 Finchum  Hudgins  Today is November 19, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum, and I   m with  Oklahoma State University Library. We   re conducting an oral history  project featuring Cooperative Extension, and today we have with us  Ladd Hudgins. He is going to share some of his memories of his days in  the Cooperative Extension Service. We   re in the OSU Library in the  Angie Debo room. So thank you for coming to see us.  Thank you.  Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about your childhood, where  you were born and then we   ll work our way forward.  Okay. I was born in Clinton, Oklahoma, which is in west central  Oklahoma, and am the only son. My parents were sharecroppers and so,  I grew up on a farm and spent some lonely time as an only child, a little  bit isolated. In regard to what we   re going to talk about today, I think my  first encounter with Extension was the county agent who was a  gentleman by the name of Pat Patrick, stopped by our house and our  farm to help my dad on some problem he was having. He noticed me  playing in the vicinity of the milk barn and asked my dad how old I was.  I think my dad told him that I was six, and he said,    Well, in a couple of  years when he gets nine, we   re going to get him in 4-H.     So sure enough, he must   ve made good notes because it wasn   t very  long before I turned nine he showed up again, and he recruited me in the  4-H club and worked with my dad on a project. My first project was a  little piece of ground that we had in cotton. My first exposure, really, to  Extension Service was through 4-H. But a good life, I can truly say that  Extension, at that time, had a tremendous impact. My mom was in a  group called the home demonstration club, and she got a lot of  leadership training through that. Virtually, every woman in that area that  lived on a farm was touched or involved in the home demonstration  5  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  programs. So it was kind of cool.  Do you remember the name of her particular club?  No. I want to say the Sunshine Club, but I   m not sure if that   s right, but  each county had several. They went through the thing of using feed  sacks and learning how to sew them into dresses and that sort of thing.  And you remember watching her do some of that?  I do. I do, yes.  So at nine years old you would have been in the fourth grade? Third,  fourth grade?  Right.  They start pretty early, then.  Right. I also remember going to Roundup, here in Stillwater. The first  time that we qualified, a friend of mine had a demonstration on how to  make livestock mineral mix and it was rather primitive. (Laughter) But  coming to Stillwater was a huge thing. It was a much smaller town then,  but it was a big place if you hadn   t been any further than Oklahoma  City, to the State Fair, but just good experiences.  Would that have been when you were in high school?  Actually, that was when I was still in grade school, when I came up here.  Oh, really early, then.  Yes. We had junior 4-H clubs and then senior 4-H clubs. The county had  I don   t know how many clubs then, but a lot.  So how many trips did you get to make for Roundup?  Several. They all got better as we went along. But to look at a college  kid that you knew from back home that had come to Stillwater to go to  school, it   s a big deal.  Where did you get to stay when you came?  Usually stayed over at Bennett Hall in the dorms. I remember one of the  things that happened, and I can   t recall, I   m sure we weren   t involved     well, pretty sure we weren   t involved. There were marble floors rather  6  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  than any kind of carpet in the dorm, which facilitated some unique  practical jokes. So one of the agents who was a chaperone for our group  wanted us to go to sleep and be quiet, and threatened us and hounded us.  So someone came up with the idea to take some lighter fluid and squirt  underneath the door and then light it, so the fire would run around his  bed. So we did do that and we were very fortunate we didn   t have to go  home early. (Laughs) We did burn some of his clothes, but okay.  Boys will be boys.  That   s exactly right. (Laughter) If they   re not, you   d better be worried  about them because they   re getting ready to do something or they   re  sick.  Well, let   s back up a little. When did you graduate from high school?  What year?  Graduated from high school in 1962.  From Clinton High?  From Clinton High School, yes, and started school up here that fall. I  finished my BS in 1966 in agriculture economics. That was the time the  Vietnam War was really going full bore, so to speak, and the draft board  said,    We will allow you another year.    So my wife was finishing up her  BS in home economics, so it was either milk cows out at the dairy barn  or go to grad school. So I stayed around and got my master   s and  finished in    67. Then the draft board said,    Okay, that   s enough. You  need to have a place to go or else we   re going to send you where we  want to.    So a friend of mine who was going to school with me here, we  interviewed with a gentlemen, a recruiter, who was in the Student Union  one day in his dress whites and caught our eye, and was taking  applications for Naval Officer Candidate School. He had the gift of gab,  which, apparently, most recruiters do have. He said he was an animal  science major from here. I don   t know what he did to miss the war and  get to come back here, but it must have been something bad. But  anyway, he told us if we come back the next day, he would give us a test  in the basement of the Student Union.  We took the test, and my friend and I both agreed it was the hardest test  we   d ever had, and we knew there was no way we passed. So we went  back the next day and asked him how we did and he said,    You guys did  great.    We said,    Can we see our tests, just for curiosity?       No, I   ve  already burned them. I   m required to       We know for sure he needed  two warm bodies and we probably scored 20 percent, and that was good  enough for him. (Laughs) Both my friend and I went to Naval Officer  7  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Candidate School in Newport, Rhode Island, and graduated from there  in about   well, I guess it would have been in    68, and then spent three  years in the navy and a tour in Vietnam. It was all quite interesting for  landlubbers that didn   t know what the front end of the ship was called  from the back end of the ship. So it was a good experience.  We got out of the service and came back and started interviewing, and  it   s kind of funny how we ended up working for OSU. We stopped in  here on campus to talk to Dr. Plaxico, who was then head of the  Agriculture Economics department, and we told him we were thinking  about going to work for Union Equity Grain Cooperative, which I had  worked for in the summer months during school. It was in Enid and I  wanted to ascertain whether they were still a viable company or not, and  what he thought about it. He said they were. He said that would be fine.  We narrowed it down to that and the Federal Land Bank, which had a  job in Kansas. We got a phone call a day or so later and said they wanted  us to come in and interview for a job in Extension. So we came in and  talked to them and they offered us a job to go out as an area farm  management agent, who is a person that works with farmers, mainly. We  were pioneering a computerized farm records program, the university  was. So they needed some help in that area. In 1970, we went to work in  Claremore in that position.  So you started in    70 and retired when?  Retired about eleven years ago, in 1999, really, almost 2000. So I   ve  been retired about ten years. Yes, it has been a good career.  So almost a thirty-year career.  Right, right.  Start with that day and kind of give us a general idea of what that day  was like and then as your job   s changed. We   ll just work our way  through those.  Well, the first day I was green. We were green. I was working out of  Claremore. We had, I think, somewhere around ten or eleven counties  that we worked in as resource people on areas of budgets, tax  management, estate planning, and the farm records. I   d have to say, I  think a lot of people in Extension would tell you that they owe a lot of  folks who helped them get started. Almost everybody needed a mentor. I  certainly did because I didn   t have a lot of practical knowledge. I had  some book knowledge.  What was really interesting, the people in northeastern Oklahoma had  8  been promised, through their advisory groups, had been asking that the  university hire a pasture specialist over there. That   s what their number  one need was. So when I show up in the county, they say,    You   re the  new pasture specialist, right? We   ve sure been needing you     (Laughs) I  had to say,    No, I   m not an agronomist, I   m an economist,    and watch  their jaw drop.    Oh, no  Well, how much experience have you had?     because up until my job, all of the area staff were former Extension folk  who had gone back to complete a master   s or had a master   s, so they had  county experience. I was the first one they   d hired without that.  I had some folks in the county office there in Claremore, in Rogers  County where we were officed, that took me under their wing. One of  the guys who did not complete a career in Extension was the animal  scientist, and he was an extremely good teacher and extremely  knowledgeable in his field. So he would wiggle me on the program. He  said,    I   ll come do a program for you, but I   ve got this new guy. He can  add a little to it.    He had a good motive, too, because he had a bad habit  of going to sleep at night while driving. His wife had encouraged him to  help, to let me come along to drive. So in order for him not to go run  into a bar ditch, in order for me to get a toe-hold, an open door with the  counties, then we had a mutual agreement. That gave us a toe-hold.  Then, also, most of us had several mentors. I had a mentor here on  campus by the name of Cecil Maynard, who we talked about earlier. The  university, back thirty or forty years ago, had some folks on staff who  were professors but did not have PhDs. They had been people who had  excelled out in the state in some position, and were brought in to  Stillwater and did not have a PhD. So you called them Mr. or Professor,  and this fellow was one of them, Cecil was. He would come out and help  me teach these courses, particularly in estate planning. The first time he  taught it all, and I observed. The second time, I would teach the second  hour after he had taught the first hour, and he was there to bail me out of  questions. Then the next season, I would teach one complete session and  he would teach one, and then I would teach the other one. Then the next  season he said,    Guess what, I   m not going to be there.    (Laughs)  But the mentors, everybody had a mentor, and I think that   s still  probably pretty important. That was a big part of Extension. I think the  thing that was so awesome to me in working for Extension in the  university was the teamwork. We talk a lot about, now, like our current  football team has chemistry, and our teams had chemistry. What that  meant was there was really a family, and the folks who were in the  counties or in the field or in an area office like I was and the folks on the  state staff, there was no differentiation whether or not you had a PhD or  you didn   t or one year experience or thirty. Folks really worked together  extremely well and had high regard for each other   s positions, and an  9  Finchum  Hudgins  understanding, because most of the time they   d all come through the  ranks. That was unique and that was good. It worked out very well.  Did that change much over your thirty years?  It did change a lot, yes. I think when we talk about change   and my, has  Extension changed like everything else has. It   s not to cast stones that  somebody intended to do away with something good. It   s brought on by  technological advances and things beyond us. But it did change because  the accreditation folks, I think, the North Central Association  Commission on Accreditation determined that everybody that would be  full-time on the staff, regardless of what their assignment was, would  need a PhD. I think that was not a good decision in that we previously  had a staff that had a mixture of people who had the latest information  by just coming out of school, technological information, and a mixture  of people who brought to the table a lot of practical experience being out  in the field.  I   m sure we became even more research focused as an idea to bring in  additional funds. That   s not anybody   s fault, either. So people that were  specialized in Extension or in teaching, it became harder to stay that way  because you needed to also do research as well. That was a change that I  really noticed, and I think that was hard on the teamwork because some  new people coming in with their new PhD learn very quickly and  observe. They needed these folks, like Cecil, that had so much  experience. Some others did not. So I remember a lot of experiences.  To give an example, the university hired a new person in agricultural  finance, who, I think, probably may still be on the staff at Purdue, a  whale of a good teacher. He wanted to get some field experience. I can  remember back in the early    70s, he came out on a field visit, and he  came out with Mr. Maynard that I was talking about that had all the  practical experience. We were riding around in a car and we were  looking at a young producer   s farmland that he had bought. This was a  run up in land prices in the oil boom, in western Oklahoma, and land  prices had almost tripled in a few years. Land, it was not very productive  and it had been going up on the average the last five years about 10  percent a year, which made it a pretty good investment. I remember  Mike, the new Ag economist straight out of school, said,    Well, I think  this producer made a good decision, don   t you, Cecil?    Talking to me he  said,    It looks like he   s really got things going his way.     I remember Mr. Maynard looked at him and he said,    All I can tell you  is from experience, things go up and things go down. And when things,  like land or stock get so overvalued in comparison to its annual return,  eventually there will be an adjustment. I don   t know when that will be,  10  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  but it will happen and it will probably be painful, and this guy may not  survive it, because       Mike said,    Now, Cecil, come on. Those old days  are past. Land   s never going to go down because look, they   re not  making any more of it.    That was the argument, and we had a friendly  disagreement.  Well, a few years later, land did go down, and it went down drastically.  It returned from being  1000 an acre to being  300 an acre. This young  producer, who is now a banker out there, had to declare bankruptcy. So  you see, that common knowledge and experience provided a good  balance. On a very positive note, I   m very glad to see President Hargis  seeking some people that have both a PhD and some practical  experience because  experience in the    real world    is very important.  Trying to keep the balance.  Keep a balance. Balance is key.  Well, from Claremore, where did you go?  I mentioned earlier I was an only child, and so my dad said,    I   m going  to retire from farming.    My wife and I both lived on farms out around  Clinton, and he said,    If you want to come back to the farm, then you  need to think about it pretty seriously and pretty quick, because I   m  going to rent it out, or I   ll rent it to you.    We had been in our job as the  area Ag Economist about ten years and really enjoyed it, some of my  work was repetitive. Basically, the courses were the same and I was  getting a little bored. That probably meant I wasn   t as good a teacher. So  we decided we   d try something new.   About the same time  the county agent in Custer County made a very  sudden decision to resign. The district director for that district, who was  in Duncan, called me and he said,    I understand you   re wanting to move  out west.    I said,    Yes,    and he said,    Well, there   s a job open now that  if you want to take it.     We went out to Custer County, in Western Oklahoma, and we stayed  there for about eight years. In1980, when we got the opportunity to go to  Duncan as a district director for Extension. We moved down there and  spent the rest of our career in Duncan. We had some variety and that was  good. Being a district director was rewarding as well as challenging  because it was more working with people.  The District office provided  an opportunity to test my leadership ideas. My career in Extension was  good.   I think the Extension service, the land-grant system was a great  11  Finchum  Hudgins  invention, and I think the OSU Extension Service   the word    service     described what it was. That service became somewhat out of vogue in  some educational circles. It was pass  . You have to be an educator.  There   s some truth to that, but at the time, that was the right thing to be  doing. The demonstrations and the service, and that was all before the  internet. It   s hard for us to perceive, I think, how much impact the early-day  Extension workers had on bringing new technology and new  techniques to farm families. Of course, that helped everyone because it  helped keep food cheaper.  Well, you mentioned earlier you had to help maintain pressure cookers?  Right. That was another part of the service.  In the country offices  we  could tell about what time of the year it was  by when people started  bringing in their pressure cookers for us to test . So many people early  on canned and had vegetable gardens. Even in the    60s, and especially  the    70s, when I was working, we would see people dragging in the top  of their pressure cooker for us to check the gauges out with a bicycle  pump apparatus to see if they would register the correct pressure rather  than blow up. We also did a lot of testing forage grasses. A lot of times  when certain grasses are drought stressed, they build up poisons in the  forage and the cattle gorge themselves on it. There are a couple of   dangers    bloat, and prussic acid poisoning, that would kill cattle. So  farmers would bring in grass samples for us to test with some bottles of  material the university provided.  As a new county agent, I told you, when I went to work in Custer  County, one of the hazards of that, as my wife would say,    Where did  you go yesterday to check? I know you checked some forage.    I said,     How do you know that?    She said,    There are holes in your jeans, or  your trousers,    because if you spilt that acid it   d eat a hole in your pants  just real quick. We still provided a lot of service, but there was an  affinity there with the people, a personal contact. Those same people you  did the service thing for developed a trust in you, and then they would  show up at the educational meetings.  I used to like to watch how  wheat yields increased with new  wheat  varieties  being introduced constantly  The acceptance rate on  new  technology  is just almost mind boggling, because you can be out of  contact with farming and wheat farming in Oklahoma and come back  five years later, and the varieties that were in the top three may not even  be in the top twenty anymore. Farmers adopt technology so quick. A lot  of our wheat field days were extremely well attended because farmers  are very fast adopters of technology, and Extension was the one who  brought that research information to the farmer.  12  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  You mentioned cotton when you were just little.  Right.  Did you do much with cotton on through your career?  Not in northeastern Oklahoma. Cotton was grown almost everywhere in  the lower half of the state at one time. At one time, a lot of the land in  eastern Oklahoma was planted to cotton. It was highly erodal land due to  the Dustbowl and floods. A lot of the top soil was lost. Those old cotton  fields were now in improved grasses, like Fescue and Bermuda grass.  When I came back as a district director in the southwest, cotton was very  important in that region of Oklahoma, especially around Altus. I grew up  chopping cotton because my dad raised a lot of cotton. We were talking  about  pulling cotton  this morning with a friend here on campus.  Crop  production  has been so revolutionized because of herbicide use. My dad  was one of the first ones to use Treflan, which was an herbicide to put  on cotton before it was planted, to keep the grasses out of the cotton.  Now, fast forward several years, of course, and we have Roundup. It   s a  chemical that is widely used now. Crops are bred with Roundup  resistance. They plant the cotton, then go over the top with a spray to  eliminate most of that chopping. Machines now take care of the pulling.  Some good things.  Some good things. Some good things, but we   ve used the term     balance,    and some things are good and then sometimes they   re not all  good. I think with mechanization and the adoption of new technology,  like the herbicides, it wasn   t all good. I can remember growing up,  during this period of time we were sitting here at this time of the year.  My dad would have as many as 100 to 200 people in the cotton field  pulling cotton. I was telling a gentleman today in the Seretean Center,  that was all across the spectrum of ethnic groups and middle class on  down. Not so many, really, upper class, but people would bring their  children out on Saturdays, particularly, and let them pull cotton and  make their money for their Christmas, so they could buy Christmas  presents with their own money or save. So a lot of families would be out  there, and that was good. There were a lot more jobs, in other words, for  young people and other folks. Now, I guess, the only equivalent you   d  have is the fast food industry. But that was good. Families could work  together. I do miss the Negro spirituals. I miss those. There was still a  group of older African Americans who could remember when their  great-grandpas and whatever would do that work and sing, and that had  a special beauty in it. It had a special beauty.  And you remember that from your childhood?  13  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  I remember that from my childhood. Some of the African Americans  that would be working in the field   and like I say, it wasn   t all African  Americans, we had Native Americans and all kinds of Caucasians and  whatever, too. But still, the African American had been pulling cotton a  lot longer than the rest of us under not such good situations. But anyway,  they loved to sing. It was good.  And where was the closest cotton gin?  There was a cotton gin within about five miles from my dad   s place.  There were cotton gins, I don   t know, I grew up in a little town of maybe  10,000, and we had three or four. Of course, they were labor intensive  themselves. Every town had a couple of cotton gins. Everybody had  chickens. Everybody milked cows. So farm wasn   t a lot of leisure time.  If you made it, when I grew up, a big trip was to the State Fair of  Oklahoma in Oklahoma City, or when you really splurged as a child,  you got to go to Spring Lake Amusement Park, which is now one of the  tech centers down on the tech center side in Oklahoma City, but it was a  big thing. It was a good thing. Good times, just like they are now.  Well, in high school did you go to the county fair to compete?  Oh, yes. The county fair was a big deal. When I was in 4-H and in FFA I  showed sheep at one time, hogs at one time, steers at one time, and  heifers. I tried them all. I wasn   t good at any of them. (Laughter) I  should have written a book on what not to do, on that, but they were  good experiences. Of course, then, in high school we went to the Tulsa  State Fair. That was really a big thing.  That   s quite a ways.  Yes, it was quite a ways and a lot of fun.  Did you make it to the national level any?  No, I didn   t make it to the national level in any, at all. All that led to me  coming to OSU to school and that, of course, was a great experience  here, too.  I have a note that in    64 or    65 you were a FFA American Farmer,  something like that.  Yes, something like that. Yes, we got to go to Kansas City and that was  nice, while I was in school here. That   s an award given through the FFA  program. That was a good experience in my life, too, especially the  14  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  speech program of FFA. That was extremely strong. I got an opportunity  to write. My folks wouldn   t write my speeches, and I   m not very proud  of too many of them, but it was a fun thing, doing that. Then when I got  to school here, I got into a group here that is still, I think, active. It   s  called Aggie Toastmasters. I don   t know how many people have ever  been a member of the Toastmaster group, but I think we met, I don   t  know, it may have been once a week while we were in school here. You  give speeches and spontaneous talks. You trade around and one time  you   re the one giving the speech and the next time you   re the one  evaluating that person, and it   s kind of cool. And then we had an  advisor, too, that kept us on track. That was cool. That was good.  Some of that they do in 4-H, too, don   t they?  Right.  Give speeches.  They also have a good program. Both of those youth programs have  been  good . It   s amazing how many people have been in leadership  roles in those two organizations, but they   ve changed a lot because we  simply don   t have that many people in the rural areas. We haven   t made  that many in-roads in the city with those programs, really. Well, it   s kind  of interesting. I have a good friend in school here who was a FFA  teacher at John Marshall High School, and then he went to Dallas, but it  was a horticultural angle they pursued. So it was a good program. Got to  change, change or die, right?  Well, at one point, maybe in the    70s, Extension switched and included  more than just rural?  Right, right.  You had to change some of the programs that were beginning at that  time.  I think   just an observation here, looking back on my career   I don   t  know the proper term to use, here. So in lieu of knowing what better  term to use, I   ll use the word    regret    that I might have is, I think  organizations like Extension that were so rooted and had many  stakeholders because they were called a Cooperative Extension Service  for a reason, and that is they had federal funds coming in and state funds  coming in, co-mingled with county funds. So when you take people   s  money, they have this little quirk that they want to have a say in what  you do. When you have an organization that has multiple-source  funding, it makes it even harder for that organization to change. As I  15  look back at our organization, the regret I have is   and I   m talking  about the Extension service   that we were not able to change as we saw  massive change occurring in our country. I think that was to our  detriment.  What I mean by that is   I   ll give you an example. One of the real  debates that we have, and I guess one of the things I   m tickled to have  had the opportunity to be part of is early on Extension employees in the  field were called agents. That was a venerated term for many years, but  as time went on, fewer people were involved in the program. Then the  city dwellers, people who did not know anything about Extension, they  identified the term    agent    as an FBI agent, a revenue agent, IRS agent,  and most of those connotations were not as strong as what the county  agent had then. But they   d ask,    What   s an agent?    I mean, that   s the  only way they could think of,    It must be something foreign to us that  we don   t want much to do with.    So in Extension back, I would say, in  the    80s, we had a real debate as to changing our title. I think very  correctly we went to the title of    educators,    because that was more  reflective of the current populous of what our mission was and what we  did as educators. I was happy to be called an educator because people  could automatically have some clue from my title of what I did, and I  think that was good.  That was a positive change, but as technology came in, and especially  with the arrival of the internet, people didn   t need to come down to the  county office anymore. People could watch videos now on the computer  of the demonstrative-type things, or listen to a lecture any time they  want to. I think that really changed our field work, our county work, a  lot. We became so much more specialized and we had so many fewer  farmers and stay-at-home moms and everything. It was very difficult for  us to change. Difficult because some stakeholders didn   t want us to  change and some employees didn   t want us to change, so it has been a  challenge to administrators to roll with the flow, so to speak. Since we  were tied so closely to the counties, because in the field work, that   s  where most of the work originated from   or the contact, I should say,  with people was through the counties.  What happened there is, see, we   re caught up in this whole very, very  hotly contested idea of consolidation. We   re getting to the point where  we have 2000 or 3000 people in a county and so, government costs at  that level per individual is pretty high. But then there are so many issues  there, because consolidation usually means loss of jobs and jobs are  already hard to come by in rural areas. It   s hard, but then if you don   t  have much growth in funds, it   s hard to maintain quality employees,  then, as you go along. You give them the same amount of funds and you  can   t keep up in salaries and so, that has been a real, real challenge, I  16  Finchum  Hudgins  think, for Extension.  You   ve interviewed some folks who went to work for us after World  War II and so forth, and back in those days, the county staff were paid  pretty well equivalent with, let   s say superintendant of schools and other  positions. We gradually lost that competitiveness or that ability to  compete for your top educators and to maintain them. So that has been a  challenge. And again, it   s not really anybody   s fault, it just happens.  The prestige that went along with the title back in the early days has  changed some, I guess.  It has changed tremendously. Back, I would say, in the    50s and the     60s, as I say, the county agent and the county home economist or the  county demonstration agent, they were viewed with as much prestige as  any other person, the superintendent of schools or anyone else because,  virtually, they were the doorway to the university knowledge, and that  was good. I think we may have talked about this, another big debate that  went on in Extension years ago was   and this is one that   s still debated  today   was OSU Extension going to be the OSU Agricultural Extension  Service, or was it going to be the OSU Extension Service? What  colleges on campus would be involved in that same group? And that was  the debate that was held. At one time it was headed toward, when you  said,    Extension,    that meant all outreach efforts of the university,  almost, came under that umbrella.  When I came in, for example, when we started working for Extension in  1970, one of the counties I worked in was Washington County, up at  Dewey, close to Bartlesville. That particular office, because of Phillips  Petroleum being located there, was a mini college. They had a meeting  room where there would be credit courses going on almost every night  of the week. Their budget was supplemented by the business school and  the engineering school that was offering masters degrees through  Extension, and a lot of courses to prepare someone to be a certified  engineer. Instructors would travel from Stillwater out to Bartlesville,  college instructors, professors, to teach those classes. Then we got a new  vice-president for Extension, and he wanted to expand that further.  There was a big debate over that and a lot of things involved, but it  ended up that we not only didn   t go further that way to inclusiveness,  but we withdrew, and the Board of Regents, and other key policymakers  like that, decided that our first goal was agriculture. So we eventually  dropped out of all those efforts. I guess this may have been seen, or  whatever, and I know there are good arguments on both sides. But as far  as for our long-term benefit, I regret that those decisions were made  because I think we are one university. We lost some golden  opportunities we had. But again, that requires change.  17  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  I don   t know about the rest of the university, but I think for big  organizations and complex organizations, the ability to change is so  critical. We all have to give up   we   re talking about history today, here,  and we   re talking about how awesome it was and how much influence  and prestige was involved in the early days in Extension, and that   s all  true, but you can   t keep doing things the same way you do it all the time,  because your constituency changes and their needs change. If we would  have been far sighted enough to realize that this farming clientele that  was so predominately part of our culture back in the    30s and    40s and     50s and    60s, we would   ve known it was going away. A way I would  describe that, think of this. When I was growing up on the farm, if you  farmed 500 or 600 acres, you were a pretty good sized farmer. If you  farmed 1000 acres, you were a big farmer. Now, in that same area where  I   m talking about, where I grew up, if you don   t farm 5,000 acres of  wheat, maybe a lot more, you   re not a full-time farmer, really. That   s  how it has changed. That one farmer, he   s farming 5,000 acres of wheat  now, and he also has some cattle and grass on the side. Then he   s  farming land that was previously farmed by ten, fifteen farmers, see,  producers, who were our clientele. So we   re looking at one tenth or less  of an available clientele there. And then his needs are so much greater.  So it   s so easy to look back, right? It is. But what   s the deal? If you  don   t appreciate or understand history, you   re doomed to repeat it. So  maybe that   s what it   s all about.  So today it seems like it   s more of a challenge to bring people to you?  To our meetings, you mean?  Well, to even request services.  Oh, definitely. First of all, and a lot of this is not firsthand because you  remember, I   ve been retired ten years, but I do stay in touch a little bit,  especially with my home county where I still know two of the staff  members real well. It   s very, very difficult to get people to come to  organized meetings anymore like we used to do in the evenings. Very  difficult. Again, your audience is much smaller to begin with, anyway.  They have, again, access to the internet and e-mail and all this sort of  thing. A lot of the information is   and again, with the fact sheets being  online, they don   t need to come to the office for that. They can search  those and find what they need. We have a very different role.  The other thing is this farmer we   re talking about farming 5,000 acres,  he   s very sophisticated, or she is very sophisticated, and has had to know  and learn a lot about agricultural chemicals and plant varieties. So now  we have a lot of competition in the information business, and now, in a  18  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  lot of the county   well, in the areas, I should say, that are heavy into  crop production   there are commercial advisors that farmers now use.  They   re very busy now, the farmers are, because they   re major business  managers. They don   t have the time, as much, to go around, pull their  own soil samples and keep up with all this stuff. Then they   ve got an Ag  consultant, and the Ag consulting business has really come on strong.  The companies like John Deere have advisors that will help farmers, and  so it   s extremely technical, very technical. When we have a smaller  staff   it has been hard to keep up with that, I think. It may have even  been impossible to make the changes I would   ve liked to have seen.  This is off the subject, but on a real positive note, I notice how a lot of  our majors in different colleges have changed on campus. I think that   s  awesome because it shows me the university is, in large, trying to meet  the needs of today   s student. It was great when we had departments that  had old fashioned names on them, but it   s hard for us that have been  around awhile sometimes to say,    Change is necessary.     Well, it seems that you have to be constantly learning, too. You can   t just  stand still.  Right. That   s right. But it   s still a good thing, maybe a little different.  Let   s back up and talk a little bit about what you know of the  organizational happenings within the department here on campus.  One of the interesting debates and discussions that went on in the history  of Extension, again, was whether or not we were going to be the OSU  Extension Service or the Agricultural Extension Service. At one time     this would have been, I think, in the mid    70s, probably   we had a Dean  of Agriculture who was also the vice-president of Extension for OSU, by  the name of Dr. J.C. Evans, definitely a type-A personality and a go-getter,  for sure. Dr. Evans   s vision for the Agricultural Extension  Service is that it would evolve into the OSU Extension Service, which  meant that he, and I think also the president of the university at that  time   and I don   t recall who that was   shared that vision. The idea was  we   d have one central branch of the university that would represent all  the colleges on campus and facilitate their outreach, whether it be  business or engineering or agriculture, on down the line.  Dr. Evans began to pursue that and began to build up his staff. Right  now we   re in a period of time where our previous president has brought  out his memoirs and he   s promoting his new book, and looking back on  decisions he made during his presidency. So I think if we could do that a  little bit with a point in time when Dr. Evans was here, which we   ve said  in the past we had, but he foresaw us, literally, having a mini-campus in  19  all seventy-seven counties. What I mean by that is, again, it would offer  educational information from the entire campus, from all the colleges.  So we   d have a lot more short courses there   not short courses, but paid  courses, as well, I mean, credit courses. We would be promoting  activities for the School of Engineering when they wanted to reach  certain audiences and that type of thing. I think maybe what the  difficulty became, as I said, he began to build up his staff and bring in  additional people to his staff, and one thing about Extension or about  state employees in general is if you want to look hard enough, you can  find out what each other makes. If you have an enemy that wants to do  that, they can go down to Oklahoma City and they can find out what  your salary is and publish it. So it became somewhat knowledgeable that  he was bringing in some pretty high-paid staff members along with him,  and maybe it moved too fast.  Then he was absolutely a great futurist and brilliant in many ways, but  he probably didn   t read the tea leaves that his pressure tactics were  going to become a problem. So what he did is he encouraged every  county in the state, each county agent, county director, to have an  advisory team of people drawn from all spectrums of his county  populous, different businesses represented, different organizations. It  was defined on how you selected that committee. So then they would  assist with advising you on programs, which was a good idea, of course,  but there were already in place some committees that were functioning  similarly but just had a different name.  One particular place I can remember, the county director suggested to  Dr. Evans that he just let him rename the committee and add one or two,  rather than start over and have to create a whole new organization. Dr.  Evans   s reply, I think, according to this fellow, who was telling me  about it, was,    No. We will have this committee, and you will start over,  and it will be called what I want it to do, and it will    Did you not read  your mandate?    And so I think that and other things started the  formation of a strong opposition to his vision and his plan.  Again, Extension has been a unique critter in that we did take the county  funds, and we did take the state funds, we do. We have these  stakeholders and they   re powerful. We do look to commodity groups in  Agriculture Extension, like the Cattleman   s Association, the wheat  growers, and the peanut producers. They often have helped fund  positions, so they have a stake. Any change necessitates a good deal of  skill and consensus building, and he did not have time to build a  consensus, or so he thought. So county decision makers, i.e. county  commissioners who control the county budget, they began to hear from  county staff that,    We   re getting steamrolled. We   re getting pressured to  do things we shouldn   t be doing, that are outside of our realm.     20  Finchum  Hudgins  The opposition built to the point that, I don   t know all the interior things,  but the plan to expand to Agricultural Extension to total Extension  Service was scuttled. When that happened about a day or two later after  that, when the final decree came out, we were going to go back to being  the Agriculture Extension Service. Dr. Evans accepted a position in  Wisconsin, I think a somewhat similar position, and kind of washed his  hands of us, I guess. But it was an interesting piece of history, I think, of  the Extension Service. I wondered how it would have played out.  Here is what I   m talking about. I mentioned that we   d spent the last  twenty years or so of our career in Duncan, and I noticed Duncan and  several other towns have desire to have local access to higher education.  What they have done is they have created something locally called the  Center for Continuing Education. So they basically built a building and  they invited universities like Oklahoma State and the University of  Oklahoma, and Cameron University in that case, to come and teach  courses there in their building. Now, like in Duncan   s case, eventually  the city gave control over that campus to Cameron. So now Cameron is  the only one offering courses there through that site, which they were  progressive and realized that was a good thing, so they have another  campus now.  But I think with Dr. Evans   s vision, had we been able to pursue that, we  might have had several sites of OSU, Oklahoma State continuing  education centers. Maybe that   s what the Extension Service could or  would have evolved into. Not in every county, but at least in every  region we would have had a sub-campus. I think that   s what it could  have been. And it   s kind of sad, to me, when I look back and say   there  were a lot of factors involved, but that   s what I   m talking about: change  and vision. Those are the two, adaptability to change and vision.  And be able to play politics.  And to be able to, yes ma   am. To be able to understand the lay of the  land in politics, and to be able to give people ownership in a decision.  Many times during my career I saw plans put forth that had a lot of  promise to allow us to change, and they were shelved. They were shot  down because the decision makers involved, the leadership involved  didn   t   your term,    play politics,    I would rather say they didn   t build  consensus and they did not understand who the key players were. Many  times in Extension, leadership has far underestimated the political clout  of the local county agent, county director, county staff, far  underestimated that.  Many times, we   ve seen, I think   they can   t fire me anymore, right?  21  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  (Laughter) I don   t think they can take my retirement away, but it   s  interesting. What   s happened is sometimes the university would hire  somebody to lead Extension who had no Extension experience  whatsoever. That   s usually proved to be a very, very bad decision  because they did not realize that with these county folk, especially these  icons out here that were so highly respected in the counties, often the  county director or another senior county staff member, they are next  door neighbors with the county commissioner, a state senator, a state  representative. They go to church with them, their kids have played  sports together, they   re vast friends, and because of that relationship,  they can call on that person and say,    Hey, this deal   s going to come  up.    Not only are they friends with those folks, they   re good friends with  Board of Regents members and commodity group members.  We   ve seen, a lot of times, where the leadership didn   t realize,    I have to  take the time. I first must sell my program, if you would, my plan for  change, to the staff, the county, the field staff, especially.    Let   s put it  that way, the field staff, got to do that, got to get them on board. To their  benefit, I think there are a lot of times that programs could have been  sold, even though they involved maybe eliminating some jobs and a lot  of change, if we would have taken the time to do that, to bring them in,  rather than just,    Okay, here   s what we   re going to do. Hope you like it,  because it   s going to be done tomorrow     (Laughs) And that never has  played well. It has never worked. During my tenure there were at least  two or three proposed vast reorganization plans, which many of them  had some real merits. Not only did we not adopt them, in some cases we  went two steps backward, in terms of productive change. So I would say  when we look at Extension, there were probably not many organizations  that demanded more leadership skills in the area of consensus building  than this one, the leadership and the Extension Service. It   s really  interesting.  People skills.  People skills, yes. Just,    Hey, don   t treat me like a mushroom, right?     (Laughter)  Well, a large percentage of you started and stayed with it twenty-five,  thirty years.  Right, and that   s not the case anymore. Of course, what also changed  about Extension is people my age and older up through a few more years  were granted federal appointments when we went, too, because we were  part of the OSU Extension Service and also, the Federal Extension  Service system. What the federal appointment did was it allowed you  access to a federal retirement as well as a state retirement. So when I  22  Finchum  Hudgins  came in, the selling story was,    Okay, you come to work and you   re not  going to get rich, for sure, but when you retire, you will have a good  retirement and you will have good benefits,    and that was the case. Now,  there are no more federal appointments for Extension workers. So that  whole thing has gone away, and the civil service retirement has gone  away, and a lot of the benefits side of it. Why that is important is that it  would still be a good recruiting tool today, that we don   t have, and that  was beyond our reach. That was something done at the federal level.  It wasn   t a forty hour a week job, either.  Right. That   s right. The jobs are unique in that it   s hard   again, we   ve  never had what   s been called compensatory time in our system. That  means that if you   re a 4-H agent and you were out at the awards banquet  the night before until the time you got it cleaned up and everything, it   s  twelve o   clock and maybe you got a weekend coming up where you  have to take a judging team somewhere on Saturday, and we always had  a trust system, at the time I came in, and we had the quality of people  where it was rarely abused, occasionally, but always addressed. Abuses  were addressed, corrected, but where then if you came in the next day,  nobody   s going to castigate you if you get in by nine o   clock the next  morning and start unloading your car if you didn   t get home until twelve  that night or twelve thirty. There   s still no formal way, like some  organizations have realized that we   re not geared to that dedication as  much, anymore. For example, our family members now are so much  more involved in a myriad of sports option. Where back then, we didn   t  have soccer and we didn   t have swimming and all the things. People just  kind of willingly gave fifty, sixty hours or more. Now, today   s employee  is saying,    Okay, I   ll do that, but if you   re not going to be able to give  me any more money, at least have a formal way I can build up comp  time that I can use.     I was talking to someone here the other day and they had enough comp  time that they were going to have a whole week before Christmas here,  they were going to use that comp time in lieu of their vacation time. That  didn   t used to be, but that   s another area. I know the university has  addressed that some now. But it was interesting. I guess if I   d have been  the type of administrator like the dean or whatever, it would have been  interesting because this county worker   we talked about the icons   he  is here and the main people he sees every day are the county  commissioners. So they are also his bosses just like the dean is up here,  but they provide the office space as well as the key extra dollars.  It didn   t take long to figure out if you   re out there as a county director  you   ve got a little more leverage than the average bear. It would have  been interesting to see some administrators, again, who did not  23  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  understand Extension, they thought they could just mandate without any  question   no, no, because the county commissioner will call you up and  say,    Okay, you can go ahead and do this to this person. You can require  them to do this or whatever, but you know what? We   re getting a little  low on funds and I   m not sure what I   ll be able to fund you next year.  We   re going to hate to lose those folks, but, you probably need to  find       I mean, they had leverage because they gave money. So it had to  be a real challenge to be an administrator of this organization.  Even to be a county director, though, you had to play both     Yes, you do. You   re right, exactly right. You play both sides. Yes, you  do, because you kind of keep these folks   this is another kind of  interesting aside, too   that there is politics on the county level. Many  times the sheriff   s office always needed more money, always. I won   t  argue whether it was legitimate or not. In many cases it was very  legitimate because when I first went to a county, the county required  their deputies to provide their own cars. They didn   t provide them a car.  They gave them minimum mileage, too. We had some old sheriffs    cars  that were lucky if they could get around the block. (Laughs) They   d take  a little light and set it up on the dash when they had to chase somebody  or go see somebody. They   ve modernized a lot, and of course, they  needed new equipment, but they all had an insatiable need for extra  funds, every year.  That   s a long way from your little acre at nine years.  Yes. It is. It is. Yes, it really is. Like I say, I think most people in  Extension have one big thing in common, and that is they really, really  were, in the truest sense, educators. They got a kick out of helping  somebody gain information to help them make better decisions,  whatever it was. That covered the whole water front. They got a kick out  of that. The same thing can be said of the youth program, because that   s  really what you were doing. You were helping mature young people and  trying to help them catch a vision, help them catch a vision of what they  could do.  I used to marvel at, we would go to district leadership conferences where  we   d bring in students from, say, the whole district, and most of the time  these were run by the district officers who are either seniors in high  school or freshmen in college. I would sit and watch how these  youngsters, ten and twelve years old, would just idolize those seniors or  freshmen. I mean, they   d idolize them. I mean,    Wow  I wish I could be  like that     They were bigger than any rock star because they could touch  them. I thought,    That   s a neat thing,    because they were the ones that  were really the influencers and they could say,    I want to be that  24  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  sometime.    It has been an interesting career.  You   d do it all over again?  I   d do it again. I would do it again. The only thing I   d do differently (and  I   m glad to see this happening on campus) is so many people going  ahead and getting master   s and doctorates while they   re here. I think  that   s the one thing I   d do differently is when I came back out of service,  I got real close to coming back and finishing a PhD or go to law school.  I took the LSAT  Law School Admission Test  and thought about that. I  didn   t pursue that, but I wish I would have because I did have the  opportunity to teach at Cameron for a while. I enjoyed that. That was  fun. That was really a lot of fun.  You can still do it.  No. (Laughter) I don   t think so now. I was happy to see, we had several  folks when I was in the district office that I felt like I got to play a little  role encouraging them to get a PhD, or if they had a PhD to come back  to campus and use it. I don   t know if you know Dr. Mulder, Phil Mulder,  but he   s head of the entomology now, and the plant pathology  department. He was one of my co-workers out there. I got to have a little  role in getting him back up here. It   s a kick in the pants to go by and see  Phil as a very humble but a very successful administrator. That   s why  we   re living in Stillwater. I dearly love the college kids, because they   re  not cynical.  Well, most aren   t. (Laughs)  Yes. Most aren   t. But that   s the thing about our interview and  everything. Again, I   ll always wonder how things could have gone had  the cards played out a little differently. I do have some regrets that the  system wasn   t able to change. I look at that and I look as I drive home  and I go by Wal-Mart and I say,    I have regrets that Main Street is dying  in almost every town, including Stillwater, are dead,    and yet, who do  you blame? I mean, it   s just the way things happen. I think with Wal-  Mart, though, they   re such a good example because I think sometimes  we forget that one of their biggest advantages is they had a good  scheme, they started small and worked big. They started in small towns  and then went to the big town instead of go head on with Sears in the big  town. So that was brilliant.  The second thing they did is they were a very, very early adopter of  technology. I had a good friend I was in the navy with and when he  retired, they hired him. His job was he worked for NCR, National Cash  Register, and his job was to install the satellite dishes, the old big white  25  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  ones, on top of all their stores and set up a system to help them manage  their inventory so they knew exactly how many red handkerchiefs they  sold every day and then used that information to put their distribution  centers in place. A lot of people don   t realize how important that was to  them early on in their growth because he helped them get that  information, or that system helped them get that information. Volume  buying and all these other things, but whose fault was it? I don   t know.  Some people blame Wal-Mart. It   s just technology.  And he  Sam Walton  was a good Oklahoma boy, wasn   t he? Or, he was  born in Oklahoma.  I think he was born in Oklahoma.  Around Kingfisher or something.  I think you   re right. Yes, he was.  Well, at least we still have 4-H Roundup coming to campus every year.  Yes, we do. We still have 4-H, still reaching a lot of young people and  doing good. A lot of good things are happening through Extension. I  think the printed materials we put out are still as practical and as up to  date. I   m talking about fact sheets and booklets and so forth. I don   t  know if they   re as appreciated as much as they should be now. I don   t  know, but they are excellent, many of them.  Well, more people are going back to having their own small gardens, so  I   m assuming that some of those are still being used.  And one of the real success stories has been the Master Gardener  program. I don   t know if you   ve heard much about that, but that  program has been around awhile, but still wildly successful. Folks like  myself that are retired and want to get involved, OSU goes to different  places around the state, Tulsa, Oklahoma City. They have a good one in  my home county, out in Custer County and the Weatherford area. They  bring in top instructors and a horticulturalist and entomologists, and they  give them intensive training for something like maybe eight weeks, once  a week for eight weeks, two hours a day. Then they in turn, after they  have got this training in how to control insects, pests in the garden,  disease and insects, how to plant and what varieties, a whole gamut, then  this person in order to access that information, has to sign an agreement  they will give back to the county so many hours of answering phone  calls, helping with at-home shows where they have a booth, and they  give out facts sheets, information. They   re getting a lot of people now  that are retiring and saying,    Hey, I can learn from the best,    and then in  26  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  Finchum  Hudgins  turn it expands the county educators contact just immeasurably. But that  program has been very, very successful. It continues to be.  Like a mini-program for Cooperative Extension.  Yes.  Anything else you want us to say before we close it down?  No, I   ve told you too much. I talked your ear off. (Laughs)  Anything else we need to cover?  No ma   am. I enjoyed it.  Well, thank you for coming in today.  Thank you. I appreciate it.  -------  -------  
