 Little Thunder  Miller  Today is May 17, 2011, and I   m interviewing Rudy Miller for the  Oklahoma Oral History Program, at his home in Stillwater, Oklahoma.  Rudy, you   re a professor emeritus at Oklahoma State University. You  taught there for twenty-eight years in the fields of ecology and fish  behavior, and during that time, you frequently wove art into your  scholarship and research before starting your second career as a  wildlife artist. Where were you born and where did you grow up?  I was born in Gbely, Czechoslovakia, now Slovakia, 1934. Came to this  country with my mother a couple of years later and lived mostly in  upstate New York for most of my life. Got all of my education in New  York except for two years at Tulane in    56 and    57 when I got a master   s  at Tulane. I have a bachelor   s and PhD from Cornell University, and I  served a post-doc year in Holland working with the world renowned  ichthyologist, Gerard Baerends. Baerends had a laboratory in Groningen  that was outfitted for studies on fish as well as on all kinds of other  animals. I went there to work with him, specifically, because of his  experience with fish.  I was outfitted with a fairly large laboratory, actually, or I set up  numerous tanks with gouramis. These are things like Siamese fighting  fish and pearl gouramis. There are at least eight species of gouramis that  live in mostly central and eastern Asia but extend, also, a few species,  into Africa. I got interested in these animals because of a research  project I had done at Cornell for an ichthyology class, animal behavior  class, where my wife and I studied these critters and aquaria set up in  our home. I got so interested in them, I decided I would continue  studying them as my major research project over the years. That pretty  much got me going with this group of animals. They are a fascinating  bunch that did some really interesting kinds of behavior.  Most of them are equipped with an accessory breathing organ that  5  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  permits them to swim to the surface and pinch off a little air and then  mumble it around over this organ which could absorb oxygen directly.  They were capable of breathing either a normal fish existence or, at  times when oxygen got low in the water, they could swim up and pinch  off a little air at the top and continue their behavior normally.  This is a really interesting and unusual group of fish with many species  and several different genera so they were a varied group. It seemed like  the ideal group in which to study the evolution of behavior. So I   ve  spent my time during my life working on various aspects of the behavior  of these creatures and trying to piece together a picture of what their  evolution must have been like. I think I was fairly successful. I   ve never  counted them, but I   ve probably published thirty papers on their  behavior, of one aspect of it or another. There   s quite a bit of  information that   s been generated by the work of myself and my  students. I   ve had more than forty graduate students here at OSU, and  the majority of them have worked on gourami behavior of one sort or the  other, though not all of them. I have people working on birds and other  creatures, as well.  My function here at the university has been to teach aspects of zoology,  mostly pertaining to systematics, that is, the classification of animals,  and ecology and evolution. So this is pretty much the niche that I have  selected and continued with until my retirement a few years ago. Along  the way, I decided that we needed to have a book available for people so  they could identify Oklahoma fishes, and in    73, I published, with the  help of my graduate student, Henry Robison, Fishes of Oklahoma. After  a few years, this became a little bit outdated, and I had decided I wanted  to illustrate the book so I did fifty paintings for the book, and the second  edition contained the paintings. It was a horrendous amount of work, but  I think it was worth it because the finished product is really quite  attractive and very helpful for people trying to identify sometimes very  confusing characteristics in some of our fishes. That constituted a major  part of my work, about the last fifteen years of my career.  I   d like to come back to that. I was wondering, once you arrived in the  States, did you grow up pretty much in Rochester? Is that the case?  I grew up in Rochester. Went to college at Cornell for my  undergraduate.  What did your mom do for a living?  She was a housewife. She was a little peasant lady from the old country.  Sometimes our passions and interests show up really early in childhood.  6  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  I   m wondering if you were able to get into nature, or you were exploring  art at an early age.  I was kind of lucky. I joined a Boy Scout troop that had a man, one of  the scout leaders, who was also an amateur ornithologist. When he found  out that I liked animals, he kind of took me under his wing and would  come every Sunday morning and pick me up, and we   d go out with a  group of ornithologists from Rochester and go all around that part of the  state to watch birds. I learned my birds on these excursions with him, but  at the same time, I was drawing feverishly all the time. Any chance I had  to find some blank paper I would draw something on it so it was kind of  natural that before too long I was starting to copy photographs of birds.  That sort of led me into that style of illustration.  Your mom was an artist, too. She painted.  She was an artist, too. She had no training, but she had a good eye and  was very enthusiastic about it. She produced a lot of nice work.  Which you still have so that rubbed off on you a little, I guess, as well.  (Laughs)  I have a little bit of it.  Was school a place that you enjoyed? Was your interest in nature and  art nourished in school?  Yes, it was, pretty well. I don   t think it had so much to do with the  teachers that I had. In fact, some of them seemed terribly ignorant to me,  because when I tried to get information about these animals I was so  interested in, they didn   t really know anything about them. I was kind of  disgusted by that, but they were nice people. You can   t know everything  so I forgave them that. (Laughter)  You were in a really urban environment, right? Rochester was like the  third     Right in the middle of a city.      biggest city in the US, and yet you had this love for animals, an  interest. How did you end up at Cornell? I think you first took art classes  at the Rochester Art Gallery. Is that right?  Yes, I got several scholarships to attend classes there. I did that for  maybe seven or eight years.  7  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Was that the University of Rochester?  No, that was Rochester Museum of Art. They had programs where they  sponsored kids coming in and taking various kinds of art classes. Then  there was also the Museum of Natural History there. They had some  programs like that going so I took a few of those, as well. Those were  not so much related to art as to nature. I enjoyed it all so I went to all  those things. It wasn   t long before I knew all the birds of the region and  was starting to study the other animals on my own. I started fishing  somewhere in there, maybe at ten or twelve, and got a book that helped  me identify all the fish so I knew quite a bit about the fish as well as  birds and mammals.  So how did you end up at Cornell, and what was going to be your focus  when you studied there?  Well, interestingly, my cousin, who was married to a physician, came to  visit us one time when I was in high school. At that point in time, I  wanted to go to Syracuse University, which had a program for game  rangers and people of that sort that would work in the field. This guy  was a very strong talker, and he just about talked my father into trying to  coax me to get into one of the professions. Since I loved animals so  much, the natural profession would be veterinary science. By the time  they left, my career had shifted over into pre-veterinary. (Laughter)  Well, when I got to Cornell and I finally got into a class with a lot of  pre-vets, which was comparative anatomy, I found out what a bunch of  blood-thirsty, dishonest guys these people were. When they put out  specimens and they put a pin in one place where you had to identify that  structure   this was a pop quiz. When they   d get through with it, they   d  move the pin to a different place so that everybody that came after them  would get the wrong answer.  Oh, my goodness.  That was just one of their little tricks.  Competitive to the point of being dishonest.  When I saw that sort of thing, I just didn   t want to be associated with  those kind of people. At the same time, I was taking a class in vertebrate  natural history where I was learning that you could walk down the  hillside behind Fernow Hall, the conservation building, and turn over  rocks and find salamanders and stuff like that. You could go out into the  shallow streams with a ten-foot seine, and here were dozens of different  kinds of fishes bouncing, and all these colorful things. Well, you   ve seen  the color on them. They   re just absolutely gorgeous. I just decided at  8  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  that point,    Well, heck with those guys. I really don   t want to be like  that.    (Laughter) So I switched my major to conservation and decided  I   d try something else. At that point, I met Dr. Edward Raney, who was  the ichthyologist at Cornell, and kind of made friends with him. He  found out about my artistic skills, and he started me doing illustrations  of fishes that he wanted to have figures of for some books he was  working on.  Now, were you already in the master   s program, or were you still an  undergrad?  No, I was just a sophomore at that time.  Wow.  He started me on that and kept with me through my graduation, and  actually guided me toward a master   s degree with Royal Suttkus down at  Tulane University. It was kind of a nice, even transition. I went down to  Tulane, and I just loved it there. I hadn   t seen that kind of habitat before.  Kind of Louisiana, sort of marshy, swamp habitat?  Marshy, but the rivers were mostly shallow. You could take a seine in  almost any of those rivers, certainly in the right spot in any river, and  catch fish that you never knew existed. It was like, boom  A whole new  world opening up for me. It was like flying on a magic carpet. I was  absolutely convinced that I had found what I was going to do for the rest  of my life, and, actually, it turned out to be that way.  This guy, Suttkus, was a youngish man. He was in his early forties, I  think. He had a lot of energy. He was the kind of guy that, come Friday  afternoon, he   d say,    Hey, why don   t we go up to the Atchafalaya   River  and spend a day up there seining?    We   d pack up his car, often  just he and I, but occasionally, if it was a bigger project we   d get some  other people, too. We   d drive over to Mississippi, and Alabama,  occasionally even Florida. Did a lot of seining at night, interestingly,  which means you   ve got to carry your lights with you, mostly  headlamps, that sort of thing. The only thing I didn   t like about it was  the fact that every now and then we   d be pushing our way through some  weeds on the edge, and all of a sudden, some big old thing would come  roaring out of there and past you.  Oh, my goodness. (Laughs)  You never knew whether it was a black snake or a water moccasin so  that was kind of spooky. That was the only negative part of it.  9  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  So you weren   t doing any diving, necessarily. It was mainly seining.  It was mostly seining. That   s the most efficient way, really, to get  samples, and that   s what we were doing. Filled a whole museum up with  samples. Turns out, now the people aren   t using those fishes very much,  and I actually regret having killed so many. But at the time, that was the  future for the science, and I had to convince myself that this was a very  worthwhile activity. I just kept on with it until I finished up my degree.  Then I had to decide whether to stay there with Sut or go back to  Cornell. I had decided that I wanted to switch more into behavior so I  went back to Cornell. Helen and I started working toward degrees there.  Was she also a science     She taught in the high school down in New Orleans while I was there,  but then     And that   s where you met?  No, actually, we had met the summer before at Duke  University   Marine Laboratory where she was taking a class, and I   d been invited  there to a square dance. (Laughter) It was, for me, love at first sight and  second sight. She enjoyed teaching down there, but when we went back  to Cornell, we lost a baby. We decided that the best thing at that point  would be to have her go back to school so she did, and she found a good  advisor. To make things a little easier, I talked her into working on the  behavior of sunfishes.  You were pretty much focused, then, on fishes at that point?  Yes, and I was doing mostly field work in the streams, and she was  working with fish in aquaria in our apartment. I helped her set up the  aquaria and bring fish in from the field. She did most of her work  observing those fish so that worked out very well. By the time I had  finished my degree and was ready to go to Holland on the post-doc, she  was finishing up her degree, as well. It worked out very nicely for us.  So in 1962 you were hired to teach zoology at Oklahoma State  University?  Right.  Was that your first teaching job?  Well, no, I had been teaching at Tulane and Cornell.  10  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  As a graduate teaching assistant?  As a teaching assistant, but that didn   t mean anything. I was teaching the  same stuff that I taught later as a professor. It was all teaching top-level  zoology to really bright students. Cornell breaks the brains in pretty  well.  What did you know about Oklahoma before you came out this way?  The only thing I knew about Oklahoma State was that the guy who had  written a book on keys to the fishes of the United States was a professor  here, and I knew he had a museum. That appealed to me, because at that  point in time I thought part of being a zoologist was having a museum  and building it so it was kind of attractive to me. But to be sure, the  alternate prospects were not very good at that time. It turns out that  nobody wants to pay overseas round-trip airfare just to get to listen to a  prospective employee, and none of them did, but OSU was willing to  offer me a one-year contract, sight unseen.  Coming straight from Holland, in other words?  Yes, so I decided that the most prudent thing to do would be to take that  job. If I didn   t like it, I could always get another one. If they didn   t like  me, they would sure bounce me out. (Laughter) They did make it a  temporary assistant professorship, which galled me a little bit, but I took  the job anyway and came here and found it was not such a bad place to  be.  What were your first impressions of Stillwater?  I don   t think you want to know that. (Laughter) We came in from Tulsa  on 51 which, at that time, it seemed like it had barely been paved. The  whole trip across there, it seemed as if farmers were burning the trees off  the land so they could, I guess, put in more grass. It was like driving  through an inferno with these smoking bits of trees. Then when we got  to the edge of town, they closed the road and detoured us through south  Stillwater, which didn   t help anything. We were, both of us, thinking at  that point in time,    Well, we   re going to have to start reading science  again and looking up all those jobs.    (Laughter)  What was the department like when you first came here, in terms of  programs or     It was actually a pretty nice department. The department head, Roy  Jones, was not to my mind a really brilliant scientist or anything like  11  Little Thunder  Miller  that, but he was a pretty good people person. He seemed to know how to  deal with all the different types of people he had to interact with, which  was a good thing because that meant that there could be some peace and  quiet in the department. Some of the people were as good as you   d find  anywhere, and some of them were maybe not that good. Largely, they  were competent, and they were able to do what had to be done for their  positions so that was good, too. I had to teach a couple of freshman  courses in the beginning, and I didn   t care for that as much, because that  to me was not much different from just telling somebody to read the  textbook and learn the stuff. But I did my best to try to make it  interesting, and I think it succeeded fairly well. I didn   t have much  trouble finding people who wanted to work with me on various kinds of  projects, and I quickly picked up graduate students.  A man named Troy Dorris was a very intelligent mentor at that time. He  had a training grant in environmental sciences, and he would share this  grant with some of my students at the time and help pay for us to go to  scientific meetings around the country, which was a tremendous asset,  really. There   s no faster way to get a green student inured into the ways  of real science than to let him go to a place where science is being done  and talked about and argued about, fought over, than to take him to a  professional meeting. Most of the time, we had a vehicle that we could  pack some people and some seines into. We   d stop at rivers along the  way and pile out and go catch some fish and stock them up into the van.  We   d have stuff from all over the country that way. That was a lot of  fun, too, and I saw a lot of water those first few years that I wouldn   t  have seen any other way.  Yes, that was another question I had about how you got acquainted with  Oklahoma   s animals and fish and landscapes. Did Helen go with you  sometimes on weekends?  Occasionally, but mostly it was me and my graduate students. In the  beginning, it was mostly taking classes out. Once I got a few research  projects going, then that involved me, as well, and sometimes I had to go  out to do those. Then I did some environmental impact statements about  halfway through my tenure here and started in on that. At that point, I  was doing research projects for power plants that were getting ready to  be built. This one out here was one. By then I was starting to collect  material for my book, too, so I was doing a lot of that sort of thing.  As my boys were growing up, I started taking them with me. I   ve got  two sons. Jeez, they   re forty-five and forty-two now. (Laughter) Just  kids then, but they were enthusiastic about it. We went all over the state  collecting fish for any reason we could think of, really. Because I had so  many good students, it was just so much fun to be out there with these  12  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  good kids, bright kids, who wanted to learn this stuff. It was just like  pouring syrup into them. They would just take this in, digest it  automatically. With the best of them, the next time we went out,     What   s that?    They   d tell me.    Where are we going to look for that?     And they   d tell me. It was the most rewarding kind of teaching that I  think I   ve ever experienced, and I was very good at it. You don   t get  awards for that sort of thing, because you don   t have 120 kids out there  who are all going to vote to give you an award for teaching, but it had its  own set of rewards that I wouldn   t replace for the world.  Were you doing any artwork simultaneously with that?  Oh, what I was mostly doing early on was abstracts. I don   t have many  of them, because I gave most of them away. When I had to do  something, I would paint a little abstract or a big abstract and give it to a  friend. And then   when did I start painting? I started painting again  when I initiated the Oklahoma Duck Stamp Contest. That was about  fifteen years ago. I entered a painting of a pair of wood ducks and got  second place so I figured,    Well, that   s not too bad.     That   s wonderful. (Laughs)  I figured,    Maybe I   ll do more of that.    Then I went into a phase where I  was doing a lot of waterfowl painting, and I entered quite a few contests.  I   d be runner-up or third or fourth in a whole bunch of them. I never  won any of those contests. A few of them I thought I should have, but  that   s anybody   s opinion. You can like something, or you can like it not  quite as much as you like that, and that   s the way it worked out. I had  lots of stuff around the country, being fairly successful, but never got the  big one.  Well, your book, Fishes of Oklahoma, which initially came out in    73,  you mentioned it was a big task. Why did you take on that project?  I don   t want to sound corny, but all my life my parents had kind of  talked me into a philosophy of doing things for the right reasons, that if  you   re capable of making a contribution in some way, that you should  do it. It didn   t take me long to realize that the state really needed a book  on fishes, because there was no place where all this information was  collected. There was no place even half of the information was collected.  It was just scattered out there in papers all over the place so I just  decided that it   s time we had a book like that.  This kid, Henry Robison, very bright kid, really bright, nice, nice, nice  kid, he was willing to help me. Initially, he mostly just brought me  specimens from the museum and took them back, because that was a lot  13  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  of the work, was back-and-forth work. Then as we got into it, then I  assigned him a set of keys to write for a group of animals and gradually  involved him more in the actual writing. Finally, all this material that we  had been collecting was available to us. We   d gotten the literature all  together so we just sat down in the end and wrote it up. It was very  valuable. They sold a lot of them, but eventually it became clear that  because there were some new findings and some reinterpretations of  relationships, we decided that we probably ought to do a second edition.  The OU Press was amenable to that. I asked them if they   d like to have  some illustrations for it, and when they saw what I could do, they were  enthusiastic about it. I did fifty paintings, which was probably the  hardest part of this whole thing.  I counted sixty-five color plate illustrations.  Sixty-five, okay. I guess I gave OSU fifty of them.  Right, and they were just gorgeous. What medium did you use?  They were all done in acrylic.  Acrylic, okay.  It   s a medium that, I think, works best for where you have fine detail.  Water color gives you the detail, but it doesn   t cover as well. For fish  illustrations where I have to, say, paint one color, here   s a scale, and  then there   s some markings on top of the scale I can do in other colors,  and it can work as an opaque. I don   t know if you   re at all artistic or not,  but it   s just an ideal medium, really, for painting fish.  For that fine detail. The other thing that I don   t know if this is so or not,  but I   ve fished before, and it seems to me the challenge of painting fish is  that their colors are really the brightest in the water. They   re brighter,  actually, than when they   re out in the open air, in the sunlight. I   m  wondering how you captured   you definitely captured that color, that  appearance, almost as if they were in the water.  Well, you have to remember, I spent probably thirty-five years  collecting these things and looking at them and photographing them and  actually doing quite a bit of painting of them. I didn   t start with the  Oklahoma fish paintings. That   s just sort of the end of the line in terms  of my contact with them. I have a good eye for things like color and  shape. As you might guess, I   m not much of a champion of non-objective  art, abstract art. Some of it I like, but a lot of it I just don   t  understand why they bothered. It   s just   it doesn   t relate to the world  that I know.  14  Little Thunder  Miller  I have always tried to use my senses to comprehend as much as I could  about the nature of the world. Understanding geology and its role in  shaping the world and helping to manipulate the living elements in the  world to create what we experience as reality, to me, is the ultimate  challenge. The buffalo on the prairie, there   s a thousand stories that you  could tell about them, and every one of them helps you to understand  better. To reduce something like that to a gray blob on a green  background with stars around it, or something, doesn   t make sense to  me. The challenge of it all is to find what the nature of reality is so that   s  what I   ve been trying to do all my life. I   ve been fortunate in that I   ve  been able to use my art as a means of penetrating those layers, of trying  to illustrate how you can see not just surface beauty, but how that  surface is integrated with all the layers underneath, with all the history,  all the change that has taken place on this planet. That, to me, is the  biggest challenge of all so that   s what I   m always working on.  I was struck by your preface, too, in the first book of fishes in which you  were pointing out that it was urgent to identify these fish, but also to  preserve their habitats. Then in the second preface, you were having to  issue the same warning, only this time you were having to say we didn   t  protect our watersheds, we didn   t protect our rivers and streams, and  this is where we are now, still needing to do that. Do you think there is  still time to change those approaches?  Oh, there   s still time to change. Whether it will have any effect on  returning us a little bit to a more ancestral state, I don   t know. I   m kind  of mixed on that. I feel it   s very important to try to do it, and I wish I  could convince more people to do it. The problem is when you look at  these things that we have, there   s an awful lot of people that see them as  resources. Part of the definition of resource is the word    use.    As soon  as you introduce the concept of use in your strategy for maintaining an  ecosystem or a world, then you   ve always got this bunch of people that  are willing to come in and say,    Well, we have as much right to that  water as you do, and we   re going to have a lot of people that are going to  go thirsty if we don   t get some of your water. We   re going to sue you to  make you give us some of this water.     If your sympathy is with people in Dallas or Houston, you can see that  as being a potent argument. Well, what   s more important? People or  grass in a tall grass prairie? Being people, we   re most of the time going  to opt for that. I   m not unsympathetic to that. I think that I   ve probably  been as much of a people person as anyone for most of my life, but  when you get to the point where you see ecosystems starting to fail, and  you see the nature of the world changing largely for economic reasons, I  think you have the right to object to that. That   s kind of where I   m at  15  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  now. I can understand how other people would have other priorities for  these resources, but I can   t help but think that in the long run, if we don   t  try to maintain some sort of stability in this constant changing world, in  the end we   re going to regret it. I have kind of a political argument that  doesn   t seem to be very popular in Oklahoma where the financial  arguments are more potent so I   m not surprised that things haven   t  changed very much. And most of the change has been for the negative, I  believe.  You retired from teaching in 1982. Is that correct?  Jeez, was it that long ago? (Laughter)  I read that, but that may not be correct.  I think it was 1990.  Okay, in 1990, and then launched another career, began painting  professionally. I   m wondering if you started painting full time and  marketing your work full time right away, or was it a transition?  I was getting tired. (Laughter) I think I wanted to lean back and take a  little bit of a break. I carried eight to ten graduate students for thirty  years and led every field crew on almost every weekend that I was here.  I think I was getting a little bit burned out. While I saw this as a potential  career, I was actually getting fairly decent money in my retirement  benefits so it wasn   t that I had to make a lot of money to live. Although  this looks pretty nice, it   s not luxurious. (Laughter) At least, I don   t have  a lot of things that people would call luxurious. I drive a regular car,  have a good pet. He   s just the nicest boy. That was his predecessor,  Brandy.  Yes, who   s pretty celebrated because he   s appeared on a magazine  cover and     Yes, she was a magazine dog. (Laughter) I   ve painted a fairly large  number of paintings since I retired, but I have not had the goal of  becoming an Audubon of Oklahoma or anything like that. I think I  probably have the skill to have done it if I   d been willing to devote that  kind of time to it. My work has been improving over the years. I   ve  learned to paint in several different techniques.  Are these with acrylic?  Oh, I paint in all mediums.  16  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Okay.  Half of the paintings here are oils, and there are a few water colors.  There are some things that are better in water color, but it has never been  a medium of my choice. I took a class in     You took several workshops.  Yes, you draw with black, waxy pencils.  Oh, yes, is it conte crayon?  No. What the hell was that? Oh, well. It doesn   t matter, really. I can  work in five or six different mediums.  You mentioned that you   ve learned to paint in several different  techniques. Can you talk about one or two of these?  For the longest time, I had difficulty painting in a completely loose style,  but that   s partly because I have so much reverence for the image.  And the illustration background.  Right, and the illustration background, but with time, you can learn to  reduce the detail of your brushstrokes. Then at that point, you   re able to  use both highly detailed portions of your image to tell what the precise  nature of the subject is, but you   re also able to use fuzzier strokes,  broader strokes, with just hints of the details, hints of details here. This  ends up letting you do kind of a composite that   s neither highly detailed  nor abstract. There are not a lot of painters who do that sort of thing. If  you go to Monet   s work, for example, it   s pretty much all the same in  terms of technique because he found what he wanted to do. And that   s  fine. I love Monet. But then there are other artists, equally as renowned,  whose really loose paintings I just don   t like at all. What I   ve done is  tended to produce images in which I emphasize aspects that I want to  show and that I want to use as illustrations of what I think is important in  a given image. That permits me to evolve this sort of bastard image,  which is not quite loose and which is not quite detailed. It   s a little bit of  both. I think most of the time that   s what I end up with. I do have some  paintings here that are largely loosely done.  Yes, we   ll take a look at a couple of those at the end.  The painting of a road is one, but then these chickens are pretty much  highly detailed all the way through. I don   t know if either one is more  successful than the other, or whether this hybrid imagery is better than  17  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  either of them, but I   m not sure that it really matters as long as the image  appeals to people, and a lot of them do. I figure I   ve been successful so I  don   t worry too much about calling myself   I call myself a landscape  painter and an animal painter. There   s no doubt that I am both of those,  but I don   t limit myself to a single technique or approach to painting. If  anything, I would have to say I   m leaning more toward realism than  anything else, but that in itself doesn   t say anything. There are some  people that think the most abstract paintings are realism, which I don   t.  You did take a number of workshops with some well-known artists.  Which workshop did you find the most valuable and why?  I think my very first one, with Charles Movalli, was one of the best  because this was a man that loves to talk, and he talks the whole while  he   s working on a painting. Then he   ll answer any questions you have.  Talking to him after the session, you can find out all kinds of things  about his art and his background so he was one of the best, maybe just  because he was the first.  The one that I think I admire the most (and if I could paint like him, I  would) is Clyde Aspevig who, I think, is maybe the best landscape  painter in the world right now. All of the people on that list are superb  painters, and we   re talking about little tiny distinctions. With Aspevig, it  was, I think, one demo he painted that kind of floored me. We were  standing on a bridge looking over a stream, and there was a big rock  near one side of the stream. He just said,    I   ll paint this rock.    I couldn   t  believe it because it was just a rock. I mean, it didn   t have any peculiar  qualities that looked to me like they   d make for a subject, but the man  set up his easel, started painting, and an hour later, here is this most  beautiful rock you ever saw in the world. I was just standing there with  my tongue hanging out. (Laughter) So he had to be one of the best. Let   s  see. Who were some of the others?  That sort of gives us an idea. I was wanting to talk to you a bit about  your subject matter which really includes, of course, images of wildlife  and things from Oklahoma, but also, like, the snow leopard, very exotic  or somewhat exotic animals. How important has travel been in terms of  researching for your paintings?  Well, I use one as the excuse for the other, I guess. (Laughter) I   ve  always loved to travel. Not now. I   ve got this lung thing that is kind of  keeping me exhausted all the time so traveling out to a restaurant is a big  trip for me now. I   ve always loved to travel, and I   ve done a lot of plein  air painting, that is setting up an easel outdoors and painting a sketch  and then later using photographic stuff, adding to it and producing  complete works. I   ve done some complete works in the field, too. I   ve  18  Little Thunder  Miller  done a lot of painting from photographs. I   ve learned how not to be a  prisoner of the photograph. That made a big difference from when I had  to paint every little thing that was there in the picture to the point of,     Well, wouldn   t this look better if this were over here?    or something  like that. That was a big step for me, when I was able to free myself  from the strictures of essentially copying an image.  What it boils down to, really, is finding an image that is interesting and  that you want to paint and that speaks to your motives as an artist. I   ve  told you what my motives are. They   re big enough motives that they can  accomplish almost anything. I love nature. I love animals. I love  landscapes. I love skies. I especially love water. I do a lot of paintings of  water, which is good because I think water is one of the harder things for  painters to really figure out. I   ve been on water since I was that big, and  I   ve actually been looking at water, trying to understand it, trying to  understand the animals in it, what their orientation is like, what happens  when a wave comes. All these things are stuff that I   ve known since I  was maybe twelve so I think my water paintings are among my best. My  animals   if you gave me a photograph of any animal, I could put it  down on canvas exactly as it is. These days, I think about it first. I may  move it around a little bit. I may alter it a little bit. I may add something  or subtract something. I think most of the changes I make now are  positive changes. At least I hope so.  When you do start a painting, what exactly is your creative process from  the time you get that idea?  I   m not sure what a creative process is. I read a lot of stuff in the art  magazines about people pontificating about how they have this sudden  mental surge that gives them the insight into the nature of this pot or this  lump of grass or whatever the hell they   re painting. I think most of the  time that is pretentious poppycock. This may be in part because I   m  basically a peasant. Both my parents were working people. All of my  ancestors were farmers. I do have one great-grandfather who was a  general in the Austrian Army, but he   s the closest thing to royalty in our  family.  I have always had kind of a matter-of-fact view of everything in life. It   s  not glamorous. It may make people think I   m just a dolt. Who knows?  Maybe I am just a clever dolt, but I don   t want to try to pretend that that  beautiful swan there is the result of any kind of a brain shock.    I saw this  gorgeous swan swimming with the sun behind it, and all of a sudden, my  heart burst, and I had to paint that.    Well, I found a nice picture of a  swan, and I thought,    Jeez, that   d make a nice painting,    so I painted it.  (Laughter) I probably painted that swan in different colors and different  shapes and moods eight or nine times. That   s the only one I   ve got left,  19  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  and that   s a print so it was a fairly successful swan. (Laughter)  A lot of people thought it was a nice swan. (Laughs)  He was not the result of some kind of burst of genius, of finally forcing  itself to the fore. It   s the kind of thing that when I see something that I  think is beautiful, I   ll suddenly want to paint it. Now, I don   t think that  raccoon is beautiful, but he   s certainly very cute. (Laughter) I hadn   t  painted a raccoon in many years so I thought,    Hey, I   ve got a great  picture of a raccoon here. Why not do a painting of that raccoon?    This  is not the world   s most beautiful picture of a landscape, but it was a  stream in Iceland that Helen had walked beside and photographed, going  over the hillside full of hawks and razorbacks and all kinds of seabirds  on nests. She was there, and she took this along the way, and I thought,     Let   s remind her of that place.     I actually like that very much and would like to maybe have you talk  about it a little bit. It   s a nice loose piece.  I can   t talk about it, because this is one of the few that I actually know  nothing about.  Since you weren   t there, you didn   t have that experience. (Laughter)  It was interesting enough that I thought   well, it is. There   s a lot of nice  shapes in that, a lot of nice angles. There   s not a straight line in it. It   s  got all the stuff that I like. It   s got water. It   s got rocks. There   s a little  sand beach on the side there, a mountain rising in the rear. I can just  imagine what   s on the other side of that hill there, all these boroughs and  dens and nests of all these lovely little sea creatures.  I understand that in your wildlife images, you   re often drawn to paint  the female of the species...  Yes.     and they sometimes aren   t as colorful as the males.  Right.  Any thoughts about that?  Well, the reason that I   ve gone that way, like my mamas here, the mama  elks with   there   s no male there. There is a male there, but he   s up  above them, and he   s been driving them along this path around this big  hill. When the sun hit the ice and water on the tips of those plants and it  20  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  lit up kind of magically, I decided,    I   m going to paint these gals the  way they look.    Here   s a bunch of female and juvenile elk that are being  driven by a dominant male, who everybody loves to paint, with those big  huge antlers. (Laughter) If you look at their faces, they   re complacent,  they   re calm, they   re patient, they   re not afraid. In all respects, they   re  about as happy and pleasant as you could ask an animal to be. Here they  are, being driven around the side of this big hill, calm as anything. To  me, that   s kind of a symbol of an inner state in those animals that is what  I admire. I don   t have anything against the big old bull and his antlers,  and I could sell five of them for every one of these that I could sell. I  realize that, but I think maybe it   s kind of my commitment to balance  out the representation of nature as being not just as spectacular big old  males, but also the calm, peaceful, beautiful females. It   s just one for the  girls. (Laughter)  Thank you for sharing that. It   s a neat story. What has been one of the  highlights of your artistic career?  Well, I guess I would have to say that show that the Oklahoma Museum  of Art put on where they showed all my fish paintings had to be one of  the highlights.  Because it   s so nice to see that big body of work, certainly.  Yes, it was all there. Quite a few people came to see it and seemed to  enjoy seeing all those critters so that was kind of nice. I   ve enjoyed  exhibiting at various venues across the country, but it   s hard to pick out  one over the other of those because they   re all fairly similar.  Has there been any feedback or comments from collectors or just people  viewing your work that stand out for you?  Oh, for one reason or other, most people are quite complimentary, and I  suspect that they   re being honest about it. They do like the work. I mean,  what   s not to like about a kitty cat? (Laughter) I don   t have crowds of  people rushing in to see my work or to buy it. I   ll sell a few paintings  every year. When I opened a little art gallery downtown fifteen, twenty  years ago, I sold a bunch of paintings there in about six months so I  think if I wanted to go to the trouble of setting up a venue of that sort, I  probably could make it pay for itself, if not make a little profit. Again, I  guess I think to make something like that work, you   ve got to have a  little bit of fire in your belly. You   ve got to really want to succeed at  something. Whether it   s justified or not, I have the feeling that I am a  success, that the quality of my work is good enough that I don   t need to  have a lot of feedback, encouragement of either financial or vocal  support. I suppose that could be interpreted as complacency, and maybe  21  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  it is. I don   t know.  Maybe you   re just more interested in painting right now.  I   ve always kind of felt that way. I never did want to spend the time that  it would take to run a gallery or even to run a sales unit out of this house.  Helen was never interested in doing that, and when she wasn   t, I decided  that I didn   t want to do it, either. A lot of successful artists have their  spouses working very, very hard to push them, to promote them, to help  in sales, to make sure that people know about this work. I   ve never felt  like I wanted to ask Helen to do that. She   s got her own career. She   s  writing two books right now, and it wouldn   t be fair to ask her to do  something like that, and I never have.  Are they scientific books?  Yes, they   re environment books.  Oh, wonderful.  A popular one, and one of them a textbook for an environmental science  course.  I know one of your desires was to make the world a more beautiful  place, and you   ve definitely done that. Is there anything else we should  cover before we take a look at a couple of your paintings? Anything we  forgot to talk about?  I don   t think so.  Well, let   s start with the paintings that you were explaining as we were  talking. This is the landscape of Iceland that you were talking about  previously and that Helen took the picture for.  We call that The Mamas.  The Mamas. I love the title. Humor seems to be pretty important in your  titles and your subject matter sometimes.  Well, yes, a kind of dry humor.  This particular painting is an oil. What   s the title?  I   m not sure I ever gave that painting a title. That   s one of the small  hawks that actually feeds on birds, and this one has caught a bird and is  holding it in his claws.  22  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  Little Thunder  Miller  If I can get in closer, yes, you can see     He   s looking off, off to the side. That tree limb is fairly large. I would  guess that the tree limb itself is only about fifteen inches in diameter so  that makes it about the same size as the bird. These little guys flit around  in the trees looking for birds that they can catch, and then they   ll move  to a perch, like this one, and pop off the feathers and then eventually  feed on the muscles. It   s an essentially important element in most woods  of this sort. This one was down in Panhandle, Texas, on one of our trips  down there.  Would you like to talk about this piece for us?  This is an orangespotted sunfish. It   s one of the smaller sunfishes,  almost all of them limited to North America. There   s a few that make it  down a little ways south, but not much. This is probably the smallest of  Oklahoma sunfishes. It   s actually barely much bigger than about three  inches. This guy feeds primarily on small insects and insect larvae and  other tiny animals and larger plankton. They   re found almost all over  Oklahoma, and it has always been one of my favorite fishes just because  it   s such a spectacular little thing.  Yes, the shape and the coloring, just absolutely wonderful. Well, Rudy,  thank you very much for your time today and for speaking with me.  Oh, you   re welcome. He is a beauty isn   t he?  He is.  Boy, that   s a gorgeous thing. I can never look at these critters either  alive or in art like this without marveling at them.  Yes.  They   re just unbelievable.  That   s really the word: marvelous. They   re marvelous.  One of my favorites.  -------  -------  
