 Little Thunder  Rabbit  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Friday, December  10, 2010 , and I   m interviewing Bill Rabbit as part of the Oklahoma  Native Artists Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program  at Oklahoma State University. We   re at the studio Bill shares with his  daughter, Traci, in Pryor, Oklahoma. Thank you for taking the time to  speak with me, Bill. You   ve been a force in Oklahoma Indian art for a  long time with many accomplishments behind you. Your dad is Cherokee  from Mazie, Oklahoma, but you grew up in Wyoming. What was it like?  Well, I was the only Cherokee student in the school system where I went  to school, so it actually was no different than anywhere else. I was just  another kid. But in different areas of Wyoming, you have more tribal  things like the Cheyenne, Shoshoni and the Arapaho. But in Casper, it  was just   I was a semi-white guy. (Laughs)  So, you didn   t run into any prejudice?  Oh, no.  Did your family make frequent trips back and forth to Oklahoma?  Yes, my grandmother, when she was alive, we   d come back here pretty  often. And a couple of times, we moved down here, and I went to school  for a year to two, and then went back to Wyoming, back and forth, for a  while. Then my grandmother passed away. It wasn   t too long after that I  enlisted in the Army, and went to Vietnam.  I want to come back to that subject. What kinds of art experiences did  you have in primary and secondary school?  I remember I loved to paint, and it actually started in kindergarten. I  have a certificate that my mother saved from kindergarten, a letter of  5  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  completion. It said that I might have some artistic ability, but I was  troublesome. I couldn   t get along with other students. (Laughter) Then  fourth grade, I think, I won my first award   Traci has it right there. I  won my first award in a competition in Denver, Colorado. Got fourth  place and five dollars. From there, right on through high school, I would  experiment. My problem was, I always wanted to do things that they  weren   t teaching at the moment.  Did those include doing Indian images?  Well, actually, in Wyoming, my introduction to art was things like   Charley  Russell and  Frederick  Remington. I was told by everyone,     This is what you should like and paint.    I discovered real fast that I  didn   t have the ability to paint like them. That   s why I would experiment  and paint the way I liked, and it worked out well over the years.  (Laughs) It sounds like your mom was very supportive, and your dad  probably, too. What did they do for a living?  My dad was a structural ironworker and my mother was a housewife.  She had her hands full with me and my brother and my sister, and I sure  miss her. She was a wonderful person.  I know that you came into painting via jewelry making. Did you make  any jewelry during high school or     No, what happened was, here in Oklahoma, I guess this was back in the     60s, Indian turquoise was a big thing. Everywhere you went, there it  was. So, I knew how to weld and cut a bracing, and all the different  things, so I thought,    I   m going to learn how to make silver jewelry.     And I did. I made my first ring on the kitchen table. I had a firebrick and  a propane torch, and I should have kept it. It came out alright. (Laughter)  You enlisted for Vietnam, and talking to other Indian veterans, they were  often sent out on the hardest assignments because there was that  stereotype of the super-warrior. Did you run into that?  Not really, not that I remember. I didn   t notice it. When I think back  about Vietnam, the government loves to send eighteen, nineteen year  olds into battle because they   ll follow instructions. They haven   t lived  long enough to really sit down and think about it. I went in because my  dad was a World War II veteran, and he was well-decorated. I just  thought I owed my country a few years of my time. I don   t regret it   it  was a different experience. It makes you appreciate a lot of things you  never think about. So, in that respect, it was a good thing.  6  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  When you came back, did you come to Wyoming or did you go onto  Oklahoma?  My parents had moved down here. So, I came back here, yes.  Definitely the Indian community was different from mainstream society  in terms of welcoming Indian veterans back home.  When I came back, the general attitude of the country wasn   t very good.  They weren   t really supportive of our troops. When a lot of the guys  went to Canada and everywhere else, the government, I feel, made a big  mistake  with Gerald Ford   s amnesty program in 1974 . They set a  precedent for running. Now we have a volunteer Army, and I   m so glad  to see the country supporting our troops. It helps a lot. But when I come  back, it was a lonely home return.  Was it different in Indian Country?  I think the Indian people are really, in general, very kind. They   re  supportive.  Had you already decided when you came back you wanted to be a  professional artist, or was it a process?  No. What happened  was  I got married early, had my daughter, first  baby, and I went to work for a company, welding. I did that for a while.  Then I went into jewelry making, and from there, I went into jewelry  making and painting, and then I went into painting full-time. It actually  got to the point when there wasn   t enough time to do shows and work.  So, that initial step of painting full-time was kind of scary. But my wife  supported me and said,    Go for it,    so we worked together. But I   ll tell  you, there were a few times in the beginning that I wasn   t sure if I   d  made the right decision. It   s like someone throwing you in a pond. You  learn how to swim real quick.  Right. (Laughs) How did you and Karen meet?  Well, we met in Tahlequah through a mutual friend of hers. We argued a  little bit in the beginning and then next time I went down there, she  changed her attitude. (Laughter) And we   ve been arguing for forty-five  years   When and where did you sell your first painting, once you embarked on  painting full-time?  I remember Linda Greever did a show, and all the big names were in  7  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  there. Here I was the new fish in a pond     For example?  Well, there was Solomon McCombs, Bert Seabourn, Troy Anderson     they were all there. My most expensive painting was thirty-five dollars.  They were selling out, and I was sitting back there thinking,    Boy, I   m  in the wrong place at the wrong time.    (Laughter) So when that evening  was over, I told Karen,    I   m going to have to do this very seriously or  get out.    That   s what triggered me to try to improve every time I did a  painting, try to make it better, better, better. So that first demo was at  Linda Greever   s. Then shortly after that I had a nice painting, and I  priced it at two  hundred  fifty, and sold it. And I thought I had arrived.  (Laughter) I remember saying,    If I could sell every two hundred and  fifty dollar painting I paint, I   ll be happy.    That was the beginning.  Was this around 1970 approximately?  Yes.  How would you describe your style and subject matter at that time?  The Five  Civilized  Tribes  Museum show  wouldn   t let me enter  because I didn   t paint the traditional, flat-lined type of work. So, right in  the beginning I had great advice from Randy Woods. He   s deceased.  Randy said,    Paint what you like and share with people, and if they like  it, they   ll buy it and if they don   t, they won   t.    (Laughs) So that was  kind of how it started. And it   s true, if you think about it. You can be the  best at anything, and there   s going to be two people walk up that don   t  like it, don   t care about it, don   t want to see it. So, percentage-wise, if  you could get three or four out of ten, you   re doing alright.  You were part of that wave of artists that was doing something different  from the older generation, and so it took a little bit of exposure, I guess,  for people to come around. I understand Ted Miller might have been  helpful in your career?  Ted was a great friend. You know, he passed away here recently. I just  loved Ted because he was an outgoing, loud, big old bear.  And a wonderful knife maker.  Oh yes. We just hit it off right at the beginning. Ted was a real giving  person, so anytime Ted or Charles Pratt   they were all together then     could tell me about a show or be helpful, I   d give it a try. Those really  were good days. But, you know, everything comes to an end.  8  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Bing Crosby handled a lot of your work for while. He didn   t normally  handle painting, did he?  No, not really.  How did that come about?  Well, what happened was, Ted was having a party at his home in Santa  Fe. He had moved out there, and he   d invited a lot of people. I   d never  met Bing. So, he came in and was looking around, and Ted told him he  needed to look at my paintings because they had dealt  with each other   several years. He came in, kind of looked around, didn   t give me any  indication he thought they were worth anything, and said,    Yeah, okay,  see you later.    He left, and I thought,    Well, I guess he don   t like them.     Two days later, Charles Pratt   we were traveling together   he had to go  by Bing   s business in Albuquerque. We got down there, and Bing said,     Where are your paintings?    I said,    Well, they   re in the truck.    He said,     Bring them in, I want to buy them.    So, that   s how we started off. He  bought every one I had. For several years, we worked together, and then  Bing finally moved to Utah, Park City. And we just kind of lost contact  with each other. Every now and then, we still do some things.  Do you remember when you won your first major award for painting?  Or maybe one that was particularly important to you?  I   m not sure about that, but what comes to mind   I got a letter in the  mail that the Five  Civilized  Tribes  Museum  had made me a Master  Artist. I was on cloud nine, because you   ve got a lot of prestigious artists  that were Masters. I was so happy for a while. Then, of course,  everything kind of calms down, but I actually remember that more than  any other award that I got. On my brochure, there were different awards  from the museum, different places in the country, but the reason I don   t  really keep them to mind is,  as  I told my daughter one day,    You  know, a blue ribbon is great, but when a collector buys your work and  writes a check, that   s the real ribbon.    So that   s the way I   ve always  been.  That  Master Artist designation  was in 1985, or mid-   80s, or earlier?  In the    80s, yes.  How about traveling? Did you and Karen travel to a lot of shows in the  early days?  Oh yes.  9  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  And Traci went too?  No, Traci was going to school. She was going to Northeastern  State  University . She graduated, but up until she graduated, Karen and I  traveled, oh gosh, all over the country. I   ve done so many shows, it   s  scary. When you have a family and you   re young, you   ll try things like  that. One thing I can brag about, I   m not lazy. I   ve always worked, so  you know, the rest is history. Then Traci, like I say, when she graduated,  she started doing shows with me because of her interest in the art. But  painting has been good to me, I   ll tell you.  You learned, being around some of the older artists,    I   m not pricing my  work quite the way I need to.    (Laughter) And I know you   ve mentioned  that sometimes you wanted to learn from other people   s techniques, how  they achieved a certain effect. Can you give an example?  Well, you can look at a piece of artwork, a painting   I learned  everything by doing it. I never studied under any teacher or artist, but I  was just smart enough I could look at something and try to figure out  how they did that. And a lot of times, I would ask the artist. Most artists  will share. They   ll say,    Well, you do this and this.    Funny story. I did a  snow scene one time, and I was putting those dots on, one at a time,  awful. (Laughter) And then of course, someone said,    Use a fan brush      So boy, I had a real snowstorm going. (Laughter)  So much quicker.  But it   s funny how na  ve people are. I tried to learn different techniques,  different styles, different combinations of those that I use in my work  today. There are a few things I do that I haven   t seen another artist do, so  maybe that   s my contribution. I don   t know. (Laughs)  How did the Indian art landscape change then from the    70s to the    80s?  You know, I   m not sure it   d be an exact date, but Oklahoma   the oil  money started to run out, and everything slowed down. So, I decided  that I was going out to the Southwest because that reminded me a lot of  my home state, Wyoming, in different areas. So, I went out there. I  loved the country, I loved the food, I fit right in. As a matter of fact,  when I joined the Army, just prior to that, I was accepted to go to the  Institute  of American Indian Art  in Santa Fe. I   d have been there when  Ben Harjo was, but instead of doing that, you know, I jumped right in  and wanted to be a soldier. (Laughter)  So did you relocate? Did you actually live out there for a while     10  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Well, no     Just sold more out there?  Just off and on, off and on.  I think that   s one of your really well known phases. Southwestern  imagery, Southwestern Indian images, pastel colors and clouds   .  I always admired the artist Erte, and I admired the Chinese and Japanese  artists. I liked the way they would elongate a figure. So, I started doing  that back when I was with Doris Littrell, and it went from there to all  over the Southwest. I don   t know if I was the only one doing it, but I  definitely did my part.  So the elongated figures foreshadowed the Southwestern phase?  Yes.  And this use of line that   s very sinewy, did that come with it?  Well, back in those days, before I had my stroke, I could take a twenty-four  by thirty-six  canvas  and do a hairline  pencil mark  from corner to  corner and had complete control. I paint today, but I paint with two  hands. This hand is numb. (Gesturing) But I just thank God that I can  still do what I enjoy.  Right, it   s a blessing. How about the    90s? What were some major  changes that you remember during that time on the Indian art scene and  maybe in your style as well?  I made a lot of money. (Laughs) There was a time when everything I  could paint, there was a market for it. It   ll spoil you. Like everything,  you think,    Boy, it   s going to be like this forever.    But, things change.  But Indian art, I   ll tell you, it   s been good to me because there are  people today that are willing to spend their money, if they like what you  do. That has always been my main goal, to paint what pleases me, and  hopefully the public will enjoy it. Why this happened to me, I don   t  know, but I   m very thankful.  It   s hard, that pressure when you   re selling everything, and people are  waiting in line. How did you deal with that?  Bought a bigger brush. (Laughter) No, I   ll tell you, back in those days, I  was painting seven days a week, probably about twelve to sixteen hours  11  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  a day.  What was like a typical day for you? How early did you get to work? Or  maybe you were a night painter?  I did both. (Laughter) No, I thought I was   in those days, I was in good  health, and I thought I could do anything. So, to work ten, fifteen hours a  day was nothing.  In 1990, the Indian Arts and Crafts acts was passed, which required  artists to provide proof of tribal enrollment or be certified by their tribe  as artists with that heritage. Do you remember the impact of that bill on  galleries or individual artists?  Well, I joined IACA  Indian Arts and Crafts Association  out of  Albuquerque. I think some artists that were representing themselves as  belonging to any particular tribe, some of them couldn   t prove it, even  though they had represented their selves that way their whole life. So it  had an impact on a lot of artists. What makes me sad is, as far as I know,  Indians are the only ones that have to prove they   re Indian.  What changes do you see in the Indian art scene today?  Well, I   m really not   I can   t use a computer, but I   ve seen some things  that are pretty neat. I think artists are going to experiment and continue  to grow, and I like all kinds of art. If I had more time and the knowledge,  that   s what I would do. I would learn how to use the technology and turn  it into art.  Have you noticed a change in terms of tribal support for artists from  their own tribe?  The Cherokee. The Cherokee tribe has been very supportive.  Chief   Chad Smith has really tried to awaken the people to their history, and I  believe he   s doing it. As far as the artwork goes, the tribe is  accumulating a lot of nice work by different artists, and I   m so happy to  see it.  For the  Cherokee National  Museum  in Tahlequah ?  Yes.  That   s wonderful. Your primary medium is acrylic. Was that the first  medium you worked with or did you experiment with some others?  No, my first attempt at painting was with oil. I did a painting   I was so  12  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  excited, I finished it, and it looked pretty good, I thought. No one had  ever told me about dryers or thinners and all these things. So, you know,  one month, two months, five months, the paint was still wet. (Laughter)  So, I thought,    Man, there   s something wrong here     I finally learned  about the dryers and the thinners, but the oil   some people like to work  with it, but I prefer acrylic because it dries fast, and you can continue to  create. The acrylics, you build something up in layers. Basically, you do  the same thing with oil, except with the acrylic, you do it in one-tenth  the time. I   ve worked in gouache, I   ve worked in watercolor, but the  acrylic was my favorite. Over the years, I   ve been able to do things with  acrylic that they don   t even have in the books. That all came about  through experimentation.  What   s an example? You don   t have to give away trade secrets     Let me think a minute. You know, in most paintings, I start with the  background. I   ll do the sky first. You can do fifteen different types of  skies with the acrylic. You can lay the paint down, you can add water     it   ll give you a blend of color, or you can put it in with a brush. It   s just  endless what you can do. Throughout a painting, you learn how to do  rocks and water and people. Painting is, for me, like having a tool chest  of all these different techniques. And when I decide what I   m wanting to  do, I pull from that knowledge and that   s how I do a painting. Does that  make sense?  Yes, it does, perfect sense. (Laughter) Do you paint primarily on  canvas? Do you use board sometimes?  Initially, I painted on paper and then board, but I prefer the canvas  because the main thing about it was, they have what they call gallery  wrap. It covers around, you paint the edge, you   re done. We used to  spend a lot of money framing things, and then they wouldn   t like it. So I  found out that if they liked the painting, they could frame it however  they wanted. That   s basically what I still do today.  How has your palette changed over the years?  You know, I   m liable to do a painting in pastels, or I may jump in with  real strong color, like that horse behind you. I   m spoiled. It   s like being  in a candy store. One time in the    80s, they did a one-man show  for me   at the Cherokee Nation. There were fifty-some paintings, most of them  were borrowed from different collectors. They made the comment that  people really enjoyed the show because they thought there were about  ten different artists  displayed . While they were hanging it, I could see  it. The problem with me is I never stayed with one thing. If it   s what I  wanted to paint, I   d come back and do it, but I wouldn   t stop there. I   ve  13  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  done that my whole life.  You stated in one of the interviews that you wanted to paint more than  Cherokees. Is that what kind of opened up the avenue for you to look at  these changes in format and style?  As you get older, you start to realize that you   re not going to live  forever, and then you start to think about your heritage, and it   s become  important to me. Now, one of my main goals is to paint historical  paintings about the Cherokee people. Of course, we have the ability to  take that and break it down and reproduce it in gift items and everything  else. So, I don   t mind spending several months on a big painting,  because most of them have sold. But being able to reproduce them the  way we do, that   s even better.  For those more historical paintings, what kinds of research do you do?  Oh, we do a lot of research. (Laughs) Gosh, what was that? I   m trying to  think. They wanted something to do with the school that burned down.  The  Cherokee Women   s  Seminary. Yes, we were up at Northeastern.  She used to go to school up there, so one day I went with her. We went  up there and found out a lot. A lot of things that are common knowledge,  but I just didn   t know them. Back in those days, lighter-skinned  Cherokees were considered more the elite, and full-blood or darker, they  were the ones that did their laundry and cleaned the dormitories and  things. So with research, you learn a lot of things. I   ll tell you, I learned  a lot from Cecil Dick. I guess you just learn from everybody you meet,  really. If you keep your eyes open and your mouth shut, you learn quite  a bit.  He was really well known for his knowledge  of Cherokee lifestyles ,  wasn   t he?  Yes, he was. Sure was. He gave me some great advice one time. He said,     Pick out your primary colors and the one that stands out the most, add a  little bit of that color to every shade of everything you do, and it   ll all tie  in.    And it does. (Laughter) It does.  One of the themes that I really enjoy in your paintings were the cave  images. I was wondering how you got the idea to develop that particular  image?  What actually happened was, I thought,    Wouldn   t it be slick to have a  scene here in a cave? You could see the people, but you   re further in the  cave looking out.    So, that   s how that started. Well, here   s one right  here. (Gesturing)  14  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Wonderful, we   ll put that on the video.  That   s how it started. Then, of course, once you do one, then you think  of all the different variations, and things you can do with caves. The  holdouts back in North Carolina, I   d read that a lot of these people went  into the wilderness, and some of them stayed in caves, so it was  appropriate for what I wanted to paint.  Another motif that I really enjoy is the rabbit. It   s both a play on your  name and an important character in traditional Cherokee stories. Can  you talk about the rabbit?  Well, I wish that years ago I would have tried or attempted to paint  paintings that depicted the different legends and myths. I can still do  some, but I regret I didn   t do more. There   s so much humor in life, you  know. And with a name like Rabbit, I wish my mother would have  named me Peter Jack, but she didn   t. (Laughter)  How about your signature? Has the Rabbit been there from the  beginning or did you kind of find that?  Well, it actually changed. Way back, I signed a painting with a B and an  R combined, then R-A-B-B-I-T. And then above the Rabbit, I always  have a cross like this, radiating out. Someone asked me,    Is that a bird  track or something?    I said,    No, it   s a cross.    I give credit to God for  whatever ability I have.  That   s neat. What role does story or narrative play in your work? Is it  real important to you that there be a story behind the image? Or do you  sometimes just see a picture in your mind?  I don   t always paint the story. I like to capture a place, a mood, a color.  Sometimes, a flower or something is just beautiful. You stop right  there   it doesn   t need anything else. I guess it just depends on what I  want to paint and how I go about painting it.  Can you describe your creative process from the beginning when you get  your ideas?  It comes at funny times. You   ll be driving down the road and something  will hit you. Or you   ll see something out here that triggers something. In  the beginning, I had difficulty   what do I paint next? Now I have  difficulty painting everything I want to paint. (Laughter)  That   s a nice problem to have. (Laughs) Do you do much preliminary  15  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  sketching?  No. I will if I have to, but the style of painting that I do, you can do most  of it just with the brush and painting. Traci, on the other hand, is more  precise. She   s kind of like Ben Harjo. I guess Merlin  Little Thunder   does the same thing. But when I was in school, it killed me to sketch  something, then paint over it. So, I just convinced myself I could paint it  without sketching. So, I did. (Laughter)  Karen mentioned on the video that a sense of fun is very important to  you. How does that translate into your paintings?  I think probably I   m so fortunate to enjoy everything I paint, or at least  ninety-nine percent of it. I feel so blessed, and I can find humor in a lot  of things. My mind never stops working. It may show up in a painting or  it may not, but I   ve got a great job. I have something I enjoy.  I   ve wondered if part of you likes to challenge stereotypes of appearance  with regard to your Indian images. Indians with blue eyes or sporting  beards. Of course, Indians know that  some  Indians do look like that,  but I don   t know if you ever had someone object to something because it  didn   t    look    Indian enough?  Well, I was at an art show years ago, a lady walked up and started asking  about different paintings, and I was trying to explain them. She said,     Are you Indian?    I said,    Yes, ma   am, I   m half Cherokee.    She said,     No you   re not.    I said,    What?    She said,    You   re not Indian. Indians  don   t shave.    I said,    Who told you that?    She said,    I   ve seen all the  Western movies, and they do not shave.    I said,    Well, have a nice day.     (Laughter) You know, I have some cousins, their mother was full-blood,  my dad was full-blood, and one of the boys took after his dad   he was  German. The mother is full-blood Cherokee, and the daughter was like  me. He was sandy-colored hair, blue eyes. He didn   t look like an Indian,  if you go by the stereotype. It doesn   t bother me if someone walks up  and says,    I   m part Cherokee,    or    I   m part this or that.    If they   re proud  of that, they   re not going to get an objection from me. I think it   s great.  There was a time in America when people wouldn   t admit they were  Indian and like everything else, it changed.  You like to keep your art affordable. Why is that important to you?  I   ve shifted now in my old age. (Laughs) The originals have gone up  because we do all the different reproductions and gift items. We try to  make something affordable to anybody that likes it. Not everybody  wants an original. So, I don   t know, it   s kind of bad. You paint long  enough, and you have to go up. So, either you don   t sell them and just  16  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  sit on them, or you have the options of the gift items. That   s where my  daughter, Traci came on board. She   s really worked hard, and we have a  lot of customers that deal with our gift items.  Can you expand on that, how you two work together? I know you show  together     Well, she says,    Do this,    I say,    Okay.    She says,    Go there,    I say,     Okay,    and that   s about it. (Laughter) No, I trust her. I trust her  judgment and I respect her, so we work well together.  That   s wonderful. I agree with Karen that artists    wives are sometimes  their greatest critics, (laughter) and probably their most trusted ones,  too. How important is it for you to get feedback from Karen or Traci?  She makes me mad occasionally. Both of them do. I think I   ve done a  nice piece, and they start to break her down.    Well, you need a little  here, and this, this, this.    They   re right, and I hate to admit it. But no, I  value their opinion. I did one here a while back, and I thought,    Man,  you can   t improve on this.    And Karen did. What   s funny is you can  paint for hour s  on end, and you become almost hypnotized by it. You  think,    This is the best painting I   ve ever done.    But then you give it a  couple of days to cool off, you come back and look at it, and then you  can see it more clearly. It needs this and this.  Looking back, what are some pivotal moments when you think you  could   ve gone down one road, but you decided to go down another?  You know, I think everything happens the way it   s supposed to. I think  somebody   s in charge. We can shift and change things, but I believe in  God, and I just try to do the best I can. I   m so fortunate that painting  found me, and I enjoy it. If I could do it all over again, I would not  change anything. I would do it the same way. I have no complaints.  You mentioned the Five Tribes recognition as a Master Artist as one  high point in your career. What about another high point? Did you enter  the Philbrook art shows? Santa Fe?  Oh, Santa Fe  Yes. One year, I went out there   let   s see, I applied for a  booth, and I was on the Plaza, and I believe I got three first places. Best  of Class in the Miniature Division, the Momaday Award    That was  probably the most awards I ever won at one time. And to win in Santa  Fe, when you know the other art that   s there   I won on a miniature that  was one inch by two inches. I think I sold it for six hundred dollars. And  I could have sold it ten times. But at that particular show, I had enough  blue ribbons that I guess that was a high point. (Laughs)  17  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  That was a big sweep. Can you explain the Momaday Award? I hadn   t  heard of that one.  The Al Momaday. I   m not sure. I guess he must have sponsored the art  in some way. On one of my paintings, I won the Al Momaday Award.  And on another painting   I   m not sure what it was   but the artist Helen  Hardin, she liked my work and what I was doing and she gave me an  award. I hate to admit it, I don   t remember just what it was.  What a compliment.  To tell you the truth, a lot of people over the years, I think, have misread  me. I think some people think I   m standoffish, or I may not like them or  whatever. And that   s not the case. I can honestly say I have never  purposely done anything to any artist my whole life. So, when I get an  award, I appreciate it, but I like it better when I get the check, because if  you   re doing it for a living, that   s what   s important. So I just never let  that sort of thing take hold. I just never did.  We talked about another high point in your career. What was one of the  low points?  As far as the art goes, one of the low points in the beginning was when I  made the choice to do it full-time. I went to a show, and of course, it  didn   t work out. I had these paintings and no money, and right then, I  thought,    Oh man, this isn   t going to work.    So, immediately, that   s  when I decided   it was about the time I started moving out to the  Southwest   I decided I was never going to put all my eggs in one basket  again. I wasn   t going to do it, still don   t do it. I always like the option of  having something   you could go this way or that way.  You   re talking about style or subject matter?  Well, this was in the beginning. You know, life is like a big river. The  better known you are, you reap the benefits from that. But even that  doesn   t help at some point. It moves on and you have a lot of new  people coming on the scene. You have to continually have new people  appreciate what you do. And if they buy a greeting card today, they may  buy an original ten years from now. I think that   s where my daughter  was very smart. It made perfect sense. I didn   t think of it. It made perfect  sense, and we make a pretty good team. I work hard, she goes  swimming. (Laughter)  You struggled a bit with some health issues. Did they interrupt your  painting?  18  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  I   ll tell you, I   ve had quite a deal. When I was in Vietnam, I got into that  Agent Orange out in the jungle. And when I came back, as close as I can  figure, I was probably in my early twenties, and I didn   t know I was  diabetic until  I was  close to thirty years old. There was no reason to  have testing or check your blood or nothing. Well, what happened  because of the Agent Orange, it caused diabetes. Then, over the years, it  gradually hurts you. I   ve had two or three eye operations. I just thank  God that we have the medical technology and procedures that could help  someone like me today. A few years back, I   d be blind. I   ve lost both  kidneys because of the diabetes, and I do dialysis at home. Every night I  hook up to a machine and it goes eight hours. Well, I chose a peritoneal,  that procedure where I can do it at home, and it gives me a lot more  freedom than someone that does the hemodialysis. I don   t have to go sit  in a chair for four hours, or however long it takes. But, you know, we   re  all going to die. It   s just a matter of when. I trust the Lord that when  He   s ready, I   m going. I   ll tell you the truth, I   ve been in so many  situations, Vietnam, here, everywhere, if it wasn   t for   God is real. He  is real and whoever watches this, I hope to God that they get saved,  because it   s all coming to a head.  It seems to me that in a way, your style is kind looping back around a  little bit, with the strong colors, the more representational things     You know, I look at painting like flowers. Out in the field, you have  flowers, a flower garden. There   s pastels, there   s red-purples, there   s  green, yellows, all these things. The color wheel that you go by in   painting , the theory or history   it   s all in nature. If you just look at the  plants, there it is. So, the reason I like to experiment and paint the way I  do   if you want realism, take a photograph. But if you want something  that   s a little different, then give me a chance. You might like it.  We   re going to look at a couple of your paintings in a minute here. Is  there anything you   d like to add, Bill, or anything we didn   t talk about  you feel is important?  Is this going to be used for students?  And the general public. Just whoever   s interested.  One thing that I would like to say to any beginning artist  who  put all  they can  into  a painting that you know is going to win something, and  you put it in a competitive show, and it gets nothing. I   ve known some  artists over the years that were so devastated, they quit. They actually  quit painting or drawing. And the one lesson I   ve learned is, no matter  what you do, you are never going to please everyone. If you   re pleasing  19  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  Little Thunder  Rabbit  yourself, if you   re true to yourself and if you   re happy with it, that   s all  you can do.  That   s a great way to sum that up. Let   s go ahead and take a look at the  first painting.  Okay. This painting here is one of the cave paintings, but it   s in reverse.  You   re on the outside looking into the cave. And there   s a Cherokee  warrior, about the 1700s. The scalp lock and the face paint. I think that  would scare anybody   at least it would shock them for a second. It   s a  painting that I wanted to capture an idea. No history, just there it is.  That   s what this might look like if you were there and that happened.  Very dramatic. Bill, can you talk about this painting a little?  This is one of my paintings that I call The Sky Image. Back when I was   in  second or third grade out in Wyoming, I used to play out in the sage  brush and cactus. And you look up and you see the different cloud  formations. Sometimes they would look like a face or an animal or  different things. So, I never forgot that. As my ability grew, I figured out  a way to paint this type of painting, or sky image. I believe in spirits and  the afterlife, so maybe this is the wind if you could see it.  What about this painting?  This is one that I was trying to capture Cherokee heritage and history. I  would say this is the period probably around the 1830s, prior to the  Removal. The males enjoyed the beadwork,  wore  the turban, of course.  Some of the feathers   you can   t hardly see them, but if you look  closely, they   re in there. You can see the feathers. The Cherokees  adapted a lot of European traditions and ways, so this is basically what  I   ve tried to capture here. You can see the log cabin in the back. That  one   I   m pretty happy with it. It came out fine.  -------  -------  
