 Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is November 2, 2012, and  I   m interviewing Minisa Crumbo at her husband Jim Halsey   s office in  Tulsa, Oklahoma. Minisa, you   re an artist who grew up around Native  art. Your father, Woody Crumbo, is a celebrated artist. You   re also a  supporter of women   s art and have spent much of your life thinking  about tribal spiritual traditions, those of your people and other people.  Thank you for taking the time to talk with me.  You   re welcome, Julie. Thank you for the opportunity. I   m honored.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and I lived here until I was seven years  old and then the family moved to Taos, New Mexico.  Your mother was Muscogee Creek, and she was a school teacher who  painted watercolor painting?  Yes.  How did she impact you growing up?  Well, she gave me a love of learning and reading that endures to this  day. She gave me a love of education. She was an educated woman. She  valued that from the very beginning. She always brought me books  home from teachers    meetings, things like that. Straight from Dick and  Jane, I was with the reading agenda  (Laughter)  How about your father? What was his influence on you growing up?  5  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Well, of course, I sat by his side, earlier than that, on the floor when he  was working because he nearly always had a home studio. It was just a  part of my environment. He influenced me in that I really grew up with  that as my predominant world view.  Right. Was your brother artistically inclined like you were?   Woody  is a fabulous silversmith.  Now, your father was Citizen Potawatomi, but he was also raised by  Muscogee Creek people, I think.  For a few years.  Would you say that cultural influence was a little more dominant in your  life, growing up?  I would say that the pan-Indian experience, very much of a culturally  bilocated experience, is what influenced me more than anything. By  culturally bilocated, I mean not only pan-Indian but also dominant  society and Indian cultures. I have a lot of influences. I   m also mixed-blood.  I have Scots-Irish and German tribal influences that run deep and  strong in me that I value very highly.  Were you close to your grandparents on your mother   s side?  Very close to them.  What are your memories of them?  Well, I have a lot of memories. They lived on a farm. They weren   t on  the original allotment, but they were close to it. Like a lot of Oklahoma  populations in the 1940s, they were still on the farm and completely  rural. They had a wagon and a team of horses that they hitched up when  they went to Checotah or to Pierce. The only cash income was from  forty acres of pecans and cattle that my grandfather raised. They never  had indoor plumbing or electricity. They grew all their own food. I grew  up in a great deal of that atmosphere, and I was there for some of what  were the last butcherings.  At a certain point, the family had a huge smokehouse because they had  to get through the winter and cared for a few other hands. They had a  three-room smokehouse. Having smoked, myself, I can tell you it takes a  lot of meat to fill three rooms. There  are many  processes involved.   Those were  very valuable  lessons in sustainable farming, gardening  and animal husbandry that I draw upon today .  6  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  There was a vineyard. Of course, there was a huge garden, lots of  canning. Gran made her own soap, grew their own corn and the food for  the animals. Had hogs, chickens, a milk cow. Made their own butter,  buttermilk, dairy products. There was a spring  near the house . I value  it.  Wonderful experiences. What is the first piece of art that you have a  really distinct memory of when you were young, when you sort of  become conscious of the fact that,    I   m looking at a piece of art   ?  Oh, my. What would that have been? I think I would have to back it up a  little bit to a piece of art that I experienced before I knew it was art, and  that would be the Peyote Ceremony mural that   s in the Philbrook  Museum. I was about three years old when our father was working on  that, three or four, and he worked on it at night when the public wasn   t  there. I would go over with him and be present while that was going on.  I remember getting lost in the Philbrook. There wasn   t anyone there.  How exciting to be in a big museum  Or scary?  It was scary. I was calling around and running, running and calling for  him. (Laughs) Then he came up and got me. That probably marks my  experience more because I really noted what he was doing then when he  had to come up and get me.  Right, wow. What is your first memory of making art, yourself?  Art. What is art? That   s what it brings my thoughts around to. I don   t  really classify art as an activity. It   s more of a connection of spirit and  the combination, unification of mind, heart, body, spirit connecting with  spirit energy, which then infuses whatever it is that we do. So I would  say probably digging in the earth was my connection, my first  connection and then handling the material because art by its definition,  then, has to have a material, a physical property. I would say mine was  just first a handful of clay, earth, or sand.  At your folks    house or grandparents    house?  At my grandparents    house. In front of the house there was a spring that   flowed  by  the house . People still stop to get water there.  So you moved to Taos when you were around six?  Yes.  7  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  What was the reason for the move?  Well, our father had asthma. Not quite asthma. He had respiratory  problems that were aggravated by the humidity (do you relate?) and the  pollens, so he had traveled  west previously  and found that he was able  to live and breathe much more clearly and aside from loving the area and  knowing  many  people.  Then, of course, he had  accompanied Thomas Gilcrease  west while   serving as artist-in-residence at the Gilcrease Foundation in the mid-     40s.  While  traveling  west , and Thomas Gilcrease purchased  many  paintings  from the Taos founders  which served to  broaden our father   s  relationship with the area even more deeply.  The relocation to New  Mexico  was a combination of health and work- related interests .  Was he still working a little bit for Gilcrease at that point when you  moved or not?  No, he   d completed his work, the body  of which totaled  160 pieces  that he  completed while  in position  of artist in residence . That  body  of work and more  will be represented in the Gilcrease Centennial  Exhibition, February 2013.  Oh, that   s really exciting.  Yes.  I don   t know if you ever met Gilcrease, and you would   ve been so young  if you did, but I just wondered if you had a memory of him.  Oh, certainly, certainly. I have many memories of him  as very kind and  nice . I went back and forth all the time. I wasn   t  yet  in school, so I  was  present and observing . The museum was  under construction and   not open yet. Our father was there to paint and accompany  T.G.  on  buying trips and assisting in the  establishment  of the museum. His sons   and their  children, I knew and played with at that time. Bart   s  daughter, Jana, and I were friends, and we connected  recently  after  many, many years.  That   s cool. So what are your memories of Taos and that big change  from these landscapes of your grandparents    farm, northeastern  Oklahoma, and Taos?  I didn   t view it as  a  radical change. It was just a change. I   m a  Potawatomi, and Potawatomis are migrators and travelers. We trace our  Anishinaabe roots back to Nova Scotia and have been following the  8  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  seven shell  fires  prophecy for the last several hundred years. Now  the  Potawatomi  are  principally  gathered around the shores of Lake  Michigan in Indiana,  Kansas, Oklahoma , and Michigan.  The  Potawatomi  were  again  on the move  by government order  when  relocated to Kansas and Oklahoma.  The tradition  of movement  is alive and well in me regarding the new  optimism.  The family  traveled back  to Oklahoma  every summer and  Christmas to be with the grandparents. Then, eventually, we had some  family move to New Mexico from here, so I can   t say that I experienced  any separation at all. It was an enhancement and enrichment of an  already very rich life.  What school did you attend in Taos?  Well, I went to the Taos Day School, first of all, because our mother was   a BIA  teacher there. She was a first-grade teacher, and was my first   grade  teacher.  Oh, wow  (Laughs) Did that present challenges in any way?  No. She was just my teacher. No, she didn   t single me out at all. She was  very professional, and it was just a wonderful experience. I went there  for three years, and then they moved into town, and I went to the  elementary school and junior high school in Taos, New Mexico.  So you probably have some strong memories of Taos Pueblo, too.  Yes.  Do you mind sharing a couple of those?  Well, it   s a very, very deep, unique, and powerful place, and my stories  are only superficial vignettes and observations from the outside because  I   m not Taos. What I do recall was in the early days, there  was  a guard,  a person that stands guard 24/7  at different points  around the Pueblo,   making  prayers, watching the movements of the sun,  the wind, night  sky ,the comings and goings of the people. There is a great deal of  attentiveness that is very present with the people, coordinating the  activities  of the people  with those of the natural world.   The Taos people are  agrarian. They still had a granary society at that  time where seven years of grain  was stored in  prepar ation  of famine  or drought.  The Taos Pueblo people are  very culturally-oriented in  terms of bringing forward the old  ways, teachings, and  ceremonies, the  foods and  continuing to  live in that way  still .  9  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  In the Pueblo itself, there  was  no  running  water or power. I  remember  a  friend   s grandmother wanted to get  electric  power into  her house, which was a ways away from the  most traditional  Pueblo  grounds. She could   ve gotten power where she was, but her grandson  looked at her, and he said,    Grandma, are you sure you want to have to  pay to live?       They don   t need money.  That and my experience with my grandparents were very formative in  my world view and establishing my priorities about what it was going to  take to  define  liv ing  well, what  that  looked like, and what I had to  do to live well, which first of all comes from establishing  and  maintaining the right  relationship with the Creator, the land, family, and  community and tribe, in whatever order that happens to come, and  endeavoring to remain in balance and harmony and fine attunement with   all living  things. Everything else is accessory,  important but of  secondary importance.   Who were some other Native artists you got to know growing up?  Well, of course, I knew Bert Phillips and Joseph Henry Sharp.  Wow.  They were Taos founders.  They must   ve been a little bit older, pretty elderly.  They were getting on up there at that time. A lot of the Taos artists, Ila  McAfee   let   s see. There   s just so many, and then a lot of the  Oklahoma artists, Archie Blackowl, Blackbear Bosin, Willard Stone,   Fred Beaver , just everyone that was working around here at that time  that Dad came back for shows with and he was personal friends with.  Did you think of yourself   and you   ve kind of explained your views in  not wanting to categorize in that way, but I   m wondering if you thought  of yourself as an artist from a fairly young age?  No, it wasn   t even hardly an identified word because I was growing up  in a community, a tri-cultural community at that. Everyone had their  own connection with Spirit, community, the land. It was full of art, if  you will, and no one used those words. A bowl of beans and chicos  (corn) that you have cooked with maybe a little pig from your own yard  and some chile that you grew is high art.  It   s a  high art that feeds and  nourishes the people. People love what they produce, and they love the  simplicity of the land and the diet and the relationship of the land that it  10  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  takes to bring forward a meal like that, which is no small feat, given the  vagaries of weather and the things that can happen. There   s much  appreciation for  the gifts of the Mother Earth, the Father Sky-Sun, our  labor combined with the    medicine    of the elements. .  Someone that  had  a gallery  and/or gift shop  and is selling things for   respectable  prices on the street is viewed as on exactly the same level  as a person that opens the acequias (ditches), keeps them clean, sings the  songs, is up at sunrise greeting the sun and sunset, letting the sun go  back into the night. Those things are on a parity that has more to do with  Spirit than art  as an abstract concept .  Now, you did study at the Taos Academy of Fine Art, is that right?  I did, yes.  What did you learn there? What was that experience like?  I learned one very important thing. My teacher s  at a certain point,  Ron  Barsano and  Ray Vinella,  Ray  who m  I saw this  visit  is  now   retiring from painting. It was very  good  to reconnect with him.  While  still in training with Ray  I said,    When I got good or when I think about  identifying as an artist   ,    he said,    Stop it right here. You   re an artist  right now. Don   t ever view yourself any differently. You don   t become  an artist. You are an artist.     Then he taught me about value. Draftsmanship  was a value I received  from my father and  has always been my first love, drawing.  Ray then   introduced  me to  the concept of color and value in some very  interesting ways. He had been an artist for Disney, and  had initially   began drawing with the Famous Artists course. You probably saw those   ads  in the comic books  of  the    50s, right? Well, I have his Famous  Artists book series that he purchased and went through when he was in  the Army  (Laughter) He learned how to do that. Then he went to work  for Disney, and  later  he  moved  to Taos and  continued as  a fine  artist.  So,  as  he was teaching about value,    Value is the temperature of color,  warm or cool grade within it,    he said,    You   ll understand that much.  I   m going to give you a whole lot more teaching now that you won   t  understand, but you will later.    And it went that way. (Laughter) At the  time when he said that, I thought,    Well, I don   t understand. He   s telling  me I don   t understand. I   ll accept that.    Then one day he said,    It   s like a  light bulb will go off in your head, and you   ll understand what I   m  saying.    And it went that way. (Laughter) It was  good    11  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Thanks for sharing that story.  I learned to do portraits  while studying with Ray Vinella . Portraits  as  subject matter has come with  time  and  I enjoy  it  very much. I have  one of the portraits over here, we   ll talk about a little bit later.  As an  instructor in TAFA (Taos Academy of Fine Art),  he brought in people  from the Taos Pueblo to sit for us, and one of them was a man named  Joe Sandoval    Sun Hawk   . He was also a Peyote Road Man and a good  friend of our father   s.  His wife, Annie Sandoval, took care of us when Mother was teaching.  My brother  Woody, Jr.  was younger and  not yet  in school. Annie  became our surrogate mother. In recent years, we   ve all reconnected  again, and it   s been very nice. Annie and Joe are gone, but the children  and the grandchildren are around, and so the association comes on down  through time. We   re coming into something of a story here, and I would  like to interject something here of the Spirit of the story.  Sure.  It   s one thing to read a story, and it   s another thing to write a story. I  attended a gathering last night. N. Scott Momaday was there. He began  right on target with me, right on line, saying that he was at the  confluence of evolution, prayer, and story, and I  thought,    Thank you  for your words.  I   m all about this. I   m there.    Then went on to give a  wonderful evening.  It reminded me of the chapter that I wrote for the Gilcrease book on the  Taos years. I was moved to write something about the story. I would like  to contribute this to the interview and introduce and shift into yet  another of your gears of storytelling of life, as oral tradition is actually  story, and the story of life is a precious thing that you are doing in order  to preserve that history and that message for posterity. So if I may take a  moment, I   d like to read a paragraph that I included in the Taos chapter  of the Gilcrease book on Woody Crumbo about the nature of    story    as I  see it.      Our  stories are what keep us alive. When Spirit ways unite with the  mind and the body, we  are  connect ed  with our  essential  divinity. A  story is a Spirit way, a sacred thing, and must be told  truly . The  storyteller and the listener must both be ready and  travel  at the same  pace.  When we  tell a story well  we are  engage d  in a ceremony.   Our  stories are what keep us alive.     That   s wonderful. Thank you for reading that.  12  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Yes, you   re welcome.  So, what path, after studying at the Taos school there, the art institute     and I   m not sure how old you were, but I   m just wondering what you did  after that. Were you a teenager at that point?  No, I was in my early thirties.  Oh, okay  Maybe we could just go back a little bit and follow your  journey from the time that you graduate from school, I guess. Would that  have been in New Mexico?  No, it was in El Paso, Texas  at the University of Texas-El Paso .  Okay.     and Mount Pleasant, Utah. I married, and I had my children, my  lovely children: Woodrow Rexford Carter and Christine Heather Carter.  Then in the early    70s, we moved to Taos, and that   s when I enrolled in  TAFA, Taos Academy of Fine Art, and studied with Ray Vinella and  Ron Barsano.  I studied color, draftsmanship, portraiture, art theory. It was a very  eclectic program and unfortunately all too short because of life changes  in both of the teachers    lives. The Taos Academy closed, and I applied to  School of Visual Arts in New York City and went immediately there to   live and  study.  It  was a very interesting experience.  I loved being in New York at that time  and  met a lot of people. The  school experience was  complex and broadening intellectually , but it  was  my  personal experience of the city and the peoples I met there,  some of the workshops  such as  the Society of Illustrators and  other   places that were most valuable. The larger experience of the world had a  spiritual underpinning and instruction.  In New York, what was your style and subject matter when you went in?  It was the same. It was draftsmanship and painting.  And were portraits sort of a focus already then, too?  Yes.  The instructors at Visual Arts allowed us to  follow our own  subject. Some of the classes were more specific than others. There was   the  Spider Man  comic  class. Who was the creator of Spider Man?  Spider Man was just getting big  and served  on staff  where I was able  to  monitor some of  the  classes. I would walk by, and  being  so full of  13  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  information, a dynamic communicator and teacher, I  was drawn to  enter  and soaked up what he had to say because  in art  it   s all relevant.  Harvey Dinnerstein was a famous illustrator in the city. I had a class  with him. I worked with live models in a large studio with windows,  black and white, silverpoint, learn ing many  new and interesting  techniques.  The film school  experimental filmmaking, pre-video days,   was available  so in my off-time I caught some of that. It was very  interesting.  Now, did you connect with some galleries while you were there, or not?  Did you have your work in any?  No, I didn   t show in any galleries. There   s a large population, and  there  are  only so many galleries. It   s a very competitive  atmosphere and  market. An artist must be prepared  to pay for  a gallery  to take you on,  and then they   re probably going to take 50 or 60 percent commission,  much more so than they do in the West. I was strictly there to study.  The alternative galleries were starting up at that time. A lot of them  were   at that time it was   what do they call it? It was where it happens.  You know what I mean. There was a demonstration of the activity   occurring.  Some galleries were in lofts and undeveloped portions of  the city  with  space  available for artists to hang . Even  so,  those  people were fairly well connected with the art scene, with the New York  art scene  and  making initial movements into the off-Broadway of  galleries     Right.     off-Broadway and off-off-Broadway of galleries. (Laughter) I was  strictly there to learn and experience, but I did recognize that when I got  back home that life for me as a professional artist was going to be  infinitely easier for me than it was for those people in the city. Many of  them would never find gallery space and would never come in for their  share of PR, would never be recognized outside of a very small area. I  didn   t endeavor to compete there at all because it was not going to be  my home, and it wasn   t my   leave them their place where they need to  live and work and grow in because I had my own place to come back to.  What was your first sale of artwork?  Probably at Gallery A, a gallery run by Mary Sanchez in Taos. I spent a  number of years studying and working and wanted to reach a point  where I felt like I could respect my work as an artist and  have  a broad  enough appeal to sell. I held back looking for a gallery until I felt I could  14  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  reach that point.  When  I took my portfolio around she liked what she  saw and took a chance on me.  It  paid my rent for years.  That   s wonderful. So this was when, approximately?  In    73,    74,    75,    76,    77, like that.  Were your children living there, too, then?  Off and on. Sometimes with their father in Denver and sometimes with  me.  How did your dad respond to some of the directions you were taking in  art? Was he passed on by then?  No, no he wasn   t. He liked it just fine. He was not a  formal  teacher. He  declined to say anything about what anyone did because he recognized it  as  expression and as  a process. He did teach a few times off and on. It  was always when he was living else where  and I didn   t have the  opportunity to sit with him. At the time when he devoted himself to   teaching , he was a superb instructor. A  student  that really wanted to  put a lot into the work and spend a lot of time with it could get a lot from  him. If they were not willing to put time into the work in the direction  that he was giving them, they had a very hard time because they couldn   t  keep up. If his direction wasn   t followed, they just weren   t there. They  just weren   t there on the same page together at all. So no, he never did  say too much about what I did.  Each person   s work is so personal. That   s your relationship with the   personal core source and  Creator. I mean, you can say a little  something about perspective or value or drawing, but even so, if  someone   s drawing a perspective, or a color value is off a little bit,  unless you   re in a classroom,  an  ongoing classroom circumstance with  them, it   s going to be very hard to identify, address, get them to  understand and accept what you have to say.   Generally speaking,  artists do not really want to hear what someone  else has to say about their work, especially if it   s a critique, and get them  to make the shift and make it habitual. There   s a menu, a long and a  complex menu, that has to do with perception, habit that really leads one  to  allow  a person follow  to  their own process. If  someone  asks  or  offers  a critique and you   re in a position to give a critique, tread very  lightly and correctly so they can accept and grow to  understand  what   has been offered . If it   s not direct, objective and correct to some extent,  it    will  , it will be rejected. Whatever is not correct is there forever,  probably, and you   ve probably lost a friend.  15  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  That   s really well put.   Thank you. Successful judging, critiquing and even the offering of  opinion must be made with acuity, kindness and compassion.   You made a trip to Russia. You had an exhibition in Russia in 1979. Is  that right?  Yes, yes.  How did that come about?  Well,  a  Russian  cultural delegation was  traveling in the United States  with Gos Concert  a state agency . They attended a concert of Roy  Clark   s at Roy Clark   s invitation in Las Vegas, leading to a relationship  which brought them, ultimately, to Tulsa where they saw some of my  work in exhibition and asked if I would prepare for an exhibition  in the  Soviet Union .  The only stipulation was it could not be  a  commercial  exhibition . It  was  agreed upon two years  hence . I had to be working on a non-commercial  exhibition and also keep my income coming in while  prepare ing . It was fine. It happened. I ultimately took thirty-six pieces  of portraits, primarily tri-cultural portraits, and some poetry, which was  very well received. It was at the height of the Cold War, and the  misinformation was flying back and forth. The air was full of it.   The Russians  were getting the same  propaganda  that we  Americans   were.  They  were  very essentially  interested in looking into the eyes  of the Americans, Native American, Hispanic, and Anglo, and plumbing  our depths for themselves, finding out who we were for themselves. It  was very successful in that way. They would stand before the portraits  for a long time and look and look and look. Each one of those portraits  that I sent, I  had  asked permission of the person that sat for me if   asked  they would come and be present in that exhibition. Some said  no, and most said yes, so they were  fully  there. They were there,  looking as well as being looked at .  That   s a wonderful dimension to that because they   re meeting the  people.  Got to be real. Got to be real, otherwise you   re just looking at nothing.  You   re looking at a design if the spirit of the person isn   t there. When I  got home I unpacked them and returned them to the sitters.  16  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Wow. What a wonderful gift.  Yes, presented them with a painting or a drawing that was framed and  had been on the exhibition, and they were so glad to be back.  When and how did you meet Jim?  At an exhibition here in town,  Tulsa, Oklahoma .  Can you tell us a little about it? Did you notice him right away?  Yes. (Laughter)  Being around the music business, did that impact your creative process  or your creativity in any way?  Well, it was another creative  sense  that was going on concurrently with  mine, yes.  But Gilcrease Museum gave you a solo show, as well.  Yes.  What was that like?  Oh, it was great. I think I had fourteen pieces, and it was a group show.  There were a lot of other Indian artists were exhibiting. It was a  wonderful opportunity.  And with all the memories, also, that you had of Gilcrease.  Yes.  Did you find that your subject matter and style and palette were  changing at that point? Could you identify any changes?  Well, I was beginning to work more in dream and vision, alongside the  portraits.  So there was realism, and then there was     Right. Dream and vision. The dream and vision were executed in flat  line and color instead of the three-dimensional classical European studio  style.  I know that you and Jim also attended some Native art shows and  17  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  collected some work. Why was that important to you?  Well, he   s the one that attended most of the shows and bought. It was  before we met. After that the  investments  went into the household.  (Laughter) The collecting was over  There was plenty of art for the  walls.  You were providing art.  Right  (Laughter)  Oh, that   s great. Did you ever do any booth shows at all, or was it  always museums?  No, I didn   t. I assisted and accompanied my father in a lot of booth  shows. I   ve never been that prolific and never produced multiples. You  have to have multiples. You can   t just have originals up there. There   s  just not that many. Our father worked a lot with silk screens and  etchings, especially the silk screens, what people are so familiar with.  How big a part of your art have commissions been over the years?  Not very big. I don   t like to do commissions. Someone really has to have  their own relationship with something already  complete . I don   t work  to direction  and deadline, preferring to complete a portfolio of work for  exhibition and then seeking a time and space with a gallery .  One of the portraits that I did see was the one you did of Rennard  Strickland, the writer and legal scholar, and it was just a wonderful,  wonderful portrait.  Yes, I have it right here in the exhibition at the Fred Jones  Jr. Museum  of Art . No, I don   t usually work to   this was a friendship piece that we  did here.  Were there any challenges to doing that?  No.  I think that relationship really translates in that.  Yes. Whenever I did portraits in the past of someone, I never took  commissions. If they liked it, fine, and if they didn   t, it was mine.  Besides creating art, have you done any judging of art shows?  18  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Don   t do that. Absolutely not. No, my father gave me two pieces of  advice at a certain point. He said,    When you reach a certain point in  your career, don   t participate in judged shows because if you don   t make  it, then people will say,    Well, so and so can   t make the show anymore,     or,    They weren   t accepted    or whatever. Just forget that. And don   t  judge your fellows    art because you   ll make an enemy of everyone but  the first three awardees. They will not understand. Just don   t do it.    I did  once,  regretted it for I found the counsel to be  true.  Was it here in Oklahoma?  Yes. It was not a good thing. Let someone impartial, someone who   s not  connected with the community do that. Big mistake to sit in judgment of  your fellows any time, really. A big lesson there. (Laughter)  You have friends who are women artists, men artists, and a very eclectic,  as you said, approach to art, yourself. Can you talk a bit about some of  the things you appreciate about the work of women artists that you   ve  become friends with.  I   d rather talk about my work as a female artist  than comment on  another artist expression.   Okay. That   d be great.     and let the works speak for themselves. I taught traditional women   s  ways for many years, and I had a lot of art come out from that. For me,  my work, where I happen to be differentiated as a female in this world of  duality, gives me a unique world view of Creation. The teachings came  out of that, and the art came out of that. In that way, each person   s work  speaks of their personal relationship with the Creator and the family,  their gender affiliations and experiences.  My work in traditional women   s ways is uniquely feminine and female  in that it talks about and addresses the blood mysteries, which is the way  that, as women, we are grounded and seek and forge and manifest  personal power and relationship power, being a relationship with the  Creator, through our biology.  That is the definition of every person   s relationship with art. If you  happen to be a female, that is our story, but it   s also the other side of the  story because it   s a gift to the side of the story that it   s not the story of.  So, both are, both ways, always blended gender. Masculine, feminine are  very, very important because ultimately from whence we came we shall  return. We are spirit beings and living in a physical body, which is  defined by masculine or feminine definitions and ephemeral by its  19  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  definition because  first of all  we are Spirit beings.  Right now we are differentiated and enjoying that dance, enjoying the  beauty of that dance, but it   s always desirable to bring it back into fine  attunement, in touch with our  inner  masculine and feminine  natures .  That is the true marriage. The true marriage that   s spoken of in the  marriage ceremony is really each person   s marriage with their inner  masculine or feminine. It   s spoken of in the physical marriage ceremony  that the two shall become one. Well, that   s where it comes from, is here.  Spirit that comes together and becomes one,  unity  there.  From the  unity center we radiate the whole person  to the physical world.  When a person meets t the unity  center and comes in and engages in  whatever ceremony or observation or prayer that they do, then they are  renewed and restored, have gifts and energy of harmony and balance to  take out to the world through the left or the right, the masculine or the  feminine, back into duality mak ing their  contribution  of art and  vision .  That   s it in a nutshell about my work with traditional women   s ways. I  did offer sweat lodge and dance opportunities and ceremony and was  trained by some very fine medicine teachers. Marcellus Bear-Heart  Williams of the Muscogee Creek tribe was my first teacher.  He  gave  me an exceptional grounding in universal and nonjudgmental love for all  beings and grounded that teaching very well for me, which I   m carrying  on to this day.  When did you start that teaching? Was that in your forties?  Thirties.  In your thirties, the same time.  Yes. He was a friend of our father   s and a distant blood relative.  But when you, yourself, began teaching traditional women   s ways, about  the same time?  Yes.  Exploring it.  Yes.  Have you worked around the country a little bit, workshops around?  20  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Yes, yes, extensively. I   d like to add that traditional women   s ways are  universal ways. If you bleed, you   re a traditional woman. If you breathe,  you   re a traditional woman. If you eat, sleep, drink. No one has a lease  on the word    traditional.    We   re universal. Traditional just has its own  particular definition that someone wants to bring forward and share   culturally saying ,    Now this is our tradition,    but it   s not the only one.  The deepest grounded traditional traditions that we have  originate  from  the mind of Creation  for all beings .  In what ways do you think maybe your teaching has influenced your  painting a bit, or maybe vice versa?  Well, it would be vice versa. I have not developed the teachings of the  women   s ways into paintings as much as the painting tradition came into  that, simply because holding energy for the teachings 24/7 put me in  service to the teaching and not as a painter. I have not painted  professionally for thirty years. I   ve been teaching. I get a little bit in,  here and there, but you have to make some choices about how you   re  going to spend your time and express yourself.  That   s been the art you   ve been focusing on.  Right, right. I went back to school a couple of years ago and picked up a  course in silversmithing with Bradley Oliver who was a teacher at TTC   Tulsa Technology Center , a fine silversmith here in town. I had the  pleasure of sitting with him for a year and receiving his support.  I sat with my brother earlier and worked with him in the studio there, but  Bradley is the one that drew me through the keyhole. (Laughter) Yes.  Very exacting, which was   it   s wonderful. You  must  have someone,  hopefully,  who  knows exactly what they   re doing and asks you to do  only that and nothing less, and then you get it. (Laughter) I   ve been on a  high learning curve the last number of years. I moved into video  documenting artists and creative people, myself.  I understand you   ve been interested in documenting the work of other  artists with video.  Yes, I   m very much interested in that. It really started so many years ago  when I was doing the portraits. I would just draw whoever was in my  life, and if they passed into my living room, I was likely to ask them if  they   d sit for me. I always had materials handy, and I   d pull  them  out  and do a drawing. It   s the same thing. It just depends on who   s in my  life. I   ve always got the camera in the car. It   s in the car now. I may not  use it very much for a long period of time, but I want to have it  handy .  Now, thank goodness for iPhone cameras. They   re just great. I carry a  21  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  little microphone around with me, too. I appreciate your work. I know  you have a lot of fun with it. Do you do your own editing?  No, Juliana  Nykolaiszyn .  Hooray  (Laughter) You sit beside her when she does some editing, I  suppose. It   s so nice if you don   t have to do both.  Yes.  Well, it   s like that, the painting and the teaching. It really comes down to  one or the other. They   re two necessary but specific talents, very time-consuming.  Right. In 2006 the Oklahoma History Center hosted Crumbo Spirit Talk   Exhibit . Can you tell us how that came about?  The 2006     I   ve got the wrong date. I   m thinking of this year actually, I think.  Twelve.  Yes, 2012.  Yes.  Sorry about that. (Laughter)  Well, this year is our father   s  Woody Crumbo  centennial year. He  would   ve been 100, so there   s some things going on. The History  Center, Dr. Bob Blackburn, asked if I would be interested in doing  something with them. I had thought  perhaps  this 100-year anniversary   would  be privately noted and marked. I was interested, of course, in  doing what I could to honor our father and his contribution to the world  in whatever way that I could, and very appreciative of the interests and  opportunity that Dr. Blackburn brought forward. I produced a lot of  things from our collection and made them gallery-ready and worked  with their wonderful establishment  and staff . The show opened  with  rotating exhibitions  in January of 2012, which is our father   s birthday,  and it  was  up for a year and a half.  Great.  The exhibitions are going to  rotate  quarterly  for  not all of  the work   can be shown at  one time . They asked that it be a family show, so  22  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  there   s some of my father   s work (most of the bulk of it is his), some of  my brother   s jewelry work, and up to thirty of my pieces     Oh, great.     some of it from the black-and-white images from Alive in a Living  World, which is relevant to the traditional women   s ways teachings,  which are actually illustrations for the book that I   m working on now,  entitled  Spirit Talk .  Do you feel like talking about that a little bit, the book that you   re  working on now?  I can talk about it. The development areas are tender and sensitive and in  development. I really can   t tell you what they   re about now  as  they   re  in development. (Laughter) I   ve been working on the book a number of  years. I   m in the selection process now. It   s something of a blood  mysteries manual, if you will.  It   s a sensational way to put it, but in a way we   re all seeking the  sensation of linkage with our deepest selves and the Creator. We all   desire  to die and be reborn to Spirit in ceremony and in a sacred way.  Ceremony allows a person to do that without having to get into risky  social behavior.   As women  our biology and the fact that we have a moon-time event  once a month when in our childbearing years offers us the opportunity to  meet the sacred charge as  understood by  me, to meet it and to  experience  the charge , live it out, and satisfy it to the larger  community, ourselves and the larger community, the larger community  meaning all of us  now on the Mother Earth .  A powerful Spirit action that a person undertakes, when satisfied, is  actually in service to and a gift to all of Creation. Who knows where it  stops? What happens for the one happens for the all. As women, we  have a sacred charge to move through and live with our moon time in a  particular way, going  in to retreat,  a personal sacred ceremony .   There is  a lot of information, and it   s not something that we have to go  out of our home to do. It   s a way that is non-competitive with the larger  society in that the larger society in this case being the fact that most of  us as women have to interface with a lot of men in our world. That   s  fine, but we have a women   s way, too, which isn   t identified or brought  forward very often.   The women   s moon time practice removes  us  from the  competitive  23  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  arena, and the men love it. They love it when we find our power and our  beauty and come forward  to  bring something of our own forward.  They   ve been waiting for us to do it. We got sideways with it so many  years ago, so long ago, to our detriment, and now we   re crying around  about it because we don   t have our way and we   re trying to make it in  the men   s world.  It   s two steps forward and one step back. Some people might say,    Well,  how am I going to continue to function in the world?    Do it, and you   ll  find out because it   s different for each person  for  these gifts come from  the Creator, not from us. We have to put ourselves in the way of the  Creator   s energetic path that was provided for us.  Sometimes there   s an attitude of,    We have these ways of knowing, and  they   re really ours, and we don   t need to  share .    There   s that attitude,  and then there   s,    Well, these ways aren   t pertinent to you anymore, so  you all don   t need to know about them.    There   s different attitudes  towards teaching, I guess, of traditional ways.  Well, what are we talking about when we say    ways   ? What   s that  mean? What   s the word there when the word    ways    is? Do you know  what you   re talking about to me when you say those ways? Do you  know what ways you   re even referring to?  Personal ceremonies of the  moon time allow us to create a time and space to conduct medicine  inquiries into personal, cultural and collective ways   but, mostly to  delve deeply into our own true path.   Right.  They don   t know. I call that the Tampax mentality.    Oh, you don   t need  to do that anymore.    That doesn   t go very deep. We   ll stop right there   (Laughter)  I guess just another question real quickly, but you don   t go into this     this is your political commitment, too, is to the spiritual. Are you  interested in activist politics at all or not?  Totally not.  I  have  my  hands full, and  I am  not doing that. If  I  participate in    politics    my  political profile  would  be different. Men  don   t have  the same  ceremonies  as ours . We   re so fortunate we carry  our biology. We carry our ceremony within us. The women go in; the  men go out. Men have always been the ones to carry the ceremony in the   larger/outer  world, into the world of competition, and the speed of  this  world  has been  deeply  penalizing for all of us.  I read a quote of your father   s about how important stories are, and you  24  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  read us that wonderful piece of writing that you   ve done for the  catalogue. I   m wondering if at this point in your life your father   s story  is even more central to you now than it was in the past.  Yes, definitely it is. Yes, I would say that honoring him in his centennial  year is no small thing for all of us. That   s one of the things that has been  my pleasure to participate in, is bringing that out for everyone and  finding out it was for me, too, because he  speaks to me  from the other  side. His works are about our beautiful, physical world of duality as we  know it that is infused and suffused with the mind of the Creator, and to  remember that and to see that, to rest there and to know that, draw some  peace, some wisdom, some quiet, some love.  Besides painting, have you tried your hand at any of the, well, what they  call the traditional arts? I   m thinking of sewing or weaving or     I   m a quilter. I   m a potter, a basket maker, a pie maker, a gardener     And a bit of a silversmith. (Laughter) In terms of Native art, where do  you see that moving today? I don   t know how much you   re out at the  shows these days, but where do you see that going?  It   s not so much where it   s going as where it comes from, and then I  don   t have an overview on that. I would just say it depends so much on  where  I am  and who  I am  looking at and enjoy that. Almost any artist  will have something to say about a piece, but they won   t say very much  because we recognize that the person   s experience with the artwork is  unique and belongs to them. They can be told a story or hear a story  about it, but their experience is the valid one  for them. The viewer has  their unique perception and experience of another   s art .  I   d like to talk just a little bit about the process and techniques of  painting. I know you   ve been spending quite a bit of your time, as you  explained, in just getting to your painting periodically, but was there a  process for you with your signature? Sometimes that   s something artists  wrestle with: the placement of it, how big it is, how to sign.  Well, you don   t want to draw too much attention to the signature, so I  bring it down to a name, probably. It   s more professional to not draw  that much attention to it, size-wise, color-wise, length-wise, placement.  All that comes with instruction because, at the beginning, we   re all like  kids. The teacher will come by and say,    All I see is your name      (Laughter)    Tone it down      Good point. When you do get to painting, are you working in oils  sometimes, or is it mostly water media?  25  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Oil.  Oil.  I like oil a lot. I   m working in watercolor  off and on  because oil is a  demanding mistress, especially if you work large. It takes an enormous  amount of  physical  energy. I like to work the size large enough that I  can walk into. I   m finding that I   m enjoying working smaller,  and in   watercolor, which is very immediate. I like the transparency  and   qualities of watercolor.  However,  my first love is draftsmanship and  then oil and then watercolor.  So do you keep a sketchbook?  Yes.  You   ve probably had a couple over the years. (Laughter)  I took one to Egypt.  Oh  I was wondering if you   d just talk briefly about one or two trips that  were highlights for you, besides the trip to Russia.  Egypt was big. I elected not to take a camera on that trip. I forced  myself. An eight-and-a-half-by-eleven sketchbook, bound hardcover, all  my pencils and razorblades, (good drawing pencils, you don   t put in a  sharpener; you have to use a razorblade to sharpen them) and the erasers.  I had all that with me. I regretted it almost every day that I had to work  instead of get the camera out and snap. On a trip like that, it   s happening  every day, and you have to see so much and then have to work very fast  because it   s passing scenes for the most part.  After a while I stopped regretting it when I realized I was polishing a  skill through necessity and  accomplishing a lot . I did tomb rubbings  and  drew  the pyramids,  making  notes and drawings of people that I  met along the way. It was a wonderful experience.  Now when I look back through  the sketchbook , it   s with awe. I   m so  happy that I listened and forced myself not to take a camera,  to  work  through that resistance, early resistance to working. It   s a fine line  between taking time off and just going and doing work, but I made a  decision to make it a working trip.  Was this in the    90s?  26  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  No, it was in the    70s.  Okay. Wow.  Yes, when Jim went to Russia with Roy Clark, my brother  Woody, Jr.   and daughter  Cris  and I  traveled to Italy . We spent the winter in  Rome and  traveled  to Egypt.  How wonderful.  Then we met back up when we got back. We   d only met once before we  made that trip, and then we both just had wildly divergent  paths . Our  lives took us in wildly divergent directions for a while, a couple of  months.  Yes, wow. (Laughs) What   s your creative process when you are engaged  in painting? What   s your creative process starting from the time you get  your idea?  Well, it depends. It depends  largely  on the medium in part. I   ve been a  serious student of the energetics of stones, so that was part of my  silversmithing. It depends on whether I need instruction first, then  making the dedicated time and disciplining my mind toward being aware  of what   s coming into my interest field and noting it and filing it in a  place where I begin to notice if things accumulate.  I may have a lot of fields around me, but if something comes up I   m  very interested in, actually, I don   t file it. I put it into an area around me  somewhere not too far away. If three things accumulate that are  connected and something else comes in,    Oh, this is about that too,    I   ll  put it over there if I don   t have anything more to do with it. Then when a  third thing comes in, I pull the other two out, and I say,    Okay, let   s  look. We have three things that have come here together.  Why?      When that happens, I need to be ready to start right then, whether it   s a  poem or a story or a painting or a sketchbook or a thought. I need to be  writing because inspiration and creative energy has revealed itself and  come together. Then. No more than twenty minutes. If I am driving or  something and I have to put it off, I pull over to the side of the road in  twenty minutes, and I do some writing,  notes or drawing . That   s the  way it often goes. Can   t put it off. It   s not going to be there tomorrow in  the same way. It   s here now.   I  can put it  an inspiration or concept  off until tomorrow, but  will   have evolved and become something else.  I  have to  then  do  some   work toward the original point, picking up that energy.  27  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Right.     and not do the back work  to  go back and say,    Stop everything.    I  like to do that now, actually. I used to be aware that I didn   t want to look  back and connect with that point and bring it forward. It was way too  exciting when I finally got to it. Let me get out my paints, and I   m going  to paint something right now  (Laughter) It   s a little farther down the  road, and it catches up with you.  That   s a good description. Well, looking back on your teaching, your  art, the many things you   ve been doing over the years so far, what was a  fork in the road that seems really meaningful to you now, that you  could   ve sort of taken one path and you took this different path?  Anything a little more specifically that you   re asking about?  Just sort of where you went with your art and your teaching, do you  remember any forks in the road that seemed like you were making a leap  or committing yourself to one thing as opposed to the other? It can be  about either one of those.  Well, I suppose they   re all that way to some degree or another because  working with Spirit, it   s always evolving, and it   s always a prayer, and  it   s always  an  emerging story, always risky because  I  don   t know  from one moment to the next when one thought comes and  I  move into  that. One thing that artists often know is that we   re not in very much, if  any, control. It   s all risky, and we have to be prepared to love,  manage,  and organize  that excitement.  If  I   ve  got a brush and  I   m  drawing a string of watercolor across  my   paper, every centimeter is a risk.  I  don   t know where it   s going to go,  what it   s going to look like, what   s coming forward for  me  to see and  become aware of, what  I  are endeavoring to put in and want to be in it  and it won   t behave. Or  I  can tighten it way down into a real tight  drawing and get in there and make it just exactly the way  I  want to and  so forth.  I   ve  got this perfect little thing when you finish, but it   s not  real vibrant. Or it is.   I  may find out that it   s not very vibrant, or  I  may find out that it is  very vibrant and say,    Hey, I   m going to work small and tight from this.  I just found out that I was working real big and loose, and what I need to  do is just bear down with it, fine drawing, and get in there with my little  brushes and do it just all perfect like that.    Or vice versa, working real  tight. We all tend to work tight when we start, so  our teachers are   always trying to get  us  to loosen up.  28  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  That really doesn   t work for me because of my relationship with  draftsmanship. I   ve got to have the drawing. Part of that must be in my  DNA or from my father   s example because he made finished pencil  drawings of everything. He made finished pencil drawings on  parchment. They   re exquisite, all of the etchings, all of the silk screens,  all of the oils, full-size. Depending if it was etching, could be that size,  and silk screens, like this. (Gestures) I study them. They   re exquisite.  So unusual.  Yes. I know where my love of draftsmanship came from.  So looking back on your life so far, is there a highlight that you   d like to  talk about? We   ve talked about some, but is there another one we  haven   t mentioned?  Well, no. No. It   s still unfolding. It   s still exciting and a wonderful  journey.  How about has there been a low point in your career or your teaching  or art?  Well, all of the risks  are  made of highs and lows. The highs and lows  are not unlike duality, though, and the seasons, all of that. It   s just  another facet of reality as  I  see it and as it is momentarily because the  moment something is seen and recognized, it has the opportunity to  move and to dynamic change, and then it   s over. It   s down the road. So   I  don   t have the highs without the lows. When  I  draw the line and  that risk is being taken, success and failure is in that draw. Highs and  lows, artists know about highs and lows. It   s all about   we don   t walk a  middle path. No one does, really.  We aspire to the sweet spot of unity in  Spirit, and the journey is an interesting one.   Is there anything else you   d like to talk about before we take a look at  your artwork?  No.  Okay.  I think we   ve covered it very well. (Laughter)  Great. Well, I   m excited to look at these images for a minute here. All  right, we   re looking at one of your early oils. Is that right?  29  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Yes, this one took the Philbrook award in    75 at the Indian Invitational.  Indian Annual.  Indian Annual, yes. The original then was purchased by the Heard  Museum in Phoenix, and it   s in their collection.  Oh, how wonderful. And you talked about your model for that.  Yes.  Okay. How about this piece?  Okay, this one is entitled The Little People. Do you want me to read  this?  Yes.  Okay. This is entitled The Little People. This was the cover of art for a  show at Carnegie Hall in 1976 that Jim Halsey took to New York,  the   first country music presentation in Carnegie Hall. The poem goes like  this:  The brotherhood of all spirits, the wisdom of the land, the  blossoming of each spirit, the search for the recognition of  and the expression of the beauty and truth in each of these  things.  Let each one of us radiate our love, each in our own way,  and may our path be richer for each one   s gift. The gift of  sound, the gift of song, the gift of touch, the gift of labor, of  children and dreams and warm rays of sun, of trees in the  wind and blue shadows on the snow, sunset skies and  innocence.  That   s very nice. Thank you. And this was   is that gauche?  That   s watercolor.  Watercolor.  Yes, it   s just opaque watercolor. That was  the  playbill cover.  Yes, how wonderful. Well, thank you so much for your time today.  You   re welcome. Did you know that I recently completed a  30  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  Little Thunder  Crumbo-Halsey  documentary on our father?  No.  I have one here for you if you weren   t aware of that.  Wonderful. Thank you so much.  It   s good.  It will be screened  at the Gilcrease. RSU  Rogers State  University  is interested in having me edit it down a little bit so they can  run it too.  Editing down Woody Crumbo   s work is hard. It will be much  easier to add material   or re-do the entire project.   Oh, that would be wonderful.  Yes. Have you ever put music behind your     We don   t.  This has music behind it.  It does?  Yes.  Oh, how cool.  My son  Woody Carter, Woody Crumbo   s grandson  composed  and  performed  most of it. There   s a few pieces in there that are from other  places. There are two Hank Thompson snippets and some other things.  My son carries his grandfather   s flute and composes and plays on it.  Oh, wow. Thank you so much for that. I   m going to enjoy that.  Yes.  -------  -------   
