 Finchum  Waters  Today is May 14, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with the  Oklahoma State University Library and we are doing an oral history  project called Women Agricultural Extension Educators. Today we   re in  Pawnee, Oklahoma with Martha Waters and she   s going to tell us a little  bit about her career. We   ll just start with having her talk a little bit  about her childhood and then we   ll go from there.  Okay. I was born in Stillwater, Oklahoma in July of 1940   July 24th. I  went to school at a rural school about two miles from the house called  Pleasant View, which is no longer there, for eight years. Then after the  eighth year in grade school, I went to high school at Stillwater High  School for four years. Graduated in 1958 and then got my degree from  Oklahoma State University. I lived at home and worked the summers at  the OSU switchboard for fifty cents an hour. Got my bachelor   s degree  in 1962. Went from    58 to    62 at Oklahoma State University.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  I have two brothers and a sister.  And when did you get interested in home economics as a career choice?  Ever since I   ve been in grade school. We had 4-H club program that we  were active in in the rural school and from the time I was probably nine  or before, that   s when I decided that   s what I wanted to do was work in  Extension.  And Oklahoma State, because it was nearby or because it had a good  program?  Basically because it was nearby. It also had a very good program, but it  was a lot cheaper to live at home and go to school.  5  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Well living at home, did your parents interact with county agents  themselves?  Yes, they did.  So you were exposed to it that way?  Yes. My father died when I was four, so Mother basically raised us and  she was involved in Extension a lot.  Once you got into OSU, did you have a favorite professor or subject?  Well all the home economics classes I enjoyed. Laura Casey was a  professor there, Beulah Hirschlein who just recently retired were very  good teachers.  Nutrition or sewing?  Basically I liked nutrition and I also liked housing and interior design.  That   s what I got my master   s degree in.  At that time did you have to spend several weeks in the home  management house?  Yes.  Or practice house?  Yes. Home management house. I think we spent six weeks in the home  management house. At that time it was the one on Sixth Street that I  spent my time at. Right east of the Stillwater hospital was what they  called the home management house. That was a real experience.  Once you graduated, did you go immediately into Extension work or did  you do something in-between?  No. I did my student observation in Waynoka, Oklahoma and then I did  my student teaching at Okeene, Oklahoma. I enjoyed it so much that that  was the first time I even considered doing something different than  Extension, but went ahead and chose to do Extension Service. I went to  work in June of 1962 in Extension.  And what county did they assign you to?  I was what they called at that time home demonstration agent-at large  and I spent six months in McClain County with Dorothy Blackwell as  6  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  the home demonstration agent. Then I was transferred on south of that to  Garvin County in Paul   s Valley and I spent two and a half years there  with Mary Tucker. She was the home demonstration agent and I was the  assistant home demonstration agent and then during that time became  what they called associate home demonstration agent.  And then moved to     I was transferred. I accepted the position here in Pawnee County in  1965, April first, and I have been here ever since.  And then retired from here in what year?  In 1992, September 3, 1992, with a little over thirty years of Extension  service.  So you liked Pawnee County.  Well basically because after I was here three years, I married and my  husband has a ranch and you don   t pick up a ranch and move it.  (Laughter) So that   s why I stayed in Pawnee County. But while I was  here as extension agent, what they call the county extension director  then retired and said,    Why don   t you apply for the job?    Well it was,  you know, at that time a male position. There was one other woman  county director in the state of Oklahoma, down in the southern part of  the state, and I said,    Oh, I don   t think so. I don   t think the  commissioners would approve that.    Then one of the commissioners  came to me and said,    Why don   t you apply for the job?    And after he  said that then I gave it some thought because that was my only way of  promotion or to work up because I couldn   t transfer to another job too  easily. At that time you basically lived where you worked, and so I did. I  applied for the job.  It was February 17, 1975 that I started.  Jan  Montgomery, who was at Hugo at the time, and myself became the two  women county directors in the state of Oklahoma.  And you stuck with it roughly twenty years?  Yes, as County Director.  Do you know if she stayed in it that long?  Yes, she stayed in Extension, but she moved onto a state job.  When you first started did you have someone who would take you under  their wing and show you the ropes?  7  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  You mean in Extension?  Yes.  Oh, basically the ones that I worked with, you know, the home  demonstration agents that I worked with were the ones that would teach  you or help you. Then growing up in 4-H or Extension work ever since I  was nine years old, I had a pretty good idea of what it was about, but it   s  always different when you get involved than when you   re in school.  Do you think OSU prepared you pretty well for the job?  Yes, I do.  Did you have a mentor, role model?  I had a role model, Ladora Chesbro Smith. She was the 4-H agent in  Payne County at the time that I was growing up and she   s still living in  Stillwater, at this time.  Since you worked in different counties, can you do a little bit of  comparison between them?  Yes, in Garvin County where I worked, they had two 4-H agents, the  county agent and the home demonstration agent. So there was a staff of  four in that office and two secretaries. Many times in Pawnee County  there was just one secretary and an agriculture agent and myself as home  economist and county director. I remember when I received the job as  county director, the  Stillwater  NewsPress called and wanted to do an  interview and talk to me about how I was going to work with the farmers  out in the wheat fields and stuff, you know. And I said,    That   s not my  job.    And they couldn   t understand because that   s what the county agent  done and I said,    Well, my job is home economist and working as  county director I will be working with the budgets, everything like that  and I have an agriculture agent who will go out in the field and work  with the farmers in the wheat fields and whatever they   re working on.     That was difficult for them to understand.  They must have gotten used to it if they let you stay around for twenty  years.  Yes. (Laughter) They wanted to take a picture of me out in the wheat  fields and I said,    No. That   s not my position. That   s not what I do.     Good for you. Well, back in the early days when you first started just as  an agent yourself, can you describe a typical day?  8  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Oh, yes. Back then (laughs), years ago when I started out I was more as  in-service. I did the 4-H type work and you would go to 4-H meetings  and do programs or you would go as an assistant home demonstration to  the homemakers  club  meetings and shared a program with them. Then  it eventually evolved where we would train the people to do the  programs.  You had to do a lot of traveling?  Yes, we did a lot of traveling. We had a lot of meetings and a lot of  travel depending on how many clubs there was in the county and other  special things that you did. We did a lot of travel.  Well I know there   s not as many clubs as there once was. At Pawnee   s  peak about how many did they have?  At their peak back in the early day? Probably forty some.  Really? And now?  Oh, I think right now there   s probably only six maybe, at the most?  At least there   s that many.  Yeah, maybe less than that. When I was still working there were  between ten and twelve that were scattered over the county. But as  homemakers went to work and became employed, it was harder for them  to attend meetings, especially during the day. We had one or two night  groups that would come, but then after they   d worked all day it was hard  for some people with families to come at nights.  Did they do county fairs as well? Did you have to do those?  Yes. (Laughs) Yes, we did county fairs. Well there   s a lot of work in a  county fair and I judged a lot of county fairs, too. Went to other counties  to judge   to do judging projects.  They probably don   t do that as much as they did.  I don   t think so. I don   t think they do judge as many fairs as they used  to. Fairs are still going on.  What were some of the first lessons you remember doing?  Well, probably more in the foods. We always gave demonstrations and,  I   ll have to share this, I was doing a program in Osage County. I was  9  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  doing a leader training program. We sometimes worked back and forth  after I was here and this lady had her little boy with her and we were at  the fairgrounds and a mouse ran behind me. I remember him saying  (laughs)   I was busy working on something and he said,    Oh, I wish I  had my BB gun.    And I didn   t know where the mouse was or where it  was going. (Laughter) It was entertaining. A lot of happy memories of  things that happen.  You could share a few more, if you like. Some other highlights.  As I think of them.  When you first started, you had to have your own car, I   m assuming.  They didn   t furnish that for you?  No, they never did furnish a car. They did what they call mileage and  you claim mileage, so much a mile according to what the state allowed.  Any car trouble issues along the way?  No, I was pretty lucky. I don   t remember any particular problems.  Were some of the county roads rough?  Our county roads were in good shape at that time here. Ice storms and  bad weather was a factor, like if we had to go to district or state  meetings that became an issue, kind of. You never knew when you were  going to get trapped out somewhere with the weather.  Did you carry a lot of equipment and things in your car?  Oh yes. You had to have a strong back, I always said, to work in  Extension. We always had boxes of stuff or projectors or little television  sets   audio visual stuff that we would take to different programs.  And over the course of a week, about how many programs would you  do? Like a typical week.  Oh gosh, maybe as many as   and we worked a lot of nights, too. It  wasn   t just an eight-to-five job. Especially where I was working 4-H and  the homemakers program because a lot of the 4-Hers met at night for  activities and things. Probably twenty or more.  That   s quite a few.  Yeah. Could be as many as that.  10  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  And would you have to practice what you were demonstrating?  Oh sure.  On your own time?  On your own time. Yeah. You always did practice something on your  own time or worked it up on your own time usually if you had time at  home to work it up. If you had some time in the office, you could do it in  the office. It just kind of depended.  Well where was your office?  Our office in my last job was in the basement of the courthouse.  Seems to be the place for a lot of them, isn   t it?  Yes. We finally got it moved about two or three years before I retired.  We got it moved up on first floor and that was a lot nicer. We kind of  switched with the sheriff   s office and that worked real neat.  Did the people in the community come to you with questions a lot? I  mean, actually come to your office with questions?  Yes, they came to the office and they called a lot. We had a lot of  questions. Seemed like a variety of questions and, of course, in the  summer a lot of them canning, preserving foods and things like that.  And do you still can?  (Laughs) I don   t just for the two of us, but I liked to can. It was fun.  Had your own garden too, I guess?  When I was working I never did raise a very big garden.  No time, doesn   t sound like.  No time, no time. (Laughter)  Did any of your young 4-Hers go on to become home extension workers  too? Are you aware of any?  Well, right now the one that is the county director here and home  economist here in Pawnee County was one of my 4-H members.  11  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  There you go. Continuing on.  Continues on, yes. Yes, she   s the one that   s working here now. Her  mother said awhile back,    Did you ever think that my girls would be in  home economics?    But yes, it   s exciting.  Do you have children?  No, no children.  Now the name has changed quite a bit over the years, too. Have you had  a favorite one? (Laughter)  Extension educator. I   m not even sure what they   re called at this point.  Home and community educator.  Well I kind of like the Extension home economist because it kind of  talked like we were out of the classroom type situation.  It wasn   t arts and crafts, it was actual     Yes, teaching.  Teaching. And money management.  Correct.  Canning and things?  That   s right.  Well did you go to association meetings outside of the state?  Yes, to the national. Yes. My first one, I think it was in 1962, we went to  Salt Lake City, Utah. Four of us drove up to Salt Lake and we had a  really good meeting and a lot of fun.  That   s before you were married?  Yes. (Laughter) Yes. I made quite a few. Well, from    62 to    68, I made  all of the national meetings. We even, one time, went to Chicago on a  train and caught it at Perry. That   s when they had the passenger train of  Perry.  That must have been fun, too.  12  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  That was fun. That was real fun.  So a lot of the association meetings would be well attended from all  across the country?  Yes, yes they were.  And I guess as a youngster you would go to Roundup?  Went to 4-H Roundup, yes. Went to Kansas City, American Royal, went  to Chicago as a state 4-H winner and we went on the train, too, to  Chicago, at that time. That was quite an experience for somebody who  hadn   t been out of the county, almost. I won a Sunbeam Scholarship,  eight-hundred dollars for college, which was a college tuition  scholarship. That doesn   t sound like much now, but it went a long way  back then.  Well, while we   re back there, we   ll go back and talk a little bit about  your fifty cents an hour job. (Laughter) Tell us a little bit about that.  Oh, well we worked at the OSU Switchboard which was on the fourth  floor of Life Science Building and they didn   t have an elevator. You  walked four flights and they worked your schedule around your college.  I started working there the summer that I graduated from high school  and worked clear through until I graduated from college. My sister was  also there and my sister-in-law and her two sisters and one of the girls  that was an Extension home economist in southeast Oklahoma along  with her two sisters. So it was kind of like one of those things that you  pass down.  Now it sounds like it was more of a female job then?  There were no males.  Doing that job.  There weren   t any boys.  Interesting.  No boys during that time, four years and five summers.  Did you have a dress code or could you wear whatever you wanted?  No, they didn   t really tell us how to dress, but we didn   t wear jeans. You  didn   t wear shorts. You didn   t wear jeans to the OSU Library. There was  13  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  a dress code when you went in there, too.  Times have changed. (Laughter)  Times have changed. Really, on campus, yes.  Did you help any of your homemaker clubs do cookbooks?  None of mine did a cookbook. They didn   t. We did sell the state  cookbook and still is one that I rely on for a lot of recipes.  The one they refer to as the    green book?     Green cookbook. I   ve got it right there. Yes, the green cookbook.  And you actually use it?  Yes, yes I do because I   ve never run onto a bad recipe in it, you know.  It   s pretty much tried and true from homemakers that have cooked and  everything through the years.  Did you know Cleo Bryan?  Yes, I did. Yes.  Any stories about her?  Oh, I can   t think of anything specifically, but there were lots of stories.  Cleo   she loved life. She did cookbooks herself and even after she  retired she went to War Eagle  Arts and Craft Fair in Arkansas , and a  lot of places, and sold them.  I had heard that she was a character in her own way.  She was.  I thought that maybe you might have a story to tell about her.  Well she had worked Garvin County a few years before I went there on  my first job, but I didn   t ever really work with her. I just knew her  through the association.  She was president     Of the state, yes.  14  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  And of the national one, too?  Yes, I believe she was. Yes, she was.  From Tahlequah.  From Tahlequah, Oklahoma. Yes, she was.  They just said she was the opposite of Dean O   Toole who was very prim  and proper.  Right, right.  And Cleo was more down to earth.  Oh she was. She was. Just loved life. Always had a good time wherever  she was going, whatever she was doing.  Well did Pawnee have adult camps?  No, no. We didn   t have any adult camps. We had educational tours that  we took, but it was just like a one-day bus tour that we would take to  different parts of the state. We only one time went out of state and went  over night with adults. Most of the time I was chaperoning 4-Hers, or  younger boys and girls, to events like 4-H camps and Roundup, state  fair. They had a state fair school back in those days and we would go  and spend two nights, I think it was, and three days at the state fair. They  had dormitories.  They don   t do that anymore?  No, no. They haven   t done that for years. I don   t know how long ago it   s  been, but they quit that a long time before I even retired.  And you would transport them yourself?  Yes.  That wouldn   t go over too well either, I don   t guess.  No. (Laughter) No, we transported most of the 4-Hers everywhere other  than to state 4-H Roundup in Stillwater. We   d take a school bus most of  the time.  How big of a county is Pawnee? Just square mile-wise or population, do  you know?  15  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  I don   t know exactly square miles. It   s kind of a strange-shaped county.  Population was about 15,000 or so, but I   m sure it   s a lot more than that  now.  More instead of less?  I think, because of the east end of the county over by the lake in  Cleveland, probably, but I   m not positive.  I was just trying to get an idea, distance-wise. If you   re traveling out to  different communities, about how many could you get to in one day?  Oh, you could get to quite a few in Pawnee County. Osage is probably  our biggest county in the state of Oklahoma and they had a lot of miles  to travel.  And typically you would just have one county to oversee?  Yes, typically at the beginning, you know. Probably about twenty years  ago, because of budget problems, they started doing multi-county things.  That was right before I retired.  Did you do some work with the Indians?  Yes, I had programs for them. Of course, we had the Indian Health  Clinic here and Indian Hospital, which is no longer a hospital. Now they  have the clinic. Over fifty percent of the Indians are diabetics as a  statistic and so we did a lot of programs with them on diabetes and  nutrition and things like that.  Well in the    60s or    70s they had some agents that just     That worked strictly with the Indian program, yes. And there was one  that did work with Pawnee County and Kay County. I think she worked  Pawnee, Noble, Kay and maybe Osage, I   m not sure.  And they just phased it out over time?  Yes. Yes, they did. I think they were housed in Kay County at the time.  So when you retired, was the next person in charge male or female?  In my position, I think it was a male. I think it was a male.  Are there very many women county directors across the state now?  16  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Quite a few. Quite a few. They hold the title. Of course, the distinction  of being strictly a county agent or an agricultural agent has gone away,  so they have the terminology CED  County Extension Director . Now  the woman that   s in here now is the CED. Basically they work with  budgets and stuff like that with the commissioners and trying to get the  county budget.  Can be tough, huh?  Very tough job. Very stressful. Especially in the counties where the  financial situation isn   t very good.  Well you had to do monthly reports and annual reports?  We did monthly reports and annual reports.  Did the office keep those or the narratives?  We didn   t do the extreme narratives that they did back in the    40s and     50s. I   ve turned all those over. There   s a lot of excellent narratives that  we didn   t know who wanted them and everything and I was afraid when  I retired they might just get thrown away. The county agent that was  here was a photographer and he took a lot of pictures back in the early     40s, and the home economist. They did narrative reports and they were  all written up, almost like scrapbook form, you know, of what was done.  They are with the historical society now.  Pawnee?  Pawnee, yes. They   re very interesting and at one time they had a big box  of pictures and I was going to check on that and see if they still had  those. And they had a big box of pictures during the time of the  Depression when they had to slaughter the cattle and everything. They  had some pictures of mattress making that they used to do.  That was in the    40s?  Yes, that was back in the    40s. A lot of history back then.  Well that   s good that they   ve been saved so the librarian in me says  thank you.  Well if there   s something in them that you want or you want to make a  copy of I can probably get access to them.  Okay, I may have to come up a different day and see what they have.  17  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Okay. These are excellent, you know, back like I say in the early    40s.  They   re really good. Very interesting.  When you came on board, you didn   t do them as detailed?  No. They were basically numbers, like how many contacts that you  made and how many people you taught for that month and how many  meetings you had and things like that. Not near as detailed as what they  were back then and no pictures and things like that, much. That would  be a very interesting thing back in the early day.  We will check. When you first started, did they have any rules about  being married or not?  Yes, they did. You couldn   t be married and work for Extension Service.  That changed. When I told my homemakers that I was going to be  married it was in 1968 and they said,    Oh, you   re not going to be able to  work any longer, are you?    And I said,    Yes. They   ve changed that  rule.    So I think it must have been about 1965, somewhere in the early     60s. Right along there is when they changed that ruling. And then at  that time they also had a rule that you had to live in the county where  you worked and you couldn   t work in a county where you were raised  either.  That   s interesting. Any reason why?  I think they thought people wouldn   t look at you as a professional as  much if they knew you from when you were young and growing up.  There   s probably some truth in that.  So that was just a rule they had. All of those are gone. All of those  rulings, as far as I know, are no longer in existence.  Well once they let you get married, could you have children without that  being an issue?  Yes, yes. They never did say anything about families after that, but at  first you couldn   t be married.  Couldn   t be married at all. You think some were and didn   t tell?  I don   t know of any that were.  I thought that maybe some rebel out there...  18  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  There might have been one or two (laughter), but as far as I knew there  wasn   t any that were married at the time.  Well when you started you were really young too. Did you have any  trouble getting people to take you seriously?  No, not really because, like I say, when I first started working I worked  with 4-Hers, young people, and that made a difference. You were kind  of on their age level more and as you matured then you worked with the  homemakers.  And you had to work pretty closely with the county agent?  Yes.  The male version too?  Yes, yes.  You did a lot of things with him?  Yes, like in Garvin County they had two 4-H agents, a male and a  female. You had one of each and then you had the county agent which  was male and then the home demonstration agent which was a female  who worked with the home economics programs.  So did he help you carry things in and out?  Yes, the ones that I worked with. I really had some good ones to work  with and when I got in Pawnee County and was working as county  director, I had ag agents. That was kind of like we were training, you  know, because the thought was that they went on bigger and better  things. I   ve worked with a lot of people through the years. Still have a  couple of   Stan Fimple and Brad Tipton were ag agents here in the  county that worked with me, but are still working in Extension.  Do you miss it?  Do I miss Extension?  Yes.  I miss the people that I had. I don   t miss the stress. (Laughs)  Well when you   re out in town do people stop you?  19  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Oh yes, yes.  Do they still ask you questions?  Not as much as they used to, but they used to a lot. In fact, this morning  I was at the grocery store and I was trying to hurry and this lady was just  visiting with me that was one of my 4-H leaders and I hadn   t seen her  for a long time, so we were visiting. Then another one stopped me and  she worked at the county fairs   one of the fair superintendents. We  visited. I never did join a homemakers group here because I felt like, this  was just my philosophy, that I didn   t want to make it difficult for  anybody else coming on, you know, any home economist that was  working here, competition or whatever. So I never did join a group.  So you still haven   t?  No, no. I belong to P.E.O.  Philanthropic Educational Organization   which is an educational organization. I enjoy that. It   s a whole different  group of people, but we still do educational programs and I still do  programs in it.  When I first got here you had said that your homemakers got together  and made you a quilt?  Yes.  Let   s talk a little bit about that.  Okay, this was kind of a surprise one Christmas. I didn   t know they were  doing it and we were having a council meeting and we were at a church  and the program happened to be on quilts, historical quilts. I had  borrowed the program from the Oklahoma State Library in Oklahoma  City and we were doing the program and in the end they presented me  with this quilt. It has all of the clubs    names along with the members that  were in that club.  So how many clubs would there have been?  I think there were twelve. I   m not sure   twelve clubs.  So probably three by four then.  Yes. And they made a big king-sized quilt out of it because they knew I  had a king-sized bed.  That was very special.  20  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Yes, it is and I have it in my bedroom. I quit using it on the bed all of the  time, but I have it on a quilt rack in my bedroom.  Can you remember some of the names of the clubs?  Yes. Dorcas, Pandora, White Rose   gosh.  Those are interesting choices.  At one time, Vida de Casa, Happy Homemakers, Willing Workers  (laughs)   they came up with their own name.  White rose?  White Rose, yes. I believe that   s the oldest club in the county or has  been in existence in the county  the longest .  Do you know if anyone is doing historical things on the clubs?  Not to my knowledge, they aren   t.  It would be interesting to see. The names are just fascinating. I think,  how   d they come up with that?  How did they come up with the names, yes.  And probably not very many members, fifteen to twenty per group  maybe?  Probably about that many to a group. Yeah. In larger cities I   m sure they  had a lot more, but here we didn   t have but about fifteen, twenty.  Well if you   re going out to their homes to do a program, that   s about as  many as you could     About as many as a home could handle, yes. That   s true.  Do you have any favorite memories when you were going out to the  homes, any particular event that stands out in your mind? Did you burn  anything?  (Laughter) No. I don   t think I burned anything. I can   t remember  burning anything. There was always something happening it seemed  like, but at one time, when I was in Garvin County and went out to the  club, I found out later that this lady   s husband had hepatitis, I think it  was. So they had to inoculate all of the people that were there because  21  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  they were afraid it would spread. Because I drink coffee, that is all I  drank, it wasn   t a big problem.  So you   d have to eat at all of these?  Oh yes, they always had good refreshments and all those things.  I   m thinking if you do twenty of those a week (laughter) then you  wouldn   t have to cook.  Well that was 4-H and homemakers that I   d do about twenty meetings a  week. The homemakers sometime we would have probably six  meetings, one at night and one during the day.  You wouldn   t get comp time either. That was just part of the job?  That was just part of the job. Just part of the job.  Did you get to take vacation?  If you planned it and worked it.  You have to be careful on what time of the year to do it, I guess.  Yes.  Not during harvest season or whatever.  Yes, and when you didn   t have major activities that were important, like  if you were to chaperone kids at state 4-H Roundup, then they had State  Homemakers Council, that was in Stillwater at the time too and just  things like that. You worked your schedules around the major things,  activities they had.  Did you have to have a pretty close working relationship with the  businesses in town to help supply you with whatever you might need for  various things like a microwave and that type of thing? Sewing  machine?  Well it was nice if they did, but most of it you just provided your own  and bought your own stuff.  Did Pawnee have a fabric store?  Yes. They used to have a fabric store, yes. In fact they had two not too  long ago.  22  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  They seem to be disappearing.  Disappearing very fast.  Did you do sewing lessons some?  Yes, yes.  Make aprons?  Made aprons in 4-H, yes. And we would do maybe tailoring classes or  lingerie classes. Taught them how to make lingerie. There was a fad  during part of the years that that was the thing to do and it was real  exciting, you know. You could buy the fabric and the elastic and it was  fun.  During those times too, probably polyester.  Polyester was real popular.  They called it something else.  Double knit. They called it polyester double knit.  Or stretch and sew?  (Laughter) Might have been.  Double knit, though, that sounds right.  That   s what they used to call a lot of polyester fabric.  How would you have to fit the pattern to them?  Well, we used to make muslin garments, to fit. They   d make a practice  garment if they were going to do something real expensive or like a  tailoring class or something like that.  So they would sew it and make sure it   d fit and then undo it?  Yeah. They could undo it and use it as a pattern or they would make sure  that their pattern fit them before they sewed it up.  Do you sew now?  Not much. Not much.  23  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Still have a sewing machine?  I still have a sewing machine. (Laughs) I have the one that I bought  when I first started work back in 1962 and I don   t have any of the high-powered  ones. It still does some stitches if I want to.  Not one those computerized ones that take a genius to figure out?  No, I don   t have that type. And I still use this one and a girl at the  quilting shop told me awhile back, a friend of mine, said that sewing  machine is probably better than any of them. In fact, I made a quilt not  long ago on it. My one and only quilt. (Laughs)  And did you keep it or did you give it away?  I   ve got it. I kept it, oh no. I kept it. I   m still working on the bed skirt.  I   ve got half of it done and I can   t seem to get the other half finished.  Well you probably know how to take your machine apart and put it back  together then?  Pretty much. Clean it yourself and everything.  I   m not sure where you would take one these days.  I don   t either. They used to have a place in Stillwater, but I don   t think  they have any place anymore to service them. Those little featherweight  machines are really nice. I never did have one of those, but they were  easy to handle when you were carrying stuff. They were tiny and they  could sew things heavy like jeans and everything else. They didn   t  weigh very much, but now if you find one, it   s way over four-hundred  dollars for just the featherweight machine. They   re kind of a collector   s  item.  Well not too many sew at home anymore either.  No, no.  Or cook.  Cook or can or do any of that.  I have never canned. I would have liked to once. Maybe I   ll have to  come up and watch you do it. (Laughter)  You had the name of Ruth Peterman, she was the state food and  24  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  nutrition specialist at OSU and would give lessons. We spent like a week  down at OSU in a class where she would do the classes   teaching us  how to can and what to do and then have us working with partners and  things like that.  Every year or how often would you do it?  No, not every year. You   d go through it once, and maybe twice in your  career. I only remember one time. I think it was basically for new  workers and people who didn   t have experience doing it and they would  make sure that you knew how to do it.  If something new was coming up the road, how did you learn how to do  that?  Through the state specialist a lot of times. They would have programs  and training sessions for us.  And then you would go to that and come back and tell your homemaker  group leaders?  Yes.  And then it spreads that way.  Right. Spreads that way. So you were gone from the county at times for  a period of time, probably never over a week at a time that you did  training programs. Usually a day or two   two or three. Upholstery  classes.  Actually had to do that, huh?  We did that.  Refinishing furniture too?  Yes. Yes, we did.  To me that seems like more of the male side, to do the refinishing part,  not the upholstery, but it was women?  It was women.  Because it had to do with the home, right?  Right.  25  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  That makes sense. Well, it   s just an amazing job you guys did. I mean, it  was not a forty hour a week job.  No, it was not. It wasn   t a forty hour a week job, and a wide variety. I  think that   s what made it enjoyable. Every day you got up, it was  different. You kept a calendar and a schedule and you knew where you  needed to be, but every day was different.  Did you keep a calendar or two?  Did I keep some calendars? Yes, I kept some. I   d have to look for them,  but I know where they   re at. They   re in the garage.  I haven   t seen one yet.  Oh, you haven   t?  People talk about them, but they haven   t kept them.  Oh, they haven   t kept them? I haven   t disposed of some of mine. I think  they   re still in the garage.  Well just send them my way before you throw them away. At least I   d  like one that shows the typical week.  Oh okay.  If there was a typical week. And they didn   t give you overtime?  No. We didn   t know what overtime was (laughs) at that time.  When you were at home, like after five o   clock, and someone would call  with a question, did you keep     Reference books? I especially did in the summer when they were  canning and stuff. They   d want to know how long you needed to do  something and I didn   t want to inform them incorrectly. You know, if it  was green beans I could look it up.  And would that happen quite often?  Oh yeah, it happened quite a bit. My husband thought it happened quite  a lot. (Laughter) About something, you know, it might be 4-H work, too.  Probably more 4-H work than anything. But if it was something I  couldn   t answer, I   d tell them I   d have to get back with them the next  day or the next morning if I didn   t have the information there and I  26  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  always did. I always followed through. That   s just one of the  philosophies I had, that you answered their questions or you returned  their phone calls.  The telephone was your best friend then.  Yes. At that time we didn   t have cell phones. There were a lot of times  my best thinking would be when I was driving in the car to and from  meetings and programs. You couldn   t write and drive at the same time  and I always wished I had a tape recorder so I could record something  that I   d think about. Technology wasn   t great at that time.  Well you shouldn   t be doing that either   driving and doing it either.  No, that   s true.  Pull over and do it, I guess.  But if you had a tape recorder, you know, that would run in the car that  you could just talk to it     Some may have done that, I guess.  I don   t know whether they did or not.  No one has said that. I   ll let you know. I am learning as we go with all of  this. So in your early days, gender did have an impact on the career  ladder?  Very much.  Mostly because of not being able to move or     That was just the way it was. That was just the way that they viewed it  and that was just the way it was.  And that   s changed somewhat.  Yes. It   s made it, probably, better for everyone.  Did you do special programs for elderly?  Not specifically. The homemakers were a wide variety of ages and you  had elderly in there, but not just specifically for the elderly.  Did you have to do radio or newspaper?  27  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  I did a newspaper column weekly.  Of stuff you wrote or they would come and interview you?  Stuff that I wrote, typed up, and sent to the newspaper.  You could choose your topic.  You could choose your topic. They had a special column in the  newspaper for us. We just have a weekly paper here, no radio station.  Did you keep some of the ones that you did?  (Laughs) I   ve probably got them somewhere.  Just checking.  Well if you need those, I   ll look them up. Might be something you   d be  interested in.  Yeah, some of them would show what was top priority at the particular  time.  Okay. Okay.  I   ll put you to work.  I   ll find some of those for you.  Federal regulations changed off and on through those years, too. Did  that impact much of what you did on a daily basis?  No, I didn   t think.  Probably more so the farmer aspect.  Probably more the farmer and probably more through the ASCS   Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service  and SCS  Soil  Conservation Service  programs than with Extension. Extension was  basically educational and the other programs were federal money and  things like that.  In Pawnee County, were there any segregation issues in the sixties?  No, not really.  28  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Is there anything that you want to add that I haven   t asked? Any  highlight? Maybe one or two things that just stand out.  Well it was a great career and I   ve enjoyed retirement too. (Laughter) In  the last, what almost nineteen years, I guess? I took early retirement.  With thirty years in though.  I had thirty years in, but you were supposed to be thirty years and fifty-five  years of age. And about three years before I was old enough they  gave us the option to, first time that they had ever done that in the thirty  years that I   d been employed, take early retirement if we had our time in  and everything. And so I talked it over with my husband and he said,     Well, go for it.    So I did. Of course I took a reduction, but that   s okay.  You get to sleep late now.  Right. (Laughs) Then I   ve enjoyed being home on the ranch and helping  him until about the last year and then I   ve kind of slowed down as far as  helping him. I stay in the house more than going out and working the  cattle and stuff.  You didn   t take a second career?  No. Didn   t take a second job. Had a big job here.  Well, you had a big job before, too. It was more like working two jobs  then, too, sounds like.  That   s true. And I had never stayed home so it was different at first. I  wasn   t sure how it was going to work because I had always worked all  my life, but it was fun. It   s been fun.  Find something to keep you busy.  Right. There   s always something to keep you busy. (Laughs)  Well when history is written about you, is there anything in particular  you would want to say?  I can   t think of anything right now, just that it has been a pleasure to  work with the people in the county. They were good people.  And you   ve wanted to do this since you were little.  Yes, (laughs) very young. Very young.  29  Finchum  Waters  Finchum  Waters  Very young. I   m sure the county is happy to have had you all those  years.  Thank you. Thank you.  I appreciate you talking to me today. It   s been great.  Good to have you here, too. Thank you.  -------  -------  
