 Finchum  Blakemore  Today is November 30, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University Library and we   re conducting an oral  history project featuring Cooperative Extension workers. Today we   re in  Bartlesville, Oklahoma to speak with Bill Blakemore who was with  Cooperative Extension from 1949 to 1966. Thank you for having me  today.  You   re a good historian.  Let   s start by having you tell us a little bit about your childhood, where  you were born and your early years. Then we   ll work our way forward.  I started in the poorest section of Oklahoma, your eastern counties.  Adair was right along the Arkansas border, southern middle of  Oklahoma. There   re probably more Indians in Adair County than any  place. I graduated from high school in 1941 and we only lived a mile  and a half out of town. I spent my life in that one house that Mother and  Dad moved there when they got married, and they never moved out. We  still didn   t have electricity in 1941, so we were rural, six boys and one  girl. We did have a few fights. We milked a lot of cows, we walked to  school, and we took butter and milk, and anything else we could carry to  pay the doctor bills and if we bought any groceries and that type of stuff.  We had dairy cows and we eventually had an apple orchard. Roads were  all gravel.  If you can survive that, and I can tell you some other stuff that will  maybe emphasize that more. All of us went to school, of course, and  graduated. That was a must. We all ended up with a college education or  some type of industrial type. The oldest son, my brother Glen, he got  with someone when he got out of school and they thought they wanted  to be meat cutters, said there was a national meat cutters school in Ohio  so he went up there. Three of us boys graduated at OSU and then the  5  Finchum  Blakemore  other two went to some other kind of school.  My sister went to NEC,  now Northeastern State University, at Tahlequah.  The youngest one  ended up as a professional army person, but he did go to school, some, at  OSU but he didn   t graduate.  OSU is where my wife and I met, after I got out of the service. Oh man,  that was the thing. I had an older brother that was in OSU and he had  been in the National Guard and had gotten drafted. So he had a little  college before the war ended and he got back in college. He probably  was more influence on me than the county agent, as they called us. To  have an older brother (and we   re all two years apart so I didn   t have to  know particularly their birthday, but I knew when they were born) he  went to OSU. He was a county agent in a little town just out of  Stillwater. Chandler, I guess. He eventually came up to Miami,   Oklahoma . I started at Tahlequah and I came here for a year, then I  went to Tulsa. But my parents, they were real, real smart. We lived just a  mile and a half from town. They never moved after they moved to that  house. They did a lot of remodeling and so forth, as the family  increased.  Were they from Oklahoma?  No, they were from Arkansas. It was real close, though, Cane Hill.  That   s just almost on the border. Just due east and a little north of  Stilwell. That cream can sitting over there we used to milk those cows.  Of course, you had to do it by hand because we didn   t have electricity.  We had a hand separator that we would separate the cream out. We   d  take that cream can over to Kansas City Southern  Railroad , run north  and south out of Stilwell and onto Kansas City. We   d send that can of  cream to Kansas City. That   s where we would market it. Well, as time  passes, you find out that that hand separator wasn   t very good. Well, and  we found out that there was a market for skim milk, after you take the  cream out of it. We fed it to the pigs. Now you go down to Braum   s and  you pay a pretty good price for that. That   s the way you survived.  We walked to school. We could walk through some people   s pasture and  we took our lunch, probably a biscuit and sausage and a fried apple pie.  There was never anything better than fried apple pie. Of course, we had  swine and we had chickens and you know, all of that stuff that you   d  have on a farm. To survive you had to have that.  Dad, as times got a little better after the Depression, he said he worked  in the store a little bit, plus the farm. He was a good horticulturist. He  was elected county commissioner one time. He rode a horse. He   d leave  the house on a Monday and come back on a Friday. You don   t get all  that history, where he stayed. I   d imagine he had a tarp or something and  6  he   d just sleep under a tree or in some farmer   s barn or something like  that. That   s the way times were. When they passed away, they had a  couple of little farms and they had a little money. Not much, but it   s a  good history lesson, that you can survive.  Mother, she was a teacher, and she probably went to some little school.  See, we didn   t get all that stuff, history, you know. As farm kids we just  didn   t get all of that. But she taught school and there   s a picture up there  with little bitty kids. She didn   t teach very long because you can see we  had seven children. She was busy having babies. The Methodist Church  was very important to them. The doctor came to the house to deliver us;  she never went to the hospital. I   ll tell you a little incident. Later in life,  she didn   t feel good. My brother in Miami was a county agent, I was a  county agent here, and they opened a brand new hospital in Kansas City.  Boy, it was supposed to be the greatest and it was. Kansas City wasn   t  too far, but we talked her into going to the hospital. She didn   t have  electricity and that stuff and she had to do all the cooking. You   ll see  when I tell you what was wrong with her. We took her to the hospital,  she finally consented. She was probably in her seventies. Of course, we  went to see her every morning and every afternoon and she told us the  same thing when we went to visit her.    If I knew what they were going  to do, you   d have never got me in this place.    Everything worked out  alright and it   s just that she had done so much work.  Of course, they had neighbors. They didn   t have high powered  combines, they had old thrashing machines. They   d have to feed the  gang that came to get the grain and so forth. She made quilts and stuff  like that. When they made an addition onto the house one time, it was on  the north side of the house, and they put us six boys in there. They didn   t  have insulation and that stuff, but she had made enough quilts and  blankets and we slept two in a bed. We just got along fine. It wasn   t any  problem. You had the outhouse and all that type of stuff, and we were  fortunate we didn   t have any sickness in our family. That worked out  good. We were in church every Sunday and probably Mother took us  when we were less than a week old. You didn   t want to be in the house  with no electricity and you heat with wood. We cut our own wood, with  six boys, and milked those cows, and we got along alright.  One of the people that we really prized was the county agent. He was an  older fellow and he learned, like all county agents do, where your better  farmers or managers or better stock and so forth are. We got to be good  friends. We had FFA, not for very long because it was a small high  school. I can tell you later on, when I got to be a county agent, some  little incidents that happened and you can understand that we, probably,  weren   t the smartest, but we probably were pretty smart. We had some  ability.  7  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  One of our daughters had a national merit child. She went to Baylor and  got her degree just this last summer. She made such an impression on  them and she   s in Washington, D.C. now working on her master   s. Her  goal is to work with people and language. She   s a real smart girl so I  think we had some smart in our family.  Came from good stock.  Well, I think so. Arkansas. We   ve got a red book over there and it   s on  our family tree. Blakemore   s English and that   s where our original  family came from, from there. I was over in the war there. Just a ways  out from London  was  where our airfield was. We   d get a pass. We  didn   t fly every day on missions because there were long missions.  There   s a hotel over there, the Blakemore Hotel, in London. Of course,  everything was closed up while we were over there, but you can get  everything on a computer, you know, and it   s a nice looking hotel. If  you want to find out who we are, read that book. The guy that wrote it,  his name was Blakemore. He lived in, I think it was, Tennessee and he  was a lawyer and he contacted the Blakemores here and they contacted  other people back in Arkansas. It   s a pretty complete book. He came to  Tulsa one time. I met him and had lunch with him. He was going to the  National Lawyers Convention in Hawaii and he wrote us a letter after he  got back, what they did at this convention and how he met people and all  of that type of stuff. We had some that came to Muskogee that was a  doctor. So we had some pretty smart people, I think.  Well, in the order, what number child were you?  Let   s see. Glen was one, Wayne was two, J. D. was three, Etta Mae was  four, I was five,  James was six, Tom was seven .  And you graduated high school in    41?  Yes.  From where?  Stilwell. The four daughters, when they were born, they didn   t know  anything about the war and all this stuff. This lawyer from Tennessee is  really smart and I guess when you write a book, you get all of the figures  and it goes to the  Library of  Congress in Washington. They said that  was one of the best organized family books that they had seen but this  lawyer was pretty smart, I think. We did find out why Dad ever planted  an orchard. He didn   t know he was going to have six sons that would  pick a lot of apples. You couldn   t get anything for them.  8  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Oh, this is what I was going to tell you about. A little of the background  when I was young, I   d probably been to Muskogee from Stilwell, was  probably sixty miles. Fort Smith was over in Arkansas and I   d been  there. So that was my extent of travel until I got out of high school. You  know, we didn   t have blue jeans. We wore overalls.  Store bought ones?  Oh, yes.  What was the name of your elementary school then?  Stilwell. Stilwell Grade School and Stilwell High School. They were a  block or two apart in Stilwell.  And about how many were in your class?  Oh, I think about sixty-three when I graduated from high school.  Pretty good size.  We had most of the subjects. When I got to OSU, I guess I didn   t have  any trouble. I graduated in seven semesters because when I got out of  the service, it was too late to start in the fall, so I started in the spring. I  got my master   s in   it must have been about    60. I got all A   s except  one B, and I went to several schools. I was still a county agent going in  the summer time and the one I got a B in was Tulsa University, so I  don   t like them. (Laughter) But I did alright in that agriculture deal. I  had trouble in chemistry. We had to take organic and inorganic. You ask  me   you mix this and you mix this and you put a little of this in it, what  do you get? Well, I didn   t have any way of ever figuring out how you  get it and the organic was okay, because I could get it. So it was a little  tough, but I passed it. You   ll faint when you see what we made up here   as a county agent .   250 for a month?  Yep. But you know, you had to raise kids and you were married and  Dorothy  his wife  went to school, too. She decided, and I agreed, that  she just wanted to raise those girls. She was in a lot of things. She was  president of a lot of things and that type of stuff. She   d work some and  she was from Tulsa. She didn   t go to school, I guess, her first year out.  She went to Tulsa Central and she was a good student. She worked for  an oil company. At OSU, she worked in the School of Commerce and  Engineering. She was a secretary, that   s what she was majoring in. So  she   s pretty smart, but anyhow, we managed. Sent those four kids  9   through college .  One of the, probably, most important words that a kid should have, and  this is from experience and smart people I   ve talked to, that in school  you   ve got to get in something that you get a lot of management. The  key, eventually, determines what you do, how you do it, and your family  and so on and this is management. Stillwater   s pretty close to  Bartlesville. It   s pretty nice. I don   t think there were very many that sent  their children to college. We paid for it, but they didn   t have a car.  When Carol started, I don   t think anything was said about it. We   d take  her over or Dorothy would take her over and I had meetings there, see,  because I was connected to the college. It   s not as bad as it sounds. We  saw them quite often. When it got down to Jan, Jan was the last one, she  didn   t say anything about a car, but she got out of college. They had to  get out in four years and they had to make good grades and they couldn   t  get in trouble. They didn   t drink and didn   t smoke and all of that, which  we didn   t. So, that comes back to the family. I had those same principles  when I grew up. I didn   t drink.  We had a dentist in Stilwell that had boys about our age and, of course,  they had money and, of course, we carried the milk and eggs and all that  stuff. He brought some cigars out one time when we were picking apples  and I   ll never forget that. I got a hold of that cigar and I   ve never been as  sick. (Laughs) I laid down under that apple tree and that old tree was  going just like this  swaying . We didn   t have to be on aid or  commodities or anything like that, but you manage it. I always had  gardens and so forth. Dorothy was a terrific cook. Her parents lived in  Tulsa.  So, management, that   s the word you never hear. This one fellow here  really impressed that on me. His father was a minister and they were  really poor people. They didn   t have anything and they had about as  many children. He became a billionaire. He was an outstanding athlete  and when he went to school he went to Oklahoma City University. But  that wasn   t enough money; his mother had to raise all those kids. His  father died early and he rode a horse to minister and he left that family. I  asked him, he had three boys and a daughter. They were smart boys and  he and his wife, Bill Doenges    wife, was really smart. I said,    Well,  what are they  the boys  going to major in?    His comment was,    It  doesn   t make any difference. Get all the management you can get.     (Laughs) But most people who become these CEOs or the presidents,  they   re usually terrific managers. They move up and that   s why there   s  so many vice presidents and so forth.  The CEO or the president can   t manage all that. When I went from the  10  Extension to the Frank Phillips Foundation, and Frank Phillips  Foundation was the first foundation in the state of Oklahoma, it had  never been managed. It was thirty-six-hundred acres and all this  livestock and buffalos and all that type stuff. He came here from Iowa,  Frank Phillips, and he didn   t have any education. When he come here  and found this oil and so forth, he got in the bank and he went from that  bank to the oil. They were going back to banking in Kansas City, but he  run on to some big oil wells. He spent a lot of time in New York City  with the Rockefellers and all those people. He really had a good front.  (Laughs) He picked up all of that stuff. They   d take him and entertain  him on their big places, you know. So that   s why the Frank Phillips  Foundation is a Delaware Corporation. That   s why the Phillips  Petroleum Company is a Delaware Corporation. See, he got these ideas  from them then later as he advanced and he   d really gotten his oil, he   d  bring them on the train, those rich people, to Bartlesville, Oklahoma. He  had a lodge out there and he could put them up to eat, and he had a  museum and he had all of these things. It was people just coming to look  at them. Maybe he   d open the front gate, this is about twelve miles out  of town, and you   d just go in free.  After he died and Mrs. Phillips died, the president of Phillips was really  one of his early people. He was a college graduate from Kansas  University, Paul Endacott, and he was an All-American basketball  player, but he didn   t want to play basketball. He was an engineer. He  wanted to do that. So he was one of the first people he hired. So he  always knew what Mr. Phillips wanted. Very smart, really nice guy.  When the Phillips died, he didn   t have anything to do with Phillips, his  wealth and his ranch and all of his livestock and all of this stuff   he  gave a lot of money to Boy Scouts and all that, millions of dollars. But  the executor of his estate came to Paul Endacott and Mr. Endacott had a  little ranch up there. I got a call at the county agent   s office one day and  told me who he was and said he was on the twenty-third floor and could  I come down and see him. I told him I could. (Laughs) He told me what  he had, ideas of what Mr. Phillips would have liked to   he died pretty  early, Mr. Phillips, maybe in his sixties. Mr. Endacott says,    I   m going  to try to       They   d made him chairman of the foundation. It had never  been managed. So he asked me, could I manage it, I know all about  agriculture. I never had buffalo but beef cattle, longhorns, horses and so  forth, so they hired me. A lot of negotiation, most of them were doing  negotiation. The extension retirement    We were paid from through  three sources: federal government, social security, and the state. That  went to the educational deal and that   s why we   re called educators  because it went through OSU. It could just be one land-grant college in  each state and then the county pays you. In the county, I think you   ll  find out, I   ve got twenty-five dollars, so you starve to death. (Laughs)  11  Finchum  Blakemore  The kids were growing and we had bought a house. County agents were  all college graduates. Some of them had their master   s, but they were  pretty smart. They really were. Most of them had been on farms. Their  grandparents had settled back here when Oklahoma started. But, boy, the  banks begin to jump on them to hire them. They   d be loan officers and  they   d know all about farm values and so forth. It wasn   t long until     that was banks    and then big ranches. These people that are making all  this money, they were write-offs on that. So they began to hire county  agents as ranch managers. When the county agents found out, the county  agents probably made a mistake. I was offered to manage a ranch, but I  just didn   t think that was what I wanted to do. I knew already by looking  at their livestock. They   d have calves that were maybe two or three years  old still nursing that momma cow and maybe she had another calf trying  to nurse her. That   s not management. But they were doing that to not  have to pay tax.  This was not connected to the Phillips Petroleum Company. It was Frank  Phillips    personal deal. I was made secretary treasurer and general  manager of it. Insurance for the employees, let   s see we had Blue Cross  Blue Shield a long time ago at the college, but the people that worked  there, there was no one had had any college. I ended up with fifty, sixty  people. I explained to them that if you were going to manage something  and the museum, this terrific museum and everything    But it took me a  good little while to get that set up. They had an office in town, well, boy  you   re not very smart if you don   t know what   s going on out there  probably. For these employees, boy I got a lot of people that loved me.  We got them insurance and vacations, a salary that was paid by the  Frank Phillips Foundation and the best thing we got them was  retirement. I had to have a little smarts somewhere. Of course, Mr.  Endacott knew all of this because he was president of the company. But  anyhow, we really got a thing and we made that thing really something.  I got the State Outstanding Tourism Award. I wasn   t doing tourism stuff.  I was county agent, you know. We got over 300,000 people a year out  there, on the improvements and this type of stuff. I got the state award  for it. I never quit doing county agent things like the fair board. I was  chairman of the fair board. I wasn   t a county agent anymore. I worked  there in the historical deal. You know, you just learn history when you  learn people. And I was the chairman and the president of the Chamber  of Commerce, for the YMCA and schools and raised the money. Got to  have you see one little letter. It   s pretty well on top in that box and it   s a  little bitty letter.  About what?  I   m mixing this up, but as county agent, I never raised any money. This  12   letter is from  the Red Cross. They had a lot of early soldiers and some  was killed in World War I. They made me the rural person to go out and  raise some money. Well, I said okay. They were done then. This is back  early in the fifties and no one else had done too much. I got the finest  letter. I think I raised three or four hundred dollars. Boy, they just  bragged on me. They introduced me everywhere. The rural country and  those people had never given any money and I don   t have any idea if I  got it in five dollars or what. Some of them I   m sure turned me down. I  kept that letter.  Since then, I   ve raised lots and lots and lots of money, of course. A lot  of it I didn   t have to raise. It was already there in the Frank Phillips  Foundation. We had to be audited every year, the foundation. I talked to  them a lot and I told them,    I got a girl that was a good tax person and  the auditors had come up every year.    Now this is our personal auditor,  people who work in Mitchell were some of the best. After we got into  this and everything was going good, I signed all those checks and tax  things. They say,    That   s wrong. You can   t do that. You   ve got to have  someone.    You know, you write some checks and I   ll tell you, later on  we got in some big money. I didn   t have anything to do with the money.  I just called the bank Scudder, Stevens, and Clark Investment in a New  York second and they   d come down every maybe two, three times a year  and they   d tell us what they should invest it in. Mr. Endacott, the  president of Philips, they knew all that stuff and the other trustees, they  was lawyers and all smart people. I didn   t know that stuff, but I got to  where I knew about a lot of it and that helped on down the line.  We had a nice big table and Mr. Phillips    granddaughter bought the  furniture and boy, I had a nice desk. (Laughter) Whole ball of wax, I  looked like an executive of a gas  company . You learn a lot. But basic  agriculture and those people and I would drink a lot of coffee and chili  and they   d bring you stuff; really good people. I don   t think they   d ever  lie to you.  But anyhow, back to that deal when the auditor said,    You   ve got to get  someone.    Mr. Endacott says,    We don   t need that.    So, I signed checks  all the time when I was there. No one ever did co-sign them. I   ve written  some big ones for grants and stuff like that that I could   ve cheated on or  done whatever. All of this goes back when you get to be eighty-seven  years old, it   s your family and you raise your kids. You couldn   t have  cuter, smarter, and better kids. Our family, poor as Old Job   s turkey and  I mean poor, and the first job I got, they sent me to Tahlequah. There   s  not a paved road in that community. You had to get a new set of tires,  (they didn   t even have good gravel), pretty often, maybe every two or  three months.  13  We   d go to these kids    4-H meeting, and they had a good county agent  there and he was crippled. He was in World War II, but he was really a  nice fellow, really a Christian, and good family. He taught me some  veterinarian stuff, so we would vaccinate their stuff. Sears and Roebuck,  we got it involved with them, and they   d give us pigs, maybe twelve.  We   d give them to the 4-H club members and when they had a litter,  they   d give them to someone. Most of the houses in the county, boy.  Teachers they didn   t have degrees, most of them. But that was better  than nothing and dirt floors and barefooted, but anyhow, all of the  commodities and got those pigs on and got the project all set up and  decided who would be in it the first time. Made them sign the agreement  that they had to give first of the litter and we   d give it to another 4-H  club and over a period of time, we   d have a lot of pigs. It worked pretty  good.  Later did that in Tulsa and did it in Bartlesville. This kid asked me,  barefooted and I don   t remember too much about him, but he wanted to  know what would be the mixture. How he would mix the feed for this  pig and we had all been through all of that you know, feeding them this  commodity milk and other food that he   d gotten from the state. He was  going to feed that milk that they were drinking, and should drink, to the  pigs, but he wanted to know what the mixture was. Well, that   s like a lot  of questions you   d get. But we just said,    We   ll work that out,    and then  we   d get him off or maybe his parents. Now, his parents weren   t any  smarter than the kid.  A lot of Indians, too. There were probably more Indians in Cherokee and  Adair County than anywhere in the state. What they did for a living, they  would   railroad ties. They   d cut timber. They didn   t have chainsaws  and that type of stuff, so they had an axe. But, boy they could cut that tie  and get it that wide and that tall, you know, to go on the railroad tracks.  Of course, they didn   t have trucks or anything like that and they   d bring  them to town. It was all Indians on Saturday and they   d take them to the  railroad yards and they   d buy them. Wouldn   t give them much, but  they   d take the money, what they get, and they   d get drunk and the old  mules or horses they had, wagons, they always knew the way home.  They   d get home by, my dear, Tuesday. That   s the way the state of  Oklahoma was in the forties, you know. That   s been a long time ago, but  boy it   s really changed.  You learn all of these things, we walked to school and just up the road  from us was a school teacher. She was about a quarter of a mile up the  road. Her brother was the undertaker in Stilwell. Smart people. Every  time you talked, Ms. Ella Roberts, boy, she pulled my ears a lot. If we   d  been bad, every time she   d come home from school, she   d stop and give  all the poop to mother. (Laughs) So that sort of kept us in line, but you  14  know it   s      97 doesn   t seem like it   s been that long, but it   s really  progress.  The biggest mistake that college made is (Laughs)   I want this in  print   changing the name of Extension from county agent. Everyone  just prays to county agents. They knew them and they waited on the  county agents and they knew what they did and everything. Of course,  fertilizers, grains and new varieties and all of this stuff, that is all  change. May not be the thing they should have done, but boy, they  started it as county agents and it   s a hundred years old, they should   ve  kept it county agent.  I   ve got a letter in there from the director that came from Missouri just a  couple years before I quit.    Boy,    he tells me,    I got a job any time you  can come back,    he says, and this is in print in that letter. (Laughs) So,  he   s the one that got it changed. Missouri was always more forward.  Like veterinarian college. We couldn   t get one and finally the president  of OU, Boren, he was a governor in the state of Oklahoma at one time,  he   s a smart guy, he went overseas to college and he really had the  brains. He was a democrat, but he didn   t know it. He just played the  deal, but he got OSU approved as a veterinarian college the year I  graduated in 1949. I thought about being a veterinarian because I  practiced all over Tahlequah. (Laughs) A cow would get milk fever and  we knew what to do for her and things like that. Vaccinate pigs, castrate  them, and all that type of thing. They didn   t know how to do those  things. County agents really were, most of them, intelligent people. They  were really good ones.  I was in Tulsa for a short time and, boy, the agents I replaced and the  one that was the county agent in Okmulgee, John Gorman was the  county agent and I   d just been up here a year in Bartlesville and boy,  they had an agriculture program. Can you see me back in 1950 getting  on that television? I learned it. They had a guy that was a farm editor,  W.T. Kelly, Channel 82 I think it was. They talked to me, but that   s  when I come back up here because I knew Bartlesville. Good schools,  good jobs and everything.  I didn   t know that I ever might be working for Phillips and I never  dreamed I would be managing the Frank Phillips Foundation. I probably  had gone out there once or twice, but that was the extent of it. Mr.  Endacott came from Kansas, real smart, he married a local girl and that  local girl had two more sisters and one of the ranchers out here married  one of those sisters. That probably was the way that I got to be known a  little to Mr. Endacott. He was a key person on the North Sea when they  got all that oil and gas and stuff. But again, I did all these things in  Bartlesville. It didn   t make any difference.  15  Now, quarter horses, that   s the best thing there is in Oklahoma. Good  quarter horses, you know, fantastic. The biggest horse organization in  the world is quarter horses. They   re everywhere. I was chairman of  twenty-six consecutive quarter horse shows. All the world could bring in  their horses. Here our buildings weren   t very good. The guy that had the  quarter horses had a big ranch and he knew the breeding on them and, by  gosh, through our efforts and what we did at these shows, a couple times  it was the biggest in the United States. I know that   s unbelievable, but  anyhow, we got him elected president of the American Quarter Horse  Association. Let me tell you, it wouldn   t have happened if we hadn   t had  all those quarter horse shows and that type of stuff.  I didn   t get in some of these things   I got in them to help the people like  the YMCA. I was on fund driving and I helped them raise some money,  but then I ended up president of it. Phil Phillips, he   s the nephew of  Frank Phillips. His father was the co-founder of Phillips. I   m getting out  of the Extension business, but just to show you how that works, he never  married and he   s a multi-millionaire. He came around and told me I was  going to be president of Boy Scout Council next. He just lives down the  road here. He was always chairman of Boy Scouts because he   d give  them all the money. Man, anything you want. I told him, boy, I was  pretty busy. I didn   t believe I   d make that. He says,    You   re not  listening to me.    (Laughter) So he made me president for three or four  years, but the deal was, and he made the deal, he says,    Anything you  need, you come to me and I   ll guarantee it.    He had all that money. He  was that type of guy. I   ve got a lot of pictures with him, and 4-H club  was the same deal.  When I came from Tahlequah up here, I didn   t know anyone up here.  They told me that the man I wanted to see was Phil Phillips, if you  needed anything. That   s fine, but I   m still taking chicken coops to 4-H  clubs and judging chickens once a year. They were given this little  money through the county, but it came a time that, I hadn   t been up here  very long. We had dairy cattle at home. They had somewhere or another,  it wasn   t too far from the University of Arkansas, got a registered Jersey  bull. So anyhow, we bred better cows. He had figured out if you   ve got a  registered bull then you can raise better cows and, of course, that  happened. I did spend up here about six months and had judged dairy  cattle and so forth. I hadn   t judged dairy cattle since maybe over at OSU.  But anyhow, we had some smart kids.  One I was telling you about, John Thornton, he got his PhD and was the  head of the department over there and he   s retired, but his wife, her  father managed a dairy farm here. So they were going together and the  other kids, maybe six or eight, by gosh we won the dairy judging  contest. I think we went to Enid, Oklahoma. I had been out here about  16  six months, I hadn   t had much experience. So, by gosh, we got to go to  the national dairy judging contest up in Iowa. I don   t remember the  town, but anyhow, boy that is a big thing. So I had to train these kids a  little better. Boy, we   re out of state, so what I proposed when I went to  see Mr. Phillips, Phil Phillips that was down here, I told him that we  wanted to do more practice. I   d judged all the dairy cows in Washington  County and we needed a little more experience. He says,    Yeah, that  sounds good. What do you need?    I said,    Well, I   ve got a brother over  in Miami and they   ve got some good dairies and that   s close to Missouri  and they   ve got some good dairies. I   d like to take about six of these  kids and we   ll go over there for about six days. We need a little money  for gas and feeding them and a place to stay.    Well he says,    That   s  really a good idea.     He hollered in to his secretary to write me a check. I don   t remember  how much it was for, but by gosh, we went over there and we placed real  high up there. Some breeds, you judge breeds separately, maybe first or  second. Before we got ready to go, this other family here, he said,     Management   s the whole thing.    His wife, she was real smart, of  course. She   d just got a new car, and she says,    You   re going to take my  car and take those kids up there.    (Laughter) I say,    I   ve got a car. I  can   t do that.    She says,    You   re not hearing me.    That   s a term with  people who   ve got money. By gosh, so I took that car and drove that car  up there. It got better as things went along. A good county, just good  people and people with money.  Some of that money is still working at OSU. Mr. Don Tyler is a  millionaire. He called me and he didn   t like where our office was. It  should have been at the fairgrounds up in Dewey, but it was in a federal  building up in Bartlesville. See that was a federal  building  when it was  built. County agent moved right in it. It was downtown and you could  never find a parking place and people had trouble finding you and that  type of stuff. But anyhow, Mr. Tyler built one up at the fairgrounds, an  Extension office. Boy it was a nice building and you can   t beat that. He  had a lot of land and as he got older, he had lost his wife. Good cattle,  angus. I think in his herd, about 150 and he wanted to know would the  college be interested in them. I said,    You just wait, I   ll have someone  up here tomorrow.    So I called Dr. Barlow, he was the dean of  agriculture. He came up and we had a talk before and Dr. Barlow said,     You know, those are good cattle he   s got and they   re registered, but all  of our stuff is experimental stuff and we go by the bloodlines within the  breed.    He says,    Gosh, we can   t use them.    So he was real honest with  Mr. Tyler.  Mr. Tyler said,    You know, that don   t make a bit of difference,    he says,     I   ll just give them to you, you sell them,    and this is where the best  17  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  thing that Mr. Tyler ever did. He set up this deal with the college. After  he sold those cattle, no one could handle that money but the animal  science department with the agreement of Mr. Tyler. That money is  given every year to the outstanding animal science professor at OSU.  The Don M. Tyler Award and that never will run out. So that   s the  things that you get into and you just sort of work them out. Again, you  go back to good people.  I was looking at this, you started in July 1949 at  250 a month and then  when you switched jobs in 1966, the salary was  860 a month?  They saw that I was a good worker. (Laughs)  Some of the county paid  more. The longer you worked for Extension your salary increased if  money was available.  But anyhow, it did come up. The director we had,  Shawnee Brown, he was an old fellow and he probably increased the  staff. We never did have enough Extension people.  And you worked in three different counties?  Yes, but short times. I came up here. I worked at Tahlequah first and  boy, you needed to get out of that place but there   s one good thing. You  can look back and see all this and they had a Kiwanis Club in  Tahlequah. They met at the college and most of those were professors  and business people, you know, that was pretty smart, that would join a  club that you had to pay dues for. Man, that   s the best thing that ever  happened. I got acquainted with the townspeople, the college people and  I   m on my sixty-first year in Kiwanis Club. I   ve been president and all  of these things, and to national deals. Boy, that is really a good club.  We needed more dairy, I found out, up here. These kids that had gone  and judged dairy and it   s a good 4-H club project. You know what we  did? Went to the bank and they gave us the money and we went to  Canada. Three of us. Myself, one farmer, and the other guy that was  older and we bought dairy cattle up there. It took us about six months to  get them home, but you had to cross the border, be tested and all this  stuff. These kids that wanted those, boy, we got Jerseys, Guernseys,  Brown Swiss, you name it, we   ve got them all. Breeds, quite a bunch of  them. These kids that wanted them, we had a big meeting and they told  us in advance so we knew how many we should get of each breed. Went  into the bank and the bank loaned them the money. And every one of  them paid. Of course, those like John Thornton, his parents worked for  Phillips or his mother taught, they could just pay cash for it. We didn   t  get too much.  But in the winter time we went in those big old barns up there,  everything was inside. I came back here, I was assistant county agent for  18  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  one year and then I went to Tulsa and got some of that liberal education.  Then when I come back after three years, I was county agent. Boy, we  won the Tulsa State Fair a lot of times with the dairy we bought in  Canada. Grand champion steer and that type of stuff. It all comes down  to, you   ve just got so much time. You   ve got to manage your time, you  probably don   t call it that, but the older you get, you do more  management. It   s the key to, probably, what you   re going to do. It took  me eighteen years to get all that worked out. But see, I did impress  someone because Phillips Petroleum Company probably had 4,000  people up here and a lot of them were a graduate of OSU. OSU is their  favorite school. We had one student that was president of Phillips there.   Wayne  Allen was his name and he was a good one.  Speaking of OSU, let   s go back there. Did you get your degree using  your GI Bill?  Yes, the first one. Remember, when I got out of high school, I had been  as far as Muskogee and Fort Smith. They were going to draft me, I had  to register for it, but I was eighteen.  How long were you in the Army?  Two and a half years. When Hitler found out I was over there why he     (Laughter) But the Air Force, I had to take tests and get in it and I had to  go to schools and so forth. We shot straighter and knocked more planes  down.  So when you came back, your brother was already at OSU?   Yes.  I went over on a plane and came back on a plane and he went  over on a boat and he came back on a boat and liked to never got back. I  had about a six month period there I didn   t do anything because I got  back too late to start the fall semester and, probably, he had started at     Yes, I was back, but he had some Connors  State  College. He went  there and every two weeks, that   s close to Muskogee, he signed up for  whatever I said that was. Back before war and stuff, they grabbed them  up in a hurry. So he had a little college before he went to OSU.  Well did he stay with Extension?  Yes. Finally we were able to get a car at OSU, after we got married.  Right there.  You need to tell us how you met Dorothy   At a class at OSU, I don   t recall what the class was. She sat back of me.  19  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  I don   t know whether she pulled my hair. (Laughter) I finally, maybe,  got up the nerves to talk to her and, you know, it just took awhile. But  you weren   t exposed to that stuff in Stilwell. I don   t guess I ever had a  date in my life.  But anyhow, there are certain keys to it and if we could get these kids in  school and get them headed the right way   The foundation, multi-million  dollars and I got connected with Southwest Conference of  Foundations. Boy, I   d go to Houston for their big meetings, and Dallas  and Colorado, Kansas City. I got on their board because I always had  some comments or something.  It   s changed a lot, too, hasn   t it?  Oh, yeah. Most of those IRS people are college professors, and they had  a lot of them, and, of course, they knew it. Here, I had to learn all of that.  Had a trustees meeting. I had a good secretary. I picked the right family.  They lived in Osage County and their dad was just poor people, but most  of those kids, boys and girls, they were able to get in college and just  smart as the dickens. They all went to college and they all graduated and  I ended up with two sisters at Woolaroc. They were smart. They had an  office out there. They really did a good job.  You know, you   re put in a situation and you have to agree to it. J.D., my  brother that was a county agent, he had worked with E.K. Lowe. He was  an older guy, a tall guy, really nice. J.D. had already told him that I   d be  the best county agent there was. Hardly. J.D. was always giving me  advice. He says,    You   re politicking.    I   d say,    I   m not politicking.    But  I got elected pretty early as president of the County Agents Association.  You get to know those people. They probably do mean more for the  county because as I said, this was a good county. We won a lot of things.  We had good 4-H members.  Is the 4-H as busy now as it was when you were an agent?  No, the parents are not interested in it. Now when I came up here the  first time, I was just here for a year and I saw that it wasn   t going to  work out. I went to Mr. Lowe and I told him either get me another  location or fire me. The guy that they had here, he had some health  problems and he just sat in the office. I was doing all the work. He was  taking credit for the 4-H club and all of that and I   d already been  through all I wanted of that in Tahlequah for a couple of years. So, Mr.  Lowe called, boy within a week or two, things happen for a reason.  These two agents in Tulsa, they   d been there for a good little while.  Really friends. Tulsa   s a good county. I liked it while I was down there.  I started a program for OSU. They went into the tractor business, so I  20  Finchum  Blakemore  got to move down and be the 4-H club agent, but that didn   t last too  long. OSU started a management program. See now, you get that word  management. I sort of got out of the 4-H club and I had, I think, maybe  fifteen or sixteen different farmers, dairyman, maybe a beef cattle guy,  horticulture and different subject matters and I just worked with them. I  could get the specials from OSU.  When I got my master   s, boy, they started building new homes. When  you   re in a rich place like Bartlesville, there were some nice homes  going up. So I really got some interest in a hurry. Lawns, lawn grasses,  and Wayne Huffine, he was a researcher at OSU, he   s retired now. Boy,  he was super. He made OSU millions of dollars on turf grasses for these  golf deals. All these new varieties and so forth. So he said yeah, he   d be  my adviser. So I got the bankers, the people that were going to build the  homes, I got what it cost to do it. Now, they just bring the grass sod  down and lay the sod. When everything is finished and you   re ready to  move in they   ll come up one day and put the sod down and you   ve got  it. That really went over good. Of course, it took him a little while to get  it, but he was a good advisor. That was a good subject matter.  I had good secretaries; you   ve got to have those. I was out of the office a  lot, but she   d keep calls, you know, if they wanted to return the call. If  they didn   t tell her what the subject was, that was okay. But say that  pecan trees, I got pecan trees here, if you get bugs in them or your  garden, you get bugs in your tomatoes and so forth, they all start calling  you. So if someday she says,    I had five calls on insects in tomatoes,     well boy I   d get an article in the newspaper and I   ll see some of those,  then I   ll go down to who sells insecticide to see if they   ve got the right  one and look at the friends I   ve made, just like that. That   ll die down and  they   ll be someone else wanting to know what kind of fertilizer to use.  They   re planting something new and well, you   d get four or five calls  like that and she   d keep me informed. Then I   d do something on  fertilizers and it worked. Some, they don   t get into it as much, but it will  help your salary and a lot of things, you know. Dr. Kamm, president of  the college, I   d have him over to talk about farmers at the 4-H club  banquet. They   ll do that for an agent that   s got a pretty good program  going.  Must   ve been hard deciding to quit then.  Well, I   m still in the same town, the same people, and four daughters  that   s about ready to go to college. That wasn   t a full part of it because if  someone   s going to pay your workers    retirement, and those poor guys,  they had worked hard and they were good workers and they just couldn   t  believe it. Most of them are all retired now, but boy, they are still living  on that retirement.  21  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Made more friends.  Yeah. There was one kid from Ramona that came up to the office one  time. That was before we got the new one built out at the ranch. He got  out of the high school and he wanted to work for the Foundation. I told  him we had limits and we just didn   t have one. Nice looking boy, he was  big and he could do work and he lived on that ranch. It was a rented one,  but he was used to hard labor. I got his name and everything and the  next morning I got to the office, that same kid was there. I rehashed this,  I said,    Well maybe you didn   t understand quite all of it.    So, yes, he  understood it, but he didn   t talk much. The third day, he was back again.  That went on all week. Five times. So I thought, boy, I really checked  him out and he was a good worker, he   d have done different things, so  when he came back that time, I told him I had a temporary one. (Laughs)  Boy, he jumped at it. He stayed out there, oh I don   t know, seventeen or  eighteen years. He really worked on it.  Then his father got in some sickness and the ranch they were managing,  he went back to it. I hadn   t seen him for three or four, five years then I  went down to the tire place to get tires changed and who comes walking  up there? Big ol    grin on his face, you know, he had gotten married. He  introduced me to his wife and told me about his kids and everything. He  says,    I pass your place all the time and I just wanted to come in and see  you, but I thought you were busy.    And he never did. I said,    Well my  gosh, you come down and see me. That   s no problem.    Within three or  four weeks, I read in the paper that he had had a heart attack and died.  He was the nicest kid. A lot of people stop by and see me, but you have  those things and you put in work, but I had quizzed him on this coming  up here. He said his dad told him,    when you try to get a job, just stay  after them. Be honest with them and just keep going back,    and see, it  worked for him. He was sincere, and I guess I thought he was, and I was  from a farm. Chances are you do a lot more good, not for him, but for  yourself.  I went up this morning to have a cup of coffee. Just had to go a little  ways and a kid came in there and I don   t know him, but he was real  interesting talking to. He said something about the weather was bad but  said it was better than that stuff in Washington. Then he said,    Well our  preacher told us something the other day.    So I listened to his preacher  deal, you know. I was having trouble getting the lid on that coffee and  he said,    Let me fix that for you.    Those things just turn out for the  better. You talk to whoever wants to talk to you.  Well the job requires that you be a people person.  Well, you   ve got to be. You   ve got to be. This one family I went back to  22  here the other day, boy, I got stuck on that, but I couldn   t do anything.  His father died. He   d been sick for some time and his sister had been off  somewhere and she had been in 4-H club. I went to the funeral and there  it was and they say,    We want you to get up here and do some talking.     At a funeral? Well, I got up and talked to them. (Laughs) I knew most of  the people there, you know. I thought they   d understand, but I really said  a lot of    he was a good person. If you get a good person, you can make  it sound pretty good at a funeral.  In a hardware store here, boy, the old boy played basketball at Phillips.  He was seven-foot tall, came from Texas. Finally had to go through a  junior college up here in Miami to get in. He finally went to Arkansas  and turned out to be a pretty good player. Then he went to work for  Phillips and they used him on their basketball team, way back in those  early days. He was the best guy you ever saw. He married a girl here and  her dad and an ex-county agent owned that hardware store and they sold  feed and so forth. So boy, I had a good connection there with him. He   d  lived here a long time and had worked for Phillips. They have you for  pallbearer. So you know, you never want to pass anyone up. A lot of  good things happen.  I had to quit going to the fair because some of those old critters are still  living and every durn one of them knows me and I can   t think of their  name  (Laughs) Sometimes you can talk with them a little while and  you   ll get to asking them questions. If you can get them located in the  right family and sometimes you get your foot in your mouth. Their wife  has already died and you know, then you got to listen for awhile. There   s  one lady, she   s ninety-three years old. She calls me all the time and she   s  just wondering how I   m getting along. Her daughter was one of those  dairy girls. This mother would always go and wash that animal, help her  daughter wash that animal. I never had very many mothers that would  break down and go out and help wash the horse or the animals, you  know. You build your relationship with the family because the mom and  the dad, now this one family, the mother had already died. She had a  heart attack. She was the life of that family; she was the one that kept  them going. They knew when to jump or sit down or what. Sometimes  they   re not dominant enough with men. But she was really nice.  There   s a guy that worked for Phillips, a PhD, in World War I he was  injured, but he bought a little place out in the country and his kids are all  gone, it   s just him. Kids were all gone and he was a chemist and he was  trying to go to the fertilizer plants and some of them in Tulsa and get a  certain chemical that he could put on some pasture that he had  developed. He was using a different type of seed and he thought the soil  didn   t have all the minerals it needed to. I   d tested it from OSU, but they  didn   t show that. He always wanted to pay me. He   d keep trying. He  23  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  knew where we lived in town. During the vegetables, and he had a few  apple trees, boy, there   d be a sack of fruit there or vegetables. They  always want to    They think they owe you something. You approach  farmers different. Some of them would know that you get paid and that  was your job. Some farmers you can go out and say,    Boy, you   re  planting the wrong variety of corn here.    Boy, you don   t want to go back  to that farmer because you already set your    (Laughs) You don   t tell  them that, you just tell them that there   s new varieties out and you get  the report from OSU on how they   re yielding and it   s more than he ever  got out of it, but you don   t approach it from that angle. Sometimes you  tell them,    Well, fertilizers sometimes help certain crops, but you   ve got  to put them on at a certain time.    They   ll fall right into that. You use a  little psychology on them.  It   s an interesting job and it grows every year because your experiments  and your new varieties and flowers. Man, these people up here, they  plant those flowers. Those women, they   ve got these garden clubs and I  had to change a little of my policy. I don   t let them tell me what I   m  going to talk about, see. I know I   m smarter than they are on any farm or  agriculture project because I   ve had some experience. I   d say,    Well,  how    bout talking about something else that   ll be related.    They   d say,     Yes, that sounds good.    So I   d unload that on them and they think I   m  smart because if you   re exposed to a lot of things, it doesn   t take much.  What they want to do, they want you to talk about ten, fifteen minutes  and then they ask questions for about thirty, so that works out alright.  Sometimes, you start getting in trouble, but you tell them you   ve got  another appointment.  If you don   t know the answer you   ll find out?  Oh, yeah. See, this is a small area here. I   ll come by and see you next  week or so. I write that down and I never fail to go by and they   ll never  forget it that I came by to see their flowers or their shrub or their tree.  And it all started back on the little farm in Stilwell.  Yeah  (Laughs) It   s professional like your job. You can   t just go reveal  everything. You can   t have the answer for everything, but if you can  work it out, it   s good. I   ve got to show you something. When the girls  went to school, Jan was the last one. She spent more time with me and  she liked gardens and stuff like that. Buckeyes, you ever hear of a  buckeye?  It   s kind of like a chestnut, isn   t it?  It   s from a tree and I used to have a lot of them. We carried them around  24  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  when we were kids. No telling how old they are. Jan was asking me  what it was and I told her,    Well, it   s a tree and some of them have nuts  and some of them don   t.    So she says,    Let   s plant it in the garden.    I  said okay. We planted it in the garden and put a stake there and you  know, that darn thing come up. We probably watered it and so forth.  I got old and I needed a cane and I thought I needed one that was  different from anyone else. You won   t find another walking stick like  this. That tree out in the yard is probably about forty feet tall and one  characteristic about that tree, it doesn   t grow very straight, but that  doesn   t make any difference. You make you a good cane.  Begins to  describe his cane  I like horses and buffaloes. I managed them. I sold  them everywhere. Buffalo nickel. And the most famous airplane in the  world is the one that flew the Pacific Ocean, Mr. Phillips and there it is.  For awhile, I was managing probably one of the larger buffalo deals and  that   s a buffalo tooth. You need to know about that. (Laughs)  Let   s see what this is.    Bill Blakemore, County Agent. President of the  Oklahoma County Agents Association.    We just get one a year, so  everyone can   t have one of those. Here   s Woolaroc, you know, you  need that buffalo that says Woolaroc. 4-H club, I think I got most of  their awards and I was president of the    I helped them raise money. It  had some benefits. Ms. America, she didn   t get it, but she got pretty  close. She was the vice-president and she became O   Connor. The best  Colt/Paterson gun collection in the world is at Woolaroc. Have you ever  been to Woolaroc?  No.  Oh, I can   t believe that. OSU, the best school in the country. This is a  buckeye tree.  And a beaver?  Yes, a beaver. We had a lot of those out at Woolaroc.  So who made it for you?  That   s the rest of the story  (Laughs) There   s a place out east of town  that   s Prairie Song  Museum  and they created a village from early days  on this big ranch. The quarter horse guy is president of the American  Quarter Horse  Association , his daughter. They got this guy from  Lincoln, Nebraska,  Jim Lee,  on crafts and making stuff and he   s good  and he   s been working with them. There   s a forester here in town, but he  retired and he came out. He cut this out and let it dry and everything, but  in the mean time he moved. He got another job. So that didn   t work out,  25  Finchum  Blakemore  Finchum  Blakemore  but these people out here call me and say,    This guy is here from  Lincoln, Nebraska, and he can do that.    I said,    Fine, I   ll be out there.     So I went out and talked to him and I had all these little gadgets and he  said,    Yeah, that   s fantastic.    You know, that guy went back to Lincoln,  Nebraska, and within three weeks he sent this in the mail to me. He  wouldn   t even charge me. I took care of it.  Is there anything else I need to cover?  No, I don   t think so right now.  Well thank you for letting me come today, it   s been a pleasure.  Thank you for coming.  -------  -------  
