 Finchum  Myers  Today is December 3, 2010. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University Library and we   re conducting an oral  history project centered around Cooperative Extension. I   m in  Muskogee today at the public library to talk with Basil Myers. So thank  you for coming today.  You   re welcome.  When did you start with extension?  1963.  And retired in?  1990.  Well let   s start with having you tell a little bit about your childhood,  where you were born and then we   ll work our way forward.  Okay. I was born and raised in western Osage County   extremely  western Osage County. In fact, it was about as far west as you can go  from Fairfax, southwest, mostly west and then some south along the  Arkansas River. It makes it the big bend of the river. My folks lived on  the second bottom and farmed the bottom. Then, when I was one year  old, we moved from there further east where my father bought a ranch  and farm, and I was mostly raised there. I went to school at a little rural  school, two teachers, two-room school. I went through school there and  graduated from grade school. Started to do high school at Ralston. My  brother was driving the school bus for Ralston and he was drafted into  the army in 1944. The superintendent of schools asked me to drive the  bus, so the last two years, I was a junior and senior at Ralston, I drove  the bus.  5  To go back a little bit, when we lived on this second bottom, there were  no doctors within twenty miles. So we had mid-wives. My mother asked  this lady down about a quarter of a mile south of us. Said,    When I hang  this red towel on the clothesline, would you come up? You   ll know I   m  in labor.    So come about the third of November of 1927, she hung this  towel up and the lady grabbed up her little baby and brought it up there  to the house and helped deliver me. My dad was in the other room  holding the little baby and twenty-five years later, the little baby and I  were married. In other words, she was waiting for me   she was three  months old when I got here. (Laughter)  Okay, going on with that, my high school and college years were filled  up with either the drought or the Depression or the war   World War II.  My father lost almost everything he had because the banks closed their  doors, and he never did really get back to where he was. He had several  hundred head of cattle on feed and thousands of dollars in the bank that  he lost, and it was awfully hard in the Depression. Then that followed up  with the Dust Bowl.  The first experience I had with the Extension service was a man named  Fred Ahrberg, who was the county agent of Osage County. He came out  to tell my dad how to make grasshopper poison, because we had a  plague of grasshoppers or locusts. We would mix arsenic lead with mash  and mash was a bran, wheat bran, and the grasshoppers would eat that  and die. So he would tell my dad where to place his bran and how much  arsenic lead to put in it and these kinds of things. And he brought his  home economist. Her name was Mattie something. I can   t remember her  last name, but anyway she told my mother different things about  cooking and clothing and so forth.  So in the school, the little two-roomed school, we had a 4-H agent come  to organize a 4-H club in 1936 and they encouraged us to either have  cattle, show cattle or hogs, or something to show or have a handicraft  project. Well, the teacher named Crowder cut out a piece of board about  3/8 of an inch thick and three inches in a circle and gave it to me and  told me that was my handicraft project. Told me to paint it, and so I did.  I painted the background white and waited a day or two and he had a  Scotty dog to put over that and I traced over that and painted that little  dog on there. That was my first 4-H project in 1937, but I still have that  project. And I   m sorry I didn   t bring it to show it to you.  So I drove the bus my junior and senior high school years, and I picked  up this girl, that I told you about my neighbor had, who was my future  wife. I didn   t know then, of course. But anyway, I went and graduated in  1947. My first two years, I went to Murray College at Tishomingo  6  because a real good friend of mine got a scholarship down there and he  said,    I can get you one.    And I said,    Well, I don   t need it.    And he  said,    Well, come on and go with me anyway.    It was the School of  Agriculture. I went down and took two years of agriculture at Murray  College in Tishomingo and went back to Oklahoma A M in 1949 and  enrolled in animal science. Of course, I spent the two years there and  graduated in    51. I went from pillar to post in jobs on the ranch.  My dad died and my mother needed someone to manage the ranch. So I  stayed there a while. L.D. Trip was the peanut specialist for Extension  service. He said,    Why don   t you go to work for the Extension service?     I said,    Well, I guess I can, or I would like to.    So he got me in contact  with the district director, who was Bill Cook. Mr. Cook let me come to  Muskogee for eight months as a trainee. They called it 4-H agent-at-large,  and so that   s where I started there.  But back up to the way my parents got to western Osage County in the  first place. My dad made the Run, and before the Run, he left home  really early. He and his brother gathered up bones, buffalo bones mostly,  and sold them to a company that shipped them back east to make  fertilizer. So he had odd jobs until this Run and when he heard there was  going to be a Run, he went and bought the best horse that he could find  (which was half thoroughbred for the stamina and the speed) and went  down into Oklahoma just west of Newkirk and found a place that he  really did want.  So when they shot the gun on April 16, I believe it was, he run to this  place and right at that stake, there   s a man standing there (and he was  telling me this because I had gone with him to a Cherokee Strip Cow  Puncher   s Association meeting and I had heard him talk when I went  with him). The man was standing there, my dad just stopped telling his  story and I said,    What   d you do then, Dad?    He said,    I did the only  thing I could do. I shot the bastard.    He stopped again and I said,    What  did you do then?    and he said,    I buried him and took the saddle off the  horse and turned him loose.     So he filed on that claim and lived there whatever time he had to, to  finalize that deal and married and had two kids. One time he came in and  the kids were out in the yard, messed in their clothes and all dirty and his  wife was in the house asleep. He went in the house and told her to get  dressed. She got dressed and he said,    Go get on that horse.    She got on  the horse, and he pulled the bridle off and whipped the horse, and that  was the last time he ever saw her.  He did cowboy work and a little bit of everything else. Finally went into  western Osage County and settled on this really good bottomland. The  7  Osage Indian agent came out and said,    Mr. Myers, don   t you think you  ought to pay some rent on this land?    My dad said,    I guess I   ll pay  some.    So he paid him a dollar an acre a year for that bottomland, and  we kept it until way up into the    50s. It sold then and we lost that.  But, back to my Extension thing, I moved here for eight months, then to  Claremore. I moved to Claremore and was looking for a house to either  buy or rent, so I could move my family up there, and found out that I  was in a little place there. They were talking about John F. Kennedy  being killed at that. But anyway, I moved a family there and we stayed  in Rogers County eight years and had some really good projects going. I  had four night meetings a week   Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and  Friday nights. I told them I would not meet on Wednesday night. It was  more than I could stand up to.  But anyway, I developed a great horse program, a speech program. I had  a retired OSU speech teacher move to Claremore named Colonel  Gilbreth and he was my speech teacher   or leader. And then I would  have horsemen that would be my horse leaders, and I had dogs. My wife  was the dog trainer. She liked to trim poodles and train dogs. So we  started a dog show at the Tulsa State Fair and the Junior Horse Program  Show at the Tulsa State Fair. I assume it   s still going. I   m not sure, but  anyway, we had some really outstanding kids. One of them grew up to  be a high official in the Phillips Petroleum Company. Another one now  down the street here is a girl named Vivian Payne. I don   t know what  her last name is now. But anyway, she works for Congressman Boren  now. She   s one of his top hands down there. Everywhere you go, you  run into people that you   ve had influence on through the 4-H program.  Those were the most enjoyable years that I had, and I wanted to progress  to a county agent and by that time, they called them County Extension  Directors. So I took the job at Atoka for two years, and then I wanted to  progress some more, so I was transferred here in Muskogee in  September of 1974. The first day I got here, I was the superintendent of  the beef program, and so that was interesting. I knew I didn   t know a  thing in the world about it, but I was the superintendent of it. And stayed  that superintendent for fifteen or twenty years, and I   ve had extremely  enjoyable experiences. I   ve had some big downfalls that I couldn   t keep  from having and it changed so much, the finance part of it. Your salary  went up and your work hours changed and technology. I have no idea  what equipment they   re using now, but it   s so much different than what I  had when I first started. In Rogers County, let   s see, the boys was  Appropriate Dress. That   s what the boys were taught, the colors and  combinations and so forth to wear. And the girls, it was called Dress  Revue and that   s where they made their own blouse or dress or  something. We had 1900 4-H members in Rogers County at that time.  8  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  That   s a lot.  Yes, that   s a lot. I had a lady named Hattie Jones that was the home  economist. She was part-time 4-H and part-time lady   s home  demonstration work and I was real disappointed. I haven   t told a lot of  people, but I was disappointed in my county agent. He didn   t do much of  anything except work with the horse barns   the races. He didn   t carry  on Extension educational programs and things like this that I thought  should have been and that I could see in other counties. So I had to learn  that on my own by watching others and learning from my experience at  Atoka County and, of course, being up here. When I got here, I followed  Keith McLemore and Keith was a good agent. He moved to Tulsa  County and from there, a district supervisor. He had followed a man  named Billy Parham and before Mr. Parham was this man named Bill  Cook, but before that was a man named Ira Jay Holler.  Now, Mr. Holler was an extremely hardworking man. I talked to his 4-H  agent one time and he said,    Mr. Holler always lets us off on Sunday  morning.    That meant that   s six days a week, plus Sunday afternoon, he  was working. So you talk about changes   now, we don   t have any  people that I know of that were continuously six and a half days a week  and Mr. Holler, as I said, was the county agent at that time. When he  wanted to be advanced   he went to the state 4-H department as the state  4-H leader or head of the 4-H department. And Mr. Cook went to be a  district supervisor and Mr. Parham did. I never did because I just didn   t  want to leave the county, but Extension has been good to me. I   ve seen  some things that I would liked to have changed. I wish they would have  told me more about the financial aspects of my own personal financial  affairs. If they had sat down with me and said,    Here is a program that  you can put in so many dollars into something and it   ll be tax exempt  and you want to keep this,    and a lot more about personal advice as it  applies to your personal financial goals or wishes. Now, do you have  questions?  Well, let   s back up. So when your father sent his first wife off, he re-married?  He married another girl. He was a cow puncher and well, not far from  the 101 Ranch, but he met this girl and married her. She was fourteen  years old. He had two kids from his first wife and when he married this  girl, they had two. The older ones, I never did know much about, but the  younger son (his name was Harry) stayed with him all of his life and  really close. In fact, when we moved from the west side of the   we  called it the Big Bend, over to the other side, close to the little school, he  bought a ranch right next to it and they traded work. He went to the  9  Finchum  Myers  army in 1918 and the first World War and went to France. He used to  tell me about the way they dug trenches and it was hard to walk in these  trenches. It was hard to not walk, so it was a very difficult time in the  force, but he never did get gassed or anything of that nature.  He came back and times were awfully hard. Right after the Depression,  the government gave the soldiers  250. I don   t remember what they  called it now, some kind of a grant or something if they even called that  then. But anyway, my father   s family and my half-brother   s family lived  on that  250 all summer long. It was not enough money. Everybody had  a dollar a day job. My dad worked for the county as a foreman of the  people that were making the section lines. It had been surveyed, but his  job was to find enough farmers to build the roads and the bridges and get  them all laid out and oversee probably fifteen or twenty farmers in that  job. Seems like there was something else I was going to tell you in there.  Oh, my father, after he moved, he came from the west side of the  Arkansas River, had to cross it, but the town over there was called Bliss.  Bliss was Marland. E.W. Marland made a lot of money and he had  struck oil south of Ponca City and Bliss changed its name to Marland.  My dad bought enough lumber and things to build his house where I was  born, and that   s where all of us were born except the two later ones.  There were six boys in my family and then two girls. Two girls were  born later.  My dad was on the school board of the one over in the western part of  the bend. He had been for a long time and one year the teacher quit.  Wasn   t going to work anymore and so they had to have a county  superintendent of schools. That   s the one that had jurisdiction over the  little schools. They told him and he said,    Well, I   ll get the word out and  get you another teacher.    So he said he sent out all kinds of letters and  everything and this lady that was teaching over in Pea Ridge, Arkansas,  wrote back and said she was interested in coming to Oklahoma. Said it   d  be twenty-one dollars a month and room and board, was the agreed on  price. So she came to the part of town there and the school board said,     Mr. Myers, would you go get this school teacher and take her where  she   s going to board?    And he said,    Yes, I will.    So he took her over  there and they fell in love and they married, and that was my mother.  What else?  What was the name of the little school that you went to?  Bellford. B-E-L-L-F-O-R-D. And there was one that my mother taught  about seven miles further west, a school called Woodland. It was just a  one-room school, but she taught there that one year and my dad married  her the next, as soon as school was out. One of her students was a man  10  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  named Dick Chiles   C-H-I-L-E-S. And my mother used to say,    That  was the smartest kid I ever saw in my life.    And, of course, they moved,  so we didn   t know anything about where they went, but it ended up that  Dick went to Oklahoma A M and majored in agronomy and went to  work for Extension as the pasture specialist. I used to use some of his  materials, especially on establishing Bermuda grass, but that   s where  that Dick Chiles was raised, too. He used to tell about my dad. He had  known him back in the    20s. My dad had a full beard, because you can   t  go to barber every day, and you didn   t have electric razors and so forth,  so he had a full beard and Dick   s family was very poor   extremely  poor, just hand to mouth almost. He worked for less than a dollar a day,  if they could get the job.  So when you went to Oklahoma A M, you knew at that point you  wanted to be an agent?  No, I really didn   t. In fact, I questioned whether I ought to be in animal  science or agronomy or something else. But I liked cattle and had been  around them all my life. Of course, the horses and the sheep came in  later with a passing amount of interest, but I knew cattle and had been  around them all my life, and so I decided to take animal science. A man  named A.E. Darlow was head of the animal science department. Just  behind a man named Blizzard   W.L. Blizzard. He was one of Will  Rogers   s friends. When you move into a county, you always run into  families that you have common interest with and Will Rogers reminded  me of right south of town here about sixteen miles was a family called  McCrary   T.C. McCrary. Willy Rogers taught him to rope and he was  world champion trick roper three years in a row at Madison Square  Garden. He lived   well, he did live. He   s dead now. Some of his boys  live here, but things like that you   there   s a lot of history behind some  of the families that you never know until you really dig into it.  In Claremore, that was where Rogers was     Right. His house was on a hill. Oklahoma Military Academy was there.  It   s now Rogers State University and across the road east and maybe a  little bit north was where Will Rogers was going to build a house. He  was raised at Oologah, which was up on the river northwest of  Claremore about twenty miles. The house that he was born and raised in  was moved from that place that was on the river up to a higher place  because they were going to make the Oologah Dam, Oologah Reservoir.  So you were in three different counties?  Three total. I didn   t spend much time in Atoka.  11  Finchum  Myers  Was there much difference between the counties?  Very much. Oh, very much. Down there my predecessor hadn   t done  anything, and so anything I did was an improvement. I started running  demonstrations on peanuts, because peanuts was a big crop for them  down there. We were about the fourth place county in the state in peanut  production, and I didn   t know a thing on earth about peanuts, but I  learned. It   s a fascinating crop, but anyway, the differences in that and  some northern county is black and white.  One year, I believe it was Governor David Boren, they had a  government program back in about 1971 that was a rural development,  they called it, and they wanted people to move out of towns and move  out to a farm and be productive out on the farm. So what they came up  with was a grape growing project, a vineyard, and they threw money  around like you wouldn   t believe, this governor. They thought about  buying some land at Stringtown. The horticulturist at Oklahoma State  called me and said,    Basil, would you go out to Stringtown and look at  this place where they   re going to grow grapes?    They called it    Grapes  for the Poor.    So I went up and looked it over and you can imagine  what    I talked to a landowner and he said,    Well, yeah they   ll grow  grapes. Don   t you see those wild grapes?    I said,    Yeah, I see them.    So  I went back and called Eddy Whitehead (he was the horticulture man)  and I said,    Eddie, there   s boulders as big as this courthouse out on that  place and there   s no way on earth that you could ever make a vineyard     even ten plants up there.    And so it got back to the concerns and he said,     Well, we   ll go over to the southwestern part of the county.    And over  there it was a hard and dry and black land that wouldn   t sustain anything  in the middle of the summer. I said,    No, please find someplace else.     So they did.  They went south of Atoka to a town named Caney and found a sandy  farm and about anything that you could see was laughable. They would  put up these things that grapes grow on and some of them were as high  as   went way higher than your head   instead of down, like an ordinary  vineyard would be. They made them out of Elm trees that they went out  in the woods and cut. Planted every kind of variety that you could  imagine and finally, they finally gave up on it. They said,    Well, we just  don   t believe that   s going to do.    So one man stayed   I believe it was  two. Two men stayed, said,    I believe we can make a vineyard out of it.     So I said,    Well, I think two of you might, yes. If you   ll do it right.    And  so lo and behold, they ran a pipeline through the vineyard and paid off  all their expense   all their debts, and from then on they had a little bit of  money to work with. They set up a winemaking place and it   s on  Highway 69 south of Caney.  12  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Still there?  Still there, yes.  Gas pipeline, I   m assuming.  Yes, yes. Big one   twenty four inches. It   s pretty big.  Some other programs that they had good ideas for just didn   t work?  Oh, well it   s so much graft and corruption then that, good lord.  Even still?  Oh no, I don   t have any idea what it is now.  Well, when you didn   t know how to do something, what was your  process of learning?  Either calling an adjoining county agent or county director, whichever it  was, or OSU.  Like the peanuts.  Yes, well, we had a peanut specialist, L.D. Trip, who was my real good  friend that got me into this in the first place. He would come down every  month or so and say,    We need to do this. Get ready for the harvesting  and in June, we   ll have a field day and tell the farmers this is a cost  release spot or whatever.    That had a lot of support in the peanut  department, then I do most of the cattle questions.  Well, when you started a new program, like at the fair, did you have to  go through a lot of hoops to get that started?  Depends on whether it was the county fair or state fair. In the state fair,  we simply went to Barbara somebody   can   t remember who, but we  said,    Here is a time slot that we can have a 4-H horse performance     not the showing, but performance   horses programs.    And we told her  long enough, far ahead that she worked that in and I think it   s still going.  Our county, Rogers County, would have supported the whole thing if  there wasn   t anyone else, but there was a lot of other counties involved  in horses and so   but that wasn   t long. I doubt if the adult program is  still going, I   m not sure. But anyway, we had obedience training for the  dogs, and my wife worked as a leader of that.  Was she a graduate of OAMC too?  13  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  No. Since she got out of high school, she married and had two children  and divorced and nursing and I married her then   Fairfax.  Talk about the roots of the livestock shows here in Muskogee.  Okay, a lot of people think that the Chamber of Commerce started the  Junior Livestock Show, which is the big one. Now, that   s separate from  the fair. The Junior Livestock Show is in the spring, like March, and the  Chamber of Commerce always took credit for starting the Junior  Livestock Show. It was held in the basement of the City Hall until they  moved it out to the fairgrounds, but really, a man named Clint Collins  and this Ira Jay Holler, that I was telling you about, belonged to the  Lion   s Club. Mr. Holler got with Mr. Collins and some of the others and  said,    We need to have a thing where they can bring in steers, hogs and  sheep.    And they said,    Well, we can put up the money, but you   ll have  to do the management of it all.    And they said,    Well, we can do that.     So I think the Lion   s Club maybe put up  500, or something, for all of  the premiums, and it started and run in the basement of the city hall for  about, probably, ten years. Then they had a place down at the  fairgrounds that they started using. I have a degree in animal science, but  I wouldn   t have the faintest idea of how to judge a goat, and goats are a  big thing now.  I   ve heard that.  Yes, and that   s one of the most surprising things to me that we would  ever have. I wouldn   t have dreamed twenty years ago that goats would  ever make a comeback, but they sure have. They   re in the 4-H projects,  they   re in all the farms and ranches and so forth. One of the things about  it, they clean up a pasture. They eat weeds instead of grass, and coyotes  like them real well, but they   re cheap to keep. I just never would have  believed that they had   and the crops have changed just as much. One  time, back in the    20s and    30s, you could walk from Fort Gibson out  here   straight east of here   to Webber Falls, which is thirty miles down  the stream   down the Arkansas River and never get out of a watermelon  patch. They sent them all to Joplin, Missouri. There   s a train goes  through here that goes through Joplin. And they would pick those  watermelons and bring them here and ship them to Joplin. It was a  money-making project for the watermelon farmers. Then, they dropped  that and got into cotton, and we had anywhere from two to four cotton  gins in all the towns. Now you couldn   t find one within 150 miles of  here, I don   t think. Or I don   t know where it would be. So they can   t  raise cotton. It   s gotten prohibitive about the pesticides, insecticides and  so they went to soybeans and corn, which is working out real well for  the farmers now.  14  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Takes more and more land to do? For one farmer to     Oh yeah. Oh my, tremendously more land and more dollars. Used to     I   ve heard of farmers getting married and making a crop on a horse,  mule or horses and/or mules with a planter and a cultivator and then  make a crop and go from there, but anymore, a million dollars is nothing  for a farmer to borrow to make a crop, but you   re talking about a quarter  of a million dollar equipment and things like that. It   s extremely  efficient and labor is scarce. When I was growing up, we shocked corn  and hauled hay by the bale. Just a little bit of money to rattle in the  pocket. If you had to go downtown, or go anywhere, and find somebody  that would haul hay, pitch hay up on a truck and load it and haul it, I  don   t know where you would find them. They   re just not there. It   s just a  change of time that we live with.  Well, are the 4-H clubs as active now as they were ten, twenty years  ago? Do you know?  Well, I   m not sure. They   ve changed an awful lot. When I first started  there in Osage County, they said bring up your livestock project or  handicraft project and the girls brought their clothing. But they don   t  emphasize the livestock projects like they used to, and that   s a good  thing because there   s just not that many kids that want to do it. So kids  have gone and changed, and of course, the Extension service had to  change with it. About, oh, I guess, twenty years ago or so, about 1980  was when the computers came into being. We had a 4-H agent. I said,     Charlie, why won   t you start a 4-H computer club?    He thought about  it and thought about it and he didn   t want to do that. He said,    I don   t  think it   ll stay.    And I said,    Well, yeah it   s going to stay, but it depends  on whether you want to do it.    He didn   t want to do it and I still think it  would be a good thing. Kids, of course, grow up with it and are  extremely advanced to what I was   I am. But, that   s the secret of  Extension is to stay ahead of the curve and so many of them are not.  You know, you can   t live thirty years ago. Ten years from now, what   s  going to happen?  Did you have children?  Yes, I have a son in Tehachapi, California, that retired from the navy  after twenty years. He was in the naval air part of the navy and he was  the flight engineer, and so when he got out, he got a job with a company  at Mojave, California, that overhauls planes   motors as well as the  bodies   and they sell them, then, to other countries or other people or  something. And see, his job defined to a staff, a crew to take planes to  wherever, but he is retired now. I   ve got a daughter at Coweta that   s a  15  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Meyers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  LPN and a daughter at Fort Smith that   s an RN, but she doesn   t use her  RN part. She works for a poultry company in the auditing department.  So remotely agriculture.  Yeah, a little. (Laughter)  Did they participate in 4-H?  Oh, yeah.  Did they? Some county agents don   t encourage that with their children.  Yes, in fact, one of our daughters, the one at Fort Smith, went to  Washington on that trip. And I   ve continued to support the 4-H through  various things. I think it was last year I sponsored three of them on a trip  to Mexico. There   s a way to make glasses. There   s kind of a jig that you  have and you have stainless steel and you make all these curves and  form the frame. Then you can buy the lenses and you can make them for  about thirty-seven cents apiece. So I bought this kit, they call it, from a  guy in Kansas for the 4-H kids to take. There   s three kids went to  Mexico with my church. My church goes down on a mission at Rio  Bravo, Mexico. I   ve been down there a couple of times myself and so  when they went down there, they told this missionary that they were  coming and if anyone needed glasses, why, they could meet them there  and they could build glasses for them. Then, of course, they left the kit  down there for them to make. But anyway, I sponsored those three kids  down there.  When you first started as an agent, did you have someone that was  mentoring you?  Here I did. I was learning the 4-H agent-at-large. Ron Sharp was the 4-H  agent and he did a good job of saying,    This is the way we set up this  and this and this and this.    But when I went to Rogers County I lost all  of that. I   d have to call back to him and say,    What is this going to be  and what does it involve?    because we didn   t have that kind of direction  up there.  Did you have to travel a lot within the county?  Oh yeah, every 4-H Club   I met every 4-H Club and met a lot of the  parents. I   d go to the projects whether they had a steer project or  handicraft or whatever it was. I went to the family and looked at the  project, and then we   d have the big Appropriate Dress where we taught  all the, where to button and color combinations and shoe colors and  16  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  things like that. And I would go to a lot of meetings and say,    Now this  is coming up in April.    We had it at OMA   Oklahoma Military  Academy and we   d have a big auditorium maybe seventy-five feet wide  and two hundred feet long. We   d have these kids one end to the other,  and the judge would go along and pick-up and judge them.  And you would have to judge in other counties?  Oh yes, same way. In Nowata and Mayes and Tulsa  counties . In our  horse program, we would have competition. Our horse club would  compete against their horse club. One time we   d come down here and  the next time they   d come up there and we   d have a judge   impartial  judge, and we   d have good meetings.  Any fun stories that just really     Oh, no, I can   t think of any.  Any things that didn   t work quite right?  Oh yeah, there   s a lot of those. Unless you really had it organized and  had people that you knew were going to be there and man their post.  Sometimes you   d have problems.  Well, organizing the county fair took a lot of work.  Oh yeah. But we had superintendents. They pretty well looked after that,  and they did it year after year and then they would know. One time,  when I first went to Rogers County, they said the 4-H and FFA should  not be competing as hard as they do in livestock. They said,    Why don   t  we have a livestock club instead of a 4-H program and an FFA  program?    And when we went to other shows,  they were  not  necessarily as in to that. So we said,    That   s all right.    So they organized  a Rogers County Youth Livestock Program. That was 4-H and FFA and  we went to Tulsa and exhibited like that, and we   d have FFA teachers  helping the 4-H and I would help the FFA team.  What   s the difference in the two? The FFA and the 4-H?  The FFA is in school. We never taught in school. Ours were always  informal.  After school hours?  Generally, but that   s another big difference. When I first went to Rogers  County, almost all of the clubs met during school hours. A lot of times  17  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  the leader would be the teacher, and we would say the third Tuesday of  the month at ten o   clock we   ll be there, so they would have their  meeting and we would teach parliamentary procedure, and they   d go on  with their business and talk about new things coming up. But the FFA,  it   s just like another class except it   s agriculture.  One time the Mayes County Extension office, the county agent was  going to have a program on forage oroduction (mostly grasses). So they  set the date. They   d write letters. They wouldn   t call. They   d write  letters. So they wrote this specialist at OSU, Oklahoma A M, and set up  the date and he says,    Well, I   ll be there in plenty of time and I   ll stay as  long as you want me.    So he came and presented the program. They had  good feedback and all those kinds of things and so got ready to leave,  the county agent was getting ready to lock the door. He asked the  specialist, said,    Where   s your car?    He said,    I don   t have a car. I  hitchhiked here.    He said,    I   ve got to hitchhike back. That   s the reason  I wanted it to end at six o   clock in the evening, so that I   d have plenty of  time to get back to Stillwater.     Different times, huh?  Different times.  Your hours of operation weren   t necessarily eight to five?  Oh, my goodness. It wasn   t much. That   s the one thing that I notice  about now. They sure don   t put in the hours that we did. Whether that   s  good or bad or otherwise, I don   t know, but man, it wasn   t anything for  me to spend seventy hours a week.  Sun-up to sunset?  Almost, yes. But we worked hard on the farm and didn   t know any  difference. We thought they deserved whatever we could do for our  money.  So you wouldn   t have time to do your own farming then if you   re doing  that much during the week.  No, no. No, I didn   t have any other job, and I don   t see how anybody  could. They might supervise it thirty minutes a day, but if they really  take care of their own business, I don   t see how they could have another  job.  Was your office in the county courthouse in all three places?  18  Myers  Finchum  Finchum  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Not here. Here it   s at the fairgrounds.  Is that better than being at the courthouse?  Depends on a lot of things. There   s not as much traffic. There wouldn   t  be as much traffic in the courthouse here of farmers and ranchers. But  they would be a more   maybe women and other businessmen maybe.  Down there, if anybody comes there, they come there to see you. It   s the  only thing down there, practically. They moved that down there, I think,  about a year before I came. It was in the federal building and that was a  bad  location . Nobody goes to the federal building.  Well, at the fairgrounds you   re constantly smelling hay and     Well, not necessarily. Where the office is down there is an old rock  building and it was built in probably 1920, something like that. The  north part was the girl   s auditorium and the south part was the boy   s  auditorium and in the middle was the cafeteria. They built that so that  boys and girls from Weber   s Falls and Wainwright and Haskell could  come in and they wouldn   t have to go back home, by wagon mostly. So  they could just, the whole family could come in, and the boys would  sleep in the south half of the building, and the girls on the north half.  They would have breakfast and some of the other meals in the middle.  Have a kitchen and all. It   s still there. The framework is still good, but  the air conditioning and so forth is shot.  Well, what were some of your tools of the trade?  You know, if you walked down the street and said,    Do you know Basil  Myers?    they   d say,    Yeah, I know him.    They   d say,    How would you  know him?    I   ll tell you what I did. Every Sunday, the Muskogee-  Phoenix came out, my picture was there with an article of something.  Maybe if it   s time to plan tomatoes and so forth   information. At the  bottom, I had    Barnyard Philosophy.    Did you ever hear    Barnyard  Philosophy?    Okay. A long time ago, Bill Taggart   Dr. Bill Taggart  was in the animal science department. He and someone else came out  with an animal science newsletter and it was just like   a little bit like  mine, but they would say calving and management and so forth. Down  at the bottom, they would have    Barnyard Philosophy,    and so I adapted  that to my column here. If people didn   t do anything else to the paper,  they would read my    Barnyard Philosophy    and see my picture.  (Laughter) And that did me more public relations good than anything  that I could have done on radio, television or anything else.  Did you keep some of these?  19  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  All of them. Oh yeah.  I   ll have to see if I can find some.  Now Bill Taggart   do you know Bill Taggart?  I know who he is. I haven   t interviewed him yet. He   s on my list.  Okay, he has every one of those    Barnyard Philosophies.    The An Sci  Facts   animal science   An Sci Facts that they would send to the county  office and down at the bottom there would be the    Barnyard  Philosophy.    He had the whole bunch of them. I wrote the article  probably sixteen, eighteen years. I don   t remember how long, but that  was one of the first things that I did when I got here was to write that  column called    Country Comments.    It had my picture there and the  article and then    Barnyard Philosophy.    When I retired, one of my  secretaries took   let   s see, I reckon it was   I believe it was ten per  page, small page   half page   and about twenty pages of those and put  it in a little book for me. I wish I had one to give you. I ran out of them  and never have had them reproduced, but anyway.  And you did that for sixteen, seventeen years?  Let   s see  Your entire     Started in    74 and went to    90   sixteen   yeah. And I never did ask Bill  or anyone else if I could do that. The    Barnyard Philosophy    was not  original with me by any means, but it really helped tremendously.  That was once a week?  Every Sunday.  Every Sunday, you said.  And you   ve got to mix a little bit of humor in your work. One thing that  I did (I don   t know if it was humor or not), somebody would bring in a  tomato leaf or piece of something that I didn   t know what it was or what  was the matter with it. They   d say,    What   s the matter with this?    and I  say,    The problem is due to a multiplicity of interrelated physiological  factors.    (Laughter) Oh, I   ve used that a lot of times. (Laughs) But  they   d grab their head and I   d say,    I always say that when I don   t know  what   s the matter with it.    (Laughter)  20  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Find out and get back to you.  No, a lot of times I would think of what   s the matter with it, but,    due to  a multiplicity of interrelated physiological factors.     What were one or two of your strangest questions that people would  come in?  Oh, we   d get all kinds. Somebody would call and say,    What kind of  language do they speak in Portugal?    Well, you know, I   d say     Spanish.    I don   t know if they just tested me or what.    Who was King  Phillips II   s son?    and I would tell them    Alexander the Great.    And  they   d say    Well, who was his teacher?       Aristotle.    Things like that.  What that has to do with Extension service, I don   t know, but you would  get questions like that all the time. (Laughs)  Good training for a reference librarian. I   m supposed to ask you about  losing your boat motor?  (Laughs) Oh my. I don   t know who told you that. We had a man named  Gayle Thompson, and I went up on a coal pit north of Claremore one  time. It   s just a little flat bottom boat, wasn   t much bigger than this  table. I had about a 5-horse, I think it was, Johnson motor. We got  through fishing and we pulled up to the bank, and instead of pulling this  out all the way out on the bank, I thought I   d just take that motor off and  just carry it up. So I unhooked it back in the back, took everything off,  lifted up and about that time my feet slipped out from under me and that  motor went toward the bottom and I dived in after it. Why? I don   t  know. What was I going to do if I caught up with it? (Laughs) Anyway,  so I came back up and got out on the bank and got to wondering how I  was going to get my motor. Well, I finally decided to get some divers.  Go down and get that little motor. They did that and cleaned it up, and I  got an overhaul of the carburetor and that little old motor run good for a  long, long time. (Laughter)  That was a weekend trip or was it something you were doing on the job?  Oh no, it wasn   t no job. It was the weekend. Gayle Thompson was the  district animal science man.  It   s what you did for downtime then, fished?  Yeah, I fished a lot. Still love to fish. Man, I go out below the dam at  Eufaula and the Canadian River flows through there and in the  summertime, about sun up, you can go cast out to maybe a 100 or 150  feet out in there and those stripers want to catch it. I don   t like fish to  21  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  eat, but I like to catch it.  Catch and release?  No, I don   t generally release. I give them to whomever I want and  especially crappie. I   m allergic to crappie. Of all things, I can eat bass  and trout and so forth three times a day, but if I touch a crappie or of all  things, I ate one, man my eyes would swell shut and the bottom of my  hands would turn red and the bottom of my feet turn red. Just crappie.  Interesting. Well, have any of your former 4-Hers gone into Extension  service?  Yes, Roger Moore at Braggs, but he didn   t stay but just a few years, and  I   m not sure where he is now. Well let   s see, what was he? He was in the  state office, but I don   t remember what he did. He wasn   t in the county  office.  What did you think about the name change when it went from county  agent to Extension service in the    60s?  Well, that wasn   t as bad as what it is now. I don   t like the county  educator thing, but we grew up with county agent and I really didn   t see  that much wrong with it. It   s true that you   re not an agent, but I really  don   t know what a good name would be. When they talk about county  educator it   s   that don   t fly very good with me.  Did you have a favorite part of the job?  When I came back here, the agriculture part. I wasn   t that crazy about  doing the budget or plan the work or any of that, but I did love to visit  farms and ranches and anything that had to do with agriculture, and I did  a lot of public relations work. I was on the Chamber of Commerce and  board of directors of electric companies, and when I got out of Extension  I was on the Board of Directors of Grand River Dam Authority  GRDA ,  which is extremely big. It   s a billion dollar company for Oklahoma and I  was chairman in 1995, but I liked agriculture more than anything else. I  didn   t particularly hate any of it, but I knew that you were going to have  to fire some, you were going to have to give some big raises, some little  raises and so forth, but that just kind of went along with it. It didn   t  bother me to do that. It   s been an interesting career.  Thirty-two years?  Yes.  22  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  And you   d do it over again?  Oh, I probably would. It would depend on a lot of things. One thing that  I hated worse than anything in the world about the whole career was the  1966 Civil Rights thing. I had to go out and get boys to go to Stillwater  or do things just because they was black and that wrangled me so bad.  Not that I was a racist or anything else, if they deserve something, I want  them to have it. If they don   t deserve it, I don   t want them to have it.  One time they had a small farm assistant program, or something like  that, and had one guy at Braggs and one at Checotah and they told me to  get one at Haskell. The one at Haskell had to be a black. Well, I went  over there and I could not find a black that, well, he was a farmer, but  my goodness, a lot of farmers over there, and so that rubbed me the  wrong way on that whole program. I didn   t like it at all.  How long did that last?  About two years. Two or three. I don   t remember the name of it now.  They call it small farms something.  Well, integration happened what in the early    70s, maybe?  Well the Civil Rights Act, 1966, I think was the     I know the schools here didn   t integrate until the early    70s.  Yeah, they started. Well, I just don   t believe in giving people something  just because they   re some color.  Well, for a while Cooperative Extension had two separate  offices  in  some counties. I   m not sure when that stopped either.  Probably in    66 or    67. Something like that.  When you first started, you couldn   t work in your home county?  Yes, you couldn   t work in your own county and you could not be  promoted from   I was 4-H agent in Rogers County and I couldn   t work  up to county agent.  In the same county.  In the same county.  But you could go and come back?  23  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Yes.  Go somewhere and then come back?  Yes, but you couldn   t work in your own county. I don   t know. The  unwritten rule? And you had to live in the county and that wasn   t a big  deal, but I   ve known people that had a problem with it.  Did you go back and get a master   s at some point?  Yes.  From OAMC, or I guess OSU by that time? Oklahoma State?     69.  So it was OSU by then?  Yes, oh yes.  Do you remember what your salary was when you first started?  Fifty-one. After I got transferred. Yes, I transferred to Rogers County. I  got fifty-one. I started at  4,800.  A year?  A year, yes.  400 a month and travel, and I can   t remember what the  travel amount   like ten cents a mile or something.  It was probably pretty decent pay for the time?  Yeah, you know, it was a job. (Laughs)  Did you have to go through an interview process?  Oh, yeah.  Meeting with commissioners and all that too?  Oh yes. Well, the commissioners, 90 percent of the time, they   re going  to take whatever the district agent or county agent recommends. I   ve  heard one time that a man wanted one of his pet people to be promoted  or be transferred or something and he caused a little bit of a problem and  Stillwater said,    No, we   re calling the shots from here.    And so they  backed off on it.  24  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Well between the county agents and OSU, usually OSU would win out?  Oh yeah. They had to. You   ve got to have a strong head. You can   t let  the people in the county run the program in the state.  Even though they contribute some to the budget, don   t they?  Oh yeah, but it varies an awful lot. I don   t know what it is now. Maybe  20 percent or something like that.  Not an equal share, then.  Oh no. And then the Federal, it comes in.  Were you involved with the state association?  I was president in    80. No,    79, I believe it was.    78 or    79. Somewhere  along there, and I was national chairman of the scholarship committee  on a national basis. We raised money and gave scholarships to people, to  the agents to make trips and tours and all kinds of different things.  Did a lot of networking. You had a rather large network.  Yes, and I put it all on the computer. Up until then everything was  handwritten. I put it on the computer and our county here was the first  county to have a computer bought by county funds. It cost  6,500. I  would go down in there and go to the office that morning and there at  7:30 or so and the first thing I   d do was turn that on and let it boot up.  I   d make coffee and answer some calls and by the time I got ready for it,  an hour later, he   ll be ready to go. (Laughs) But it was good. It had  programs on it   cow/calf programs or stock programs. If you bought  stocks at this weight and at this price, and they gained this much, this is  what you   re going to have to sell them for. It had that kind of a program.  Economics? More economics?  More economics, yes. But, of course it   s gone. That   s one of the big  things about it now. A farmer can click into some of the programs and  get information ten times quicker than he can go down here to the office  and get it.  What they teach and what they do has changed a lot then?  Oh my, yes.  25  Finchum  Myers  Finchum  Myers  Do you have a favorite moment or two?  Well, I guess I could end with a    Barnyard Philosophy.    (Laughter) It  used to be that a fool and his money were soon parted. Now it happens  to everybody. (Laughter)  Thanks for sharing your experiences with me today.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
