 Little Thunder  Wilson  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Saturday, December  1, 2012, and I   m interviewing Muscogee Creek artist Sandy Fife Wilson,  who works in multiple media, for the Oklahoma Native Artists Project  sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University. We   re at Sandy   s home just outside of  Okmulgee. Sandy, you were a student at the Institute of American Indian  Arts in the    70s. You and your sisters did Native clothing for quite a  while, but you   ve also spent many years teaching in a variety of places.  Since you   ve begun doing art full time in 2009, your resume is just full of  awards at the rate of two or three a year. Thank you for taking time to  talk with me today.  Thank you.  Where were you born, and where did you grow up?  I was born in rural Okfuskee County, just outside of Dustin, and I lived  there all my life on my grandparents    allotment. I attended Graham  School, which is in Okfuskee County, also, through the ninth grade. In  the tenth grade I went to the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa  Fe, New Mexico, where I graduated in 1969.  What did your folks do for a living?  My father worked various jobs. He worked for Stanley Oil. Was it  Stanlin or Stanley? I don   t know. My father worked various jobs in  Tulsa all of our lives. He worked for Douglas Aircraft and for an oil  company, Pan American Oil Company, where he was in charge of the  tool shop, supervisor. He also did odd jobs, like he was a gardener for  Mabel Bovard in Tulsa, and he did all that to support his wife and eight  children.  5  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  My mother was a school teacher. She went to the Santa Fe Indian School  after she graduated from Chilocco Indian School and went to a teacher  art program. She was there along with some of the teachers I had when I  went back to Santa Fe, when I went to the Institute of American Indian  Arts, Allan Houser and Josephine Wapp. She said she was just a farmer,  but she was more than that. Some people called her the Indian agent  because anyone needed any help with applications or information,  anything, getting highways built, just community worker all around.  That   s cool. How about brothers or sisters?  I have four sisters and three brothers. Well, one brother passed away  several years ago. My oldest brother, Bill, was the chief of the Creek  Nation. My sister Jimmie Carole is a Master Artist for the Five Civilized  Tribes. My sister Phyllis is a well-known artist, and we all do art, crafts.  My sister Sharon is also a writer. My two younger brothers were  mechanics, but they also were leaders in the Creek Nation and in the  community, also. My youngest sister is an artist, also, but all of us girls  are teachers. Everyone has attended college or received degrees all the  way up to doctorates. We   re all involved with the Creek Nation and the  communities, also.  Education and the arts, sounds like, run through the family.  Yes, from the very beginning, from Mom and Dad. They taught us to  help others and to be leaders and do what we could.  What was your relationship with your grandparents on either side or  both sides?  My grandparents on both sides were deceased by the time I was born. I  did know my step-grandmother on my mother   s side just a little bit, for a  couple of years when she moved back from California, but that   s about  it.  Talk about your first memory of seeing a piece of Native art.  My first memory, I think, is we had a four-room house, and in the long  room in the back, up by the light, there was a picture of an Indian chief  that my sister Jimmie Carole had drawn with chalk one night when she  was up. (Laughter) It was on the wallpaper, and it stayed for a long time.  That   s my first memory of Indian art.  What is your first memory of making art?  Well, besides playing around in the clay and everything down at the  6  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  creek, I remember drawing cartoons out of the funny papers, Henry and  Sluggo and all of those. I remember doing that. I would get up in the  window, on top of the bedstead, and I would be drawing and not paying  any attention to anything else going around me.  When you were attending, like, primary and middle school here, did you  get any art classes or any art instruction there?  No, all of my art instruction came from either Mama or Carole and  Phyllis. We always had things to do, like with our reports. We   d draw a  picture with it that would help, so we drew all the time.  Your mom would actually sort of give a little coaching?  Yes, she was a good artist, and she had gone to school for that. She  coached us and would teach us how to do different things. She taught me  how to   well, we went down to the back land and got some clay, and  we put it in a pot and soaked it. Then we   d strain it and soak it and strain  it and get it all ready to make pottery. When I was about twelve,  probably, she taught me the basics of finger weaving. She had done that  when she was younger also, and weaving.  We always had supplies. Daddy would always, he   d bring us pencils.  We always had pencils. We always had some kind of paper. It may have  writing on the backside, but we had some kind of paper. He   d bring  colored chalks, colored pencils.  Our neighbor was the superintendent at Graham, and they had paint-by-number  sets. When they   d get through painting their picture, they   d give  me their leftover paints. I remember painting a picture of the moon,  when they first shot pictures of the moon, with my fingers and with  pounded matchsticks where I could make them into a brush. We   d have  maybe a couple of brushes. We   d have some brushes. They were more  watercolor brushes, and this was some oil paints, so Mama showed me  how to make the stiffer brushes out of the matchstick. I had pictures like  that, and I painted pictures of my brothers from their school pictures  when I was about ten, twelve years old. We got to use all kinds of  things. She taught us how to do all kind of things and how to play and  have fun and enjoy life and creating.  So you headed out to the Institute in tenth grade?  Yes.  Were one or two of your sisters out there already?  7  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Well, Carole, Jimmie Carole, was on the pilot program for two summers  in Arizona. When they opened the school, my sister Phyllis went out  there, and she graduated in    68, no,    66. She graduated in    66, and I went  out there that fall. The funny thing is that that   s the same school that my  mom went to when she was at her teacher training, so we were all  involved with the same facility.  Right, all that history. So what was it like for you coming in, really with  sort of an excellent background in a lot of media already but to be at an  art school where they were just focusing on art?  Well, I knew some basic things, and we   d done a little bit of things  around the home. I got to go more in depth and everything. I had  painting classes and jewelry class, printmaking. I love printmaking, and  took traditional techniques with Josephine Wapp and she taught me a lot  of the different patterns and a lot of different things.  It was traditional techniques from all the tribes. We learned about the  different tribes all over the United States, their clothing, their foods,  their dwellings, everything. Just knowing that a lot of the teachers were  famous artists already, like Allan Houser and Fritz Scholder, it was  uplifting. I mean, it just made you feel good to know that you were right  there with them, Louis Ballard and     Who was one of your favorite teachers?  One of my favorites was Seymour Tubis. He was in printmaking. We  got to experiment with a lot of different techniques in printmaking, and  it   s just something I always liked to do, different media. Also, Josephine  Wapp, I   m still in contact with her. She   s 100 years old now, maybe 101  by now. Allan Houser was one. He took me on a trip to Wichita with  him, and we demonstrated artwork. I did finger weaving there when I  was like a senior in high school. They were all pretty special.  Who were some of the classmates you had that we might know?  Let me see. Joy Harjo, she was my roommate once. Francis Tafoya, he   s  from Espanola  High School , Santa Clara  Pueblo, New Mexico  artist.  Larry Dejarlais, Peter Jones, his little sister was in my class. There are so  many. Bill Soza, Earl Biss, Earl Eder, Kevin and Connie Red Star. There  are so many, and I   m sure I   m leaving some out. Grey Cohoe. Some  were there when my sister was there, but they had come back, like T. C.  Cannon, so I got to know some of them. I was trying to think. Oh, I  know. One of my favorite ones was Dan Namingha. I   ve got one of his  prints from the Art Market in there. He was in my class, and I saw him  last time we were out there. It   s so good to see that he   s been so  8  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  successful. His sons are, too.  What did you learn at the Institute that you think really carried over into  your art, maybe beyond just the technical deepening of your knowledge?  Could you say that again?  What did you come away with from the Institute that really informed  your art and maybe even your teaching, beyond that technical  knowledge, the deepening of that?  Well, it seems that when you   re there, you   re in contact with so many  people and you learn that your art is special, especially if you use  something from your region, from your tribal area, and that you can  experiment and do more things with it. Like right now, I   m doing more  traditional things with the Southeastern designs, but my art before, I  would do more modern things, non-representational paintings, and more  with using the design and the composition. You know, I think that you  need to preserve what you know, too, because you can always  exaggerate some more and change your art, but you still have that sense  that your area is special and that you can contribute to the knowledge of  that area.  What happened after you left the Institute?  After I left the Institute, I went to Northeastern State University and  studied art there with some teachers. I loved the figure drawing classes.  That   s one of the things I liked with the charcoal and conte  pencils  and  all. I did some painting and everything, but I still liked the printmaking.  We did some serigraphy and things. I took education classes and became  an art teacher.  Were you kind of thinking that teaching would be a way of supporting  yourself while doing your art, or were you just drawn to teaching, as  well?  Well, I think since I was little I   d kind of decided I wanted to be a  teacher because Mama was a teacher, and it ended up all of us girls were  teachers. (Laughs) I do enjoy teaching students how to manipulate  materials and bring out their creativity. I also teach some about the  history of art. I have had students from all different areas.  I taught in Dewey, when I got out of school, for two years. Then I went  back   Mrs. Wapp was retiring, and I went back to the Institute and  taught for two years. Then we had kind of decided to stay out there, but  two jobs came open in Oklahoma at Chilocco. It just happened to be  9  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  math, which my husband teaches, and art. We talked it over and decided  we   d take those jobs. I had students from mostly Oklahoma, but there  were some from other states and different tribes. It was interesting  teaching them, and they were good in the classroom. They loved doing  art. They say Indians have a natural talent for art, and it seems like a lot  of them did.  Which was your favorite? Which was your favorite teaching spot, do you  think, up before you got your master   s degree?  Well, I got my master   s degree when I was at Chilocco.  Oh. Well, maybe tell us a little bit about that.  I went during the summers. I went to school during the summers and got  my master   s degree the summer that the school closed in 1980. I liked  all of them, really. They were all different. I also enjoyed going back to  the Institute and teaching there because I love weaving. Weaving is one  of the things that I love, and we had nice looms. (Laughs)  That   s what you taught, specifically?  Yes, and sewing. We did a lot of that. I took home economics in college,  also, and I did some sewing there. It was good.  When did you, sisters, start into the Native clothing business?  I think it was about in 1978, maybe. Phyllis had already been designing  clothing with Native American theme designs, and she decided to go  into business. People, they kept buying her things, and so she decided to  go into business. We all got together and joined forces. Sharon would  run the shop during the week, and on the weekends we   d take turns  running the shop.  Because you guys were teaching.  Yes. We had fashion shows all over, from Washington, DC, and  Colorado, and I   m not sure where all they went. I know in Arkansas and  Florida, different places.  So that was a good introduction to the business aspect of art, which is  sometimes the hardest for artists to deal with.  Yes. We had people who would come from all over to our little shop in  Henryetta. It was called the Fife Collection. We had our logo. I think  that we are the ones that started the tags on the outside of the clothing.  10  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Wow. (Laughter)  We had our signature on the bottom of whatever it was we made. The  Fifes, whoever designed it would sign it, stitching. Also, a lot of times  we   d put our Fife Collection tag, which was beautiful and has a logo of  raccoons. That   s our clan. On some of the things, it would be on the  outside, like on the outside of pants, like Levis. It was pretty neat.  Yes, and I think there weren   t a lot of people doing Native design  clothing in Oklahoma at that time.  No. Georgeann Robinson was in Pawhuska, I think, and Ileda Smith in  Dustin. She did Seminole patchwork, and she   s the one that helped  Phyllis learn a lot of the patterns. She did a lot of Seminole patchwork.  Why did you decide to get out of the clothing business?  We were all working and trying to run the business at the same time, and  we also all had small children. We put our families before our work  there, but we still continue to, you know, we   ll do special things for  people.  I think your longest teaching time was at Morris.  Oh, yes. (Laughter)  What were some of the rewards or challenges of teaching there?  Well, I started teaching at Morris in 1980, and I retired in 2009, so that   s  quite a while. All along the years I would teach them, like, art history,  art appreciation, art production, and we studied all kinds of things. I  would have them doing pottery, sculpture, printmaking, appliqu  , batik,  basket making, painting, drawing, any medium we had so that they  would at least experience these medias. A lot of them, they would find  that they excelled in something.  Some may draw very well, but they can   t make a basket. Others can do  crafts, and they can   t do the fine arts. I had one boy who was a Down   s   Syndrome  boy, and he won several awards with his drawings. He   d  take markers and a ruler and use that, and they were fabulous. I had  maybe twenty-five students in a class, and they were all stages of  knowledge. Some of them had been in my class for four years, and  others had never had art at all. I had to work around that and try to get  everybody to fit in and produce.  11  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Find what they were good at.  Yes. Back in the    80s,    90s, mostly in the    90s, I guess, there were a lot  of Indian art shows. The State Department had an art show. We went to  the Kirkpatrick Center. We took artwork to the fairs, Tulsa and  Oklahoma City. We had Indian art shows. We   d have four or five of  those a year, plus the others, the open art shows. The students really  enjoyed competing and seeing what other students were doing at other  schools. It was fun.  I had a lot of students who would really participate and enjoyed it and  the Congressional art contests. It seems like as the years went by, a lot of  the students with more technology seemed like they lost interest in doing  the hands-on things more. That   s one thing I think about with the  technology. They lose something because we used to do calligraphy, and  now you can just type it in, get any font, any size you want. (Laughter) I  think that   s changed it a lot.  In terms of your artwork, were you continuing to do a bit? Had you  entered the gallery scene at all before you started teaching so much?  No, I have never really had anything in galleries. I   ve entered some art  shows and won a few awards (but I   ve done painting) like in painting.  Some of my paintings are more realistic than what they used to be.  Did you enter any of the annual shows, Philbrook Annual? The last year  was    79, I think.  No, I was in school still. Five Civilized Tribes, mainly, and the  Cherokee Heritage Museum, there were some things there.  Since 2009, you retired, and you were able to do art full time. What kind  of an adjustment was that?  Well, it was an adjustment because I had been at school from eight until  about six o   clock every night. I never had time to finish anything. I had  lots of things started, or I would start a project, and I had three children,  and they loved art, so they   d say,    Let me do some.    Pretty soon, they   d  be doing their artwork. If you look around my house, it   s everywhere  still. (Laughter) They were pretty good at it, too.  I just didn   t have enough time with taking care of family and teaching,  so as soon as I retired, I hit the ground running. I got out my yarns and  everything and started weaving, doing finger weaving. I took a class in  shell carving. I took a class in Creek pottery, and Mary Smith taught me  how to do the Creek baskets. I already knew how to do a lot of these  12  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  other things and basics, you know. I wove a wall hanging and sent it to  Santa Fe for their auction for the scholarships and enjoyed going back  and seeing other people and seeing what people have done.  I try different things, like the copper tooling with the Creek designs. I  had done some with leather before, leather tooling with the old designs,  and beadwork, too. I used to make medallions even, like, with the  snakes, the serpents and things in them and all kinds of designs. I don   t  have any now, but I remember I did them.  Yes, may pick those up again. Starting with finger weaving, can you talk  a little bit about the importance of it to Muscogee culture?  Well, the finger weaving, I think a lot of different tribes did finger  weaving, and there   s samples found in caves and the Southwest even of  similar weaving. When they started trading a little more and they could  get fibers, I guess they used different animal fibers and all and plants.  The men have always been the flashier dressers. I said it   s like the birds:  The colorful birds are the males; the plain ones are the females. The men  wear the belts, the sashes. The finger weaving is the traditional style  because if you look at the old photographs, any pictures you might find,  the designs are angular with the chevron design, the diamonds, the  zigzags, anything like that.  In the stomp dance, the men, and the women, too, wear sashes. They   ve  gotten flashier, too, because they have bigger tassels on their belts now.  The men also wore them across their chest. They   d wear a sash with  their bandolier bag. They wore them as a sash. They wore them as  garters to hold up their leggings, and some, I   ve even seen some pictures  with them using them as a turban.  How about shell carving? You mentioned that you took a class, I guess,  to get started in that.  Yes, I took a class at the College of the Muscogee Nation with Dan  Townsend, who   s quite well known. He   s from Florida, and he taught us  the basics of the shell carving, using a Dremel tool. Now, I   ve yet to  carve them without one, but I   d like to try that, too.  I use the Southeastern designs on mine. Sometimes I might change them  up a little bit to make it a little different. Most of the designs come from  southeastern North America. Some of them were found on copper plates,  some were found on shells, and sometimes it   s just fragments of designs  that are found. Sometimes I   ll create the rest of what I think it might  have looked like or what might look good.  13  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  It seems like with some of the traditional arts, getting materials is very  time-consuming. I was wondering with your basketry, do you gather  your own materials?  No, what I   ve used mostly is commercial cane or commercial reed. Mary  Smith and I are going to go gather some river cane and split it and get it  ready for that. I   ve also used some pine needles when I do pine needle  baskets. I have a cousin in California that does pine needle baskets, and  she   s teaching me how to use those, some of the easier ways to do that.  How is Creek basketry different from that of other Five Tribes?  I think the Creeks use cane, river cane, and the Cherokees, I think, use a  lot of   well, also, the Creeks use honeysuckle and buck brush. The  Creek baskets, they will have   the cane baskets have a double rim on  the top. I   ve seen some Choctaw baskets that have a double rim, but I  don   t know if they   re made exactly the same. Oh, and also some of the  Creek baskets have holes in the bottom for sifting, sifting materials.  How about pottery? What are some of the differences between Creek  pots and other Southeastern  pots ?  I   m not sure, actually. The Creek pots, though, one thing about some of  the Creek pots is that on them they might have little knobs or little  nodules. Those are kind of used to keep the heat distributed evenly so  that you don   t get   maybe if you   re handling it, it doesn   t have as much  heat on the bowl.  They had certain pots, taller pots, for sofki pots. They used a lot of the  clay for pipes, different kinds of pipes. I know we found some different  pipes up in our pasture where one of the older houses had been. They   d  have the stripes, you know, the parallel stripes going in different  directions. Also with the pottery, they used, like, paddles to put their  designs in and corncobs, different things. To make the black color, the  darker coating, they would smoke them in, like, oak leaves, smother  them in leaves and smoke them to get that darker tint to the clay.  Now, do you dig your clay for your pots?  No, the clay that I had used, some of it came from Georgia, but I have  dug clay, and so you can get clay around here. The Creeks came from  Georgia, so I went ahead and used that clay for some of my pots.  Have you made a couple of trips to the homelands?  14  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  I   ve been out there one time.  What was that like?  It was nice. It was, you know, the trees are a lot taller and the dirt   s  redder. (Laughs) It was different going out there. We went to Hickory  Ground  Alabama .  Did you go with your sisters, too, or others?  I went with my sister Phyllis and my daughter, Laura. It seems like the  rivers have a lot of water in them. They   re wide, and they look so deep  as compared to the rivers here that dry up half the time. (Laughter) It  was kind of a strange feeling to think that we could still be out there if  things had been different.  I guess I did go twice. We went to Macon, Georgia, with a group of  Creeks in the early    90s, my sister Carole and I, and we talked to  students out there at several schools. We went to schools and talked  about the Creeks and what they   re doing now and where they came  from, everything.  Did you take artwork, too?  Yes, we took artwork, a lot of different samples of things to show them.  Now that you   re going full time, how would you juggle the production  side and the marketing side?  Well, it   s not much of a juggle right now. (Laughter) I kind of make  what I want to do. I do what I want to when I want to do it. If I feel like  making baskets, I   ve got reed all over the place or cane everywhere. I  might work on baskets for a week or so, and then I   ll work on finger  weaving.  Finger weaving I can take and do it in the car, any place I can do finger  weaving. The baskets I have to be around where I can have water with  me. The shell carving, the shell is actually toxic, so you have to be in a  well-ventilated space or outside. I do that mainly in the warmer months  if it   s not too hot.  Do you get a lot of commissions, like for sashes and things, moccasins?  Yes, I get quite a few, moccasins and sashes. I have done some classes,  taught some classes in moccasin making and sashes and baskets and  helped with the communities in doing that. I have sold different things at  15  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  different places. The sashes, lots of people want to order, and they want  a certain pattern, certain colors, sizes. They can customize them more.  What are some of your major shows right now?  That I have been doing? (Laughter)  Or maybe you have been focusing on producing more than shows?  I have been demonstrating at a lot of different places. Now, let me think.  The Red Fork Film Festival, that was one.  The what?  Red Fork.  Okay, yes. I have done demonstrations at the Red Fork Film Festival, at  the Five Civilized Tribes Museum, at Under the Oaks.  Art Under the Oaks.  Yes, I   ve done baskets and finger weaving. I demonstrated finger  weaving and shell carving at the Tulsa State Fair at the Creek Nation  booth. I   ve taught some classes to different organizations and different  departments of the Creek Nation. Some of the communities around, I   ve  helped with their summer work, summer programs for students, and  taught some of the little kids the finger weaving. I have some small  looms and let them work on looms. I   ve also helped with some of the  churches and all types of organizations. It hasn   t just been one thing.  I   ve entered a lot of   I think in the last, well, since 2009, I   ve been at  Art Under the Oaks and the Cherokee Holiday Art Show at the   Tahlequah Municipal Armory Center , and I   ve won awards there each  year. I was actually surprised at that because I hadn   t done anything in  so long. (Laughs)  And sometimes for media, like the shell carving, that you had just begun  to explore.  Yes, but I love doing that. I love the shell carving. Get the shell, cut it  out, grind it down into shape, polish it. I might draw my design on there  and carve it, and then I have to polish it again by hand. I put pigment in  it, in the etched part, and then wipe it all clean. Then if I make it into a  pendant or necklace or anything like that, earrings   doing from the very  beginning to the end, that   s something because a lot of people don   t do  16  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  that. I think that   s one of the things that I want to do, like the river cane,  gathering it and start from the basics and all the way to the finish.  The whole process.  Yes, the whole process and all that.  What   s so satisfying about that as opposed to starting with ready-made  materials?  Well, just the idea that I have done the whole process, I think that   s  really something because there are too many kits and easy ways to do  things. I enjoy doing it all. My mother has   we have a coat and a sash  she made when she was at Santa Fe, and she actually had to take the  wool, clean it, card it, dye it, spin it. She designed the coat. She wove the  fabric, put it together, even carved the button that was on it. Everything  was from start to finish, and I think that   s really wonderful if somebody  can do that.  Right. Let   s talk a little bit, I guess, about your moccasins, and then  we   ll talk about some of your techniques and research and things like  that. How often do you do moccasins, or does it just depend?  I do moccasins whenever, you know, if there   s a need for them because  leather, like deer skin, is so expensive now. I can   t just buy it and make  moccasins. I usually do them for, like baby moccasins or for family. My  daughter has a couple of pair. To me, they seem simple because it   s just  one piece of leather. You have to figure out how to measure the foot and  sew it up. They are really comfortable. On the flaps (they have the big  flaps) and you can decorate those with beads or ribbon or even  patchwork, different things.  How much of your time do you pick up painting or drawing?  I thought I would paint a lot after I retired, but actually I have not  painted anything since, except the sign, a couple of signs. (Laughter) I  have not had a chance to do any painting. I have done some drawings in  the last several months, actually.  Oh, for a particular project?  Yes, for an Oklahoma history project with Catherine Sharden. She   s  coordinating   she has a program to teach each county some of their  history, and I   m doing some sketches for her.  That   ll be wonderful. Tell a little bit about a highlight or two from going  17  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  to the Smithsonian with the Mvskoke Etvlwv  Muscogee People   project, the festival.  I think that the Muscogee project at the Smithsonian was wonderful  because they had an exhibit outside, and they had a full range of services  that the Creek Nation provides for right there in the rotunda or the round  room. I think there were like seven or eight artists there and     That   s not very many.  No, it   s not.  It   s a select number.  I thought there were going to be   they were taking forty. I thought they  were taking forty artists, but they took Creek singers, elders, and a stomp  dance group from Duck Creek. There were several pastors that I knew  and ladies from churches around that I knew and the artists. We had  pottery, flute making, painting, and stickball making. There was one  with some Seminole patchwork. I had my shell carving and baskets and  finger weaving, and it was very enjoyable.  I met a lot of people, and I saw some people I hadn   t seen since I was a  teenager. Met a lot of people that knew my family and had a great time  because I could sing with the Creek singers when we sang the hymns  and listen to them. There was something going on all the time. There  was not hardly any time that was dead because there was something  happening all the time. A lot of people from different countries, different  states, that came through and visited.  And your husband came with you. Does he go to shows with you  periodically? Does he help out with the art business at all?  My husband helps out some. Every once in a while, he   ll say,    So and so  wants something done.    He goes to the shows with me, and he   s real  proud to hold my purse while I go get an award. (Laughter) He has a  background in industrial arts, like woodworking. He has designed some  things. Like he has a table in there that has a light, and the light shines  through all four sides, which has a forked eye design in it. He has done a  lot of things like that, different kinds of crafts and a little bit of jewelry  and different    He knows what he likes. (Laughter)  It seems like a lot of the shows are doing that. They   re cutting down on  the amount of work you put in. I guess there   s more artists, too.  Yes, more work for them, I think. I   d have an art contest every year at  18  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  school. Since the first year I was there at Morris, we   d have an art show,  and we invited students from all the other schools around, any students  that wanted to enter. We would have everything on all the tables, all the  walls filled, all down the hall, down the other way.  We   d have K through 12, so lots of times we   d get   my sister taught at  Dustin, and so she   d send some of her work. My other nieces would  send things, different ones from different schools in different areas.  We   d get a few from the other schools around the county or the region,  and it was good. We   d have so many things and it took   I finally started  getting some of my top students in the high school to judge the little  kids    things.  Oh, that was good, a great experience for them.  It gave them a chance to do that because somebody would come in to  judge things and the middle school and high school, they   d be there  three or four hours   Right. That was a great experience for them. What kind of research do  you do for your Southeastern designs?  A lot of my research comes from museums, some museums that I   ve  gone to that have exhibits. Also a lot of them come from the book Sun  Circles and Human Hands. Emma Lila Fundaburk edited that. There  are   let me see. James Howard   s book on Southeastern Indians. A lot of  the designs I   ve seen, and we used in our fashions. When we did the  fashions we used a lot of the same designs: the serpent designs, the  forked eye, sun circles, the king bird, just everything, warriors, a lot of  the different animals.  Did you ever get to make a trip to the Smithsonian, too, or have the  museums been closer in?  We went to the Heye Museum  George Gustav Heye Center . My sister  and I went to New York, went through the museum there, saw some  things. Then we went to Macon, Georgia, and Spiral Mounds, different  places we   d see things.  For your shell carving, do you sketch the design on paper beforehand?  How do you approach that?  Usually I do. I   ll sketch it, or I   ll sketch it right on the shell. I don   t  hardly ever do it with no sketching at all because I would really get off.  (Laughs)  19  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Yes, I was wondering if you   d ever, like, accidentally ruined a shell  because     No, I usually do something else to it. I   ll fix it some way. I hate to ruin a  shell or anything like that because if you go out of line a little bit, you  can always make it a deeper line or do the background a different way.  There   s always something. I   ve learned that from my mom and my  sisters. If you make a mistake, you can change it. That   s one thing about  when I was teaching school. Some of the kids, if they   d make a little line  crooked, they   d wad it up and throw it away. It   s a process. You   ve got  to figure out how to be creative with all of these things.  Right. And are they expensive, the bigger conch shells?  Well, I found a bunch of shells at a rock shop. I think the owner had  passed away, and some younger people were taking it over. They sold  me a whole boxful for five dollars when they had higher prices on each  one. (Laughs)  I have a friend who gave me some pink mussels, mussel shells, and  those are really pretty when they   re polished up, and they   re easy to  carve, too. Some of the shells I got from my son   s father-in-law. You  can order them, shells, different places. Now that I carve shells, people  bring me shells a lot, just give them to me. I use old buttons, too, the  pearl buttons. Those make really nice carvings.  So that involves a little bit of searching around.  Yes. Well, my sister Jimmie Carole, she sews a lot, and so she is always  finding some. Dan Townsend gave me some one time. It   s just, you  know, sometimes you can find them.  Do you trade off between different media? Do you keep several projects  going concurrently when you work?  Yes, I keep several projects going. Right now, I   ve got four sashes I   m  working on. I was working on some corn to put on some baskets. I keep  things going all the time. I am never bored. I haven   t been bored. I don   t  think I   ve ever been bored in my life, actually. (Laughter)  Are you doing any loom work at all right now?  No, but I plan to. When we were in Tennessee, I saw some real pretty  scarves, woven scarves, and I thought,    I can do that.    I   m going to get  them out as soon as I have a chance because I love working with looms,  on the loom. When I was in college, we used to come back on weekends,  20  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  and we   d go to the Creek Nation, and they had several looms there.  Hepsey Gilroy would be down there, and she was in charge, and we   d  weave different things.  What is your creative process, starting with how you get your ideas?  I might get my ideas from, like if I   m weaving, just the colors, putting  together colors for weaving. Or if I see something, like the baskets   the  baskets, I   m always wanting to do something a little different, anyway.  There   s so many different weaving patterns you can do on a basket, also.  With that flat cane, it makes such a pretty tweed or herringbone.  Anything, a plane tabby weave, anything like that.  Lots of times I   ll be working on something, and I might change it  around. If I have a clear idea of what I want to do, sometimes I might  add some color to it or try a different design or try putting something  else with it just to be a little different. Lots of times it   s in progress I  change things up. Like for the finger weaving, you can start out with a  chevron design and change it to a diamond. You can split that up into  something else and change your pattern right in your hands.  As you   re working.  The finger-woven wall hanging I did, I started out with, some were  arrowheads, and I changed them to chevrons. It was kind of a plaid in  certain places and changed it around. Get creative. The materials, too.  I   ve done some with the silk cord. My niece is a fashion designer and  she designs handbags. When she was the designer for the Native  American Fashion Week in New York City, she had me do some sashes  for straps for her bags or for sashes for the girls to wear, the models to  wear, so she   d have something else Creek in there. It was fun doing  things like that.  What is your creative routine? Do you like to work more during the day  or at night or just when you get a chance?  I like to work whenever I get a chance, mainly, but a lot of times it   s at  night. My husband gets after me for staying up until three o   clock in the  morning. (Laughter) I work good at night and, I guess, any time I have  time.  The weather, like I said, the weather has something to do with it, too, if I  can get out on the back porch or someplace to carve. Right now I   m  getting a studio out in the back. The old garage, I get it for a studio. I   m  getting some shelves and tables and things, and also a vent, a vent table,  so I can carve out there because right now, you know, you have to wear  21  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  a mask to do the carving.  When will your studio be finished?  He   s going after the door today. (Laughter) Hopefully in the next month  I can get in there and get some things, move my looms out of the old  garage, the house garage, into there because they   re in storage right now  and I haven   t got the chance to use them. I have some table looms I  bought from the Firehouse Art Center in Norman, by the Jacobson  House, I think.  Oh, yes.  We used to use them at school. I   d take them to school, and we   d have,  like, eight looms going at once. Four of them were mine, so I brought  those home when I retired. I   m just waiting. Right now I work in front of  the TV, or I do my baskets and weaving in the living room and my shell  carving on the back porch.  Talk a little bit about the Fife family show, too, that you did because I  forgot to ask about that.  Do you remember when it was?  About two years ago, does that seem right? Two or three years ago?  It was about   I   m not sure, maybe three. I   m not sure. (Laughter)  Several years ago we got together with Betty  Gerber , who was the  curator at the Broken Arrow Historical Society. They had just redone  their building, and Phyllis had done a painting for their exhibit upstairs,  and they had a big room downstairs for shows. We got together with her  and decided to have a family show.  It was artwork. My dad made my mom   s wedding ring out of a stainless  steel pipe. He polished it down and made the ring. My mom, like I said,  was an artist, and she had done art all her life, too, and so she had some  things. The woven jacket she did, her sash, some carved buttons, some  pottery, a doll. I remember when we were little she had a puppet that  she   d made.  We had seventy-five years of art from the time she did her artwork to  then. I think there were like twenty-four people in it, in the show. We  had painters, printmaking, the copper, the shell work, the moccasins,  beaded work, fashions, saddles, leather tooling, poetry, photography     Every medium was covered.  22  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson     just about everything. Any kind of art you could have, we have done  in some way. Even some of the younger children had some things that  they had done. They   d always come over in the summertime and want to  do something, so we   d teach them to do things, weaving or beadwork,  finger weaving, all kinds of things. I think there were like twenty-one to  twenty-four of us that had artwork in the show.  That   s a really wonderful show. Well, looking back on your career so  far, what   s been one of the high points?  Let   s see. I think that one of the high points was that show because it  was a family thing and that it was our parents, our generation, and our  kids. That was three generations was all there was in it. I don   t know.  There were so many high points, the Fife Collection, the fashion shows  and all. The first time I won an art award in a long time, that was a high  point to me. (Laughs) I said I felt like I was on   I was really excited  because I won something. Every time I win an award, I   m always  surprised because     That was at the Five Tribes Museum. Are you talking about the first  time     Yes.  Yes, I bet that was   if you could talk about that a little bit more because  you recently, you had just retired.  Yes. When I entered the exhibit at the Five Civilized Tribes, Art Under  the Oaks, it was mostly crafts and three-dimensional art. I was entering  the things because I wanted to see how I   d do. I was really elated  because I had won some awards. It   s been good. Then going to the  Smithsonian with the tribe, being asked to do that, that was great  because I feel like I represented the tribe and our family and could show  what I could do and share that with people, share some of the traditional  crafts and art.  Looking back on your career so far, what   s been one of the low points?  I can   t think of any low points. (Laughs) I mean, to me, I   ve enjoyed it  all. I have. I   ve enjoyed doing all the work, even if it doesn   t sell or  anything. Lots of times I don   t even want to sell anything. It   s doing the  artwork and producing these things and sharing them.  A lot of times I might put a high price on something because I don   t  want to sell it. If it sells, then that   s all right. (Laughter) Keeping the  23  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  traditions going is one thing because the basket making, there   s not that  many basket makers. Finger weaving, there   s not that many finger  weavers left. If I can teach somebody how to do that, then that   s great to  carry it on because I don   t want that to die out.  Is there anything we   ve forgotten to talk about before we take a look at  your work, anything you   d like to add?  I can   t think of anything. Well, one thing   I don   t know. Like our  family, we kind of collaborate together on a lot of things. If we have,  you know, like, the show up there, Carole might make the jacket for the  Creek man, and I   d make the sashes, and Robin would make the  bandolier bag. We all work pretty well together and learn from each  other. Whenever I have a technical question or a historical question, I  like to call my sisters, good resources there. (Laughs)  You might have to start your own shop here in the near future.  (Laughter) Well, we   ll get ready to take a look at this artwork. All right,  we   re looking at one of your conch shell carvings.  This is a medicine dipper used by the Creeks and the ceremonial  grounds during their busk. They would drink the black drink from this  dipper. It   s cut out and smoothed out. The design here, the picture is  choosing sides. You can see that they   re wearing the sashes, the garters,  just like we use the finger-woven sashes for. These, they say, are the  voices coming out.  That   s wonderful. There   s a lot of carving in there.  Yes, I carved this, and then I carved the background, put the background  on there to make it a little different. I also lightened parts of it so that it  would be kind of like highlights. You can see in the face there where the  cheeks and the nose and the chin are kind of highlighted, and the brow. I  use different textures on these for different areas, learning from my  etching background. I know how to make different textures and different  shades of the brown from the amount of texture you have on there.  And the pigment that you used?  The pigment I use is oil paints, and I use the colors, the natural colors  that you see around. Sometimes I use a brown; sometimes I use a red.  That   s really neat. Okay, so this is an example of Creek moccasins.  These are your moccasins, I guess.  Yes, they   re my daughter   s moccasins. These Creek moccasins, they   re  24  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  made out of one piece of leather. It   s just one piece. It   s gathered, and it  has a puckered toe. You sew them from the inside, and you gather up a  little bit from each side as you go along and gather it up so that it  puckers there. That will make it fit over your foot. These are real  comfortable. The Eastern tribes, a lot of the tribes used the big cuffs,  wore the big cuffs on their moccasins. They might be decorated different  ways. These I decorated with a serpent design, serpentine design, on the  side and with ribbon.  Nice.  These are soft-sole. They   re one piece, like I said, but the sole is soft,  and that   s because in the woodlands there is so much foliage and the  ground is moist that they didn   t need the hard soles.  This is a Creek sifter basket. You can see the little spaces left on the  inside and the bottom so that they could take their corn or whatever and  sift it to get the small particles out. If you make the holes bigger, you  could make the right size corn come through, and the larger corn  wouldn   t go through there.  This is woven. You start on the bottom with a weave, flat tabby wave,  and then as you come up, this one is   I   ve gone across it with more like  a herringbone weave. You don   t have to add any more spokes to it or  anything. You fold this up and weave. Then this top three or four rows  kind of binds it together, and it   s woven in a tabby weave again, just a  plain weave. Then the top, the Creeks have a double rim on the basket,  and this is pretty difficult. You do one rim at a time, and there   s a lot of  folding and wrapping. It   s pretty difficult to do the top of these baskets,  but they last a long time.  Okay, we   re looking at some medallions, necklaces. Do you want to tell  us about those?  This first one is the king bird, and you can see that it has the spots on it.  This one is on a melon shell, and I used the red oxide color and the  handmade copper beads, also. If you look close, you can see that the  darker areas are actually crosshatched in it.  This is a chunky player, and you can see he has that spool in his left  hand, there. These are little petals around there. These are also old pre-  Columbian designs from the Southeastern United States.  This one is a black mother-of-pearl, and it is a double woodpecker. See,  a lot of the Creek designs and a lot of the Southeastern designs used  birds or animals, and they would be doubled like that. You can see the  25  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  Little Thunder  Wilson  four directions of whirlwind there. This one is like mother-of-pearl. This  is a Muscogee knot, and it has little inset feather-looking shapes inside  there.  This is an example of your finger weaving. Can you tell us a bit about  that?  This is a man   s shoulder sash that I designed. One side, it has chevrons,  the triple chevrons, and the other side is triple diamonds. I wove and  changed from one pattern to the other. That   s one of the things about  finger weaving: you can change your pattern if you want to. With this I  continued on down and wove the fringe and made the tassels, tied the  bottom for the tassels. This is made out of wool. It   s real soft.  Nice colors. Well, thank you so much for your time today, Sandy.  When we were up there, my niece was over there, and this guy came  over,    Oh, that   s pretty.    She said,    Yes     and she stuck it over him and  stuck it on his neck.  Oh my goodness  (Laughter)  She said,    That   ll make a nice scarf for you     I said,    Yes, or you could  wear it like a sash.     Like it   s supposed to be worn.  Yes. (Laughter) They really ought to get me to do the banners for the  Creek Princess, huh?  Yes, they should. (Laughs) Well, thanks a lot for your time today.  You   re welcome. It was fun, made me think.  -------  -------  
