 Simpson  Holloway  Today is August 2, 2011. My name is Lynne Simpson, and I am on the  faculty of the Oklahoma State University Library. I am in Oklahoma  City, Oklahoma, to interview Dr. Ernest L. Holloway as part of the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program   s Spotlighting Oklahoma  oral history project. Our topic today is Boley, Oklahoma. Thank you so  much for having us in your office here at the Oklahoma City campus of  Langston University. Could you tell us when and where you were born?  I was born in Boley, Oklahoma, and I was born on the twelfth day of  September, the year of our Lord, 1930.  Could you tell us a little about your youth and where you grew up?  My youth, from my knowledge of my youth, I remember I grew up in a  rural community north of Boley, Oklahoma. My parents were living on a  farm that once was owned and managed by my father   s parents, but it  was north of Boley in a community they called the Georgia Line. They  called the Georgia Line that because all of the citizens who lived in that  community came from the state of Georgia during the movement from  the Deep South into Oklahoma and, of course, the migration to Boley  and the movement to all-black towns, all-black communities. So I grew  up in this community and my first remembrance, I do remember living  on this farm out there. I guess I was one or two or three, I don   t know. I  just remember I was very fond of my grandparents and particularly, my  grandparents on my mother   s side. That was the area, the ones from  Georgia.  My mother   s maiden name was Green, G-R-E-E-N. I just remember  always wanting to be with my grandmother. I was the oldest child and,  of course, at that time I guess, the only child of my parents. I remember  crying to stay with my grandparents on my mother   s side. And to stay  with them was to just stay with them. I would spend the night with them,  5  and I had to sleep with my grandmother and grandfather. I remember,  physically remember, sleeping in the bed with my grandmother and my  grandfather and crying if they didn   t let me. (Laughs) So these are some  of my early childhood  memories .  And, of course, from there, I still was north of Boley. Incidentally, I  really didn   t physically move into the town of Boley until after I married  and bought a home and we moved in, my wife and I. Up to that time, I  lived in the communities surrounding Boley, the farmers who came to  that community for the purpose of Boley and the state. Of course, Boley  is in the Indian Territory of Oklahoma. That   s significant because  Oklahoma wasn   t a part of No Man   s Land, the unclaimed land. Like in  Oklahoma City and Langston, that was part of Oklahoma Territory. I  said all that to say that Boley, although it is younger, it   s not as old as  Langston, but the territory was there a long time ago, Indian Territory. I  grew up in this little community as a child, one, two, three.  When I got to be about four years old, we moved from that rural home to  another rural home, from the Georgia Line to a little community called  Chilesville. Chilesville is just about three miles north of Boley, kind of  between Boley and the Georgia Line. On this place, my father lived   he  had moved from one farm that was once owned by his parents, and  they   d usually farm, to another farm. My father   s parents were farmers.  And this was in Chilesville. This was when I was  young . I lived there  for about three years.  It is so ironic that when we moved there, when I was about four or five, I  was close to another grandparent. In Chilesville, my father   s parents  lived and operated the community grocery store. My grandfather ran the  grocery store. My grandfather was blind. I never knew him with sight.  He was blind, but he was capable of running his store. I jokingly tell my  family, I say,    My grandfather ran the store when he passed away. All of  us with sight did not have the ability to keep it going.    (Laughs) But,  nevertheless, that   s where I was staying when I reached school age, in  Chilesville near my grandfather. I was on the farm. We were living on  his farm, which is a little way out, a little community.  The community was made up of a store, four or five houses, and a  school. My first school was Chilesville, and that was a Rosenwald  school. Rosenwald in the country at that time was   they created a lot of  schools across America, the Rosenwald Foundation or Rosenwald  whatever, for disadvantaged folks, like black folks in that time.  Chilesville School was considered a Rosenwald school that they helped  to build for that district. That school, in those days, I thought it was  heaven because it was a school. I had four teachers at that school. The  late Reverend Ben Hill was the principal. I mention his name because he  6  passed away, it   s been forty or fifty years ago, but he was a minister as  well as he eventually became a legislator. And when he died, he was  living in Tulsa, I think. I   m not sure. I know he had moved to Tulsa  when he was a legislator.  So he was my first principal, but my first teacher was Zenobia Mintzer  Durley. Mintzer was her maiden name and I remember her. She taught  me in the first grade and the second grade. They didn   t call it what they  call it now. It wasn   t kindergarten and all that kind of stuff, but it was  pre-primmer and primmer. (Laughs) I remember going through the pre-primmer  and then the primmer and then the first grade, all under  Zenobia Mintzer Durley. After that, after I moved from that year, I  moved to the third grade. When I got to the third grade, I moved to my  second teacher. Mrs. Rrencher taught the pre-primmer, the primmer, and  the first grade and the second grade. Mrs. O.B. White taught the third  and fourth grade at Chilesville. Mrs. O.B. White was my second and  third grade teacher at Chilesville.  During that time, in the fourth grade, my father, a farmer, I guess came  up with this big idea. He heard about, I guess, land down in another part  of Oklahoma. And this part of Oklahoma, we called it    The Bottom     because it was on Indian land. Native Americans were very common. I  grew up around Creek Indians. Creek Indians, and they were the Native  Americans that were in that part of Oklahoma, Creek Indians in  Okfuskee County. This community was called   they called it Buckeye,  B-U-C-K-E-Y-E, but the name of the school was Anderson Chapel.  Anderson Chapel was a one-room school. We   ve heard of one-room  schools. You   re looking at someone who attended a one-room school in  America.  I moved there   my parents moved down there. It was a farm, we were  still farming, but it wasn   t the kind of farming that my parents  had  done . They   d always lived on their parents    farms, but this time they  were living on an Indian-owned farm. We didn   t sharecrop, but I don   t  know what they called it then. We leased the property, and we either  paid or shared in our crops. The name of the family, the Indian family  that my father rented the farm from, was Anderson. Their name was  Anderson, and the school was named after that family. It was very  common for African Americans and Native Americans who were in the  same community to end up in the same school. The laws, at that time,  while it was separate but equal laws, Native Americans some kind of  way, they were able to go to school with us out there at Anderson  Chapel. So this was a one-room school with two teachers.  When I first got to Anderson Chapel, there was only one teacher in the  school, and her name was Mrs. Ellis. Mrs. Ellis, she lived in Sand Creek,  7  out from Boley, kind of on a farm. She was a teacher. Most of my  teachers were graduates of Langston University because, then, a lot of  teachers could get teacher   s certificates prior to their baccalaureate  degree. They   d get it some kind of way after going so many years or  something. But, anyway, they had teaching certificates before graduation  from college. So Mrs. Ellis was my one-room teacher.  During that first year   I remember it like it was yesterday. It was in  1937, I think, when we moved down to Anderson Chapel. I was seven  years old, in the third grade. My teacher down there, in the fourth  grade   Mrs. White was my teacher at Chilesville when I left there, but  my first teacher down there was Mrs. Ellis. And this one-room school, it  was kind of an old school when I first got there, but they built a new  school during my first two years there. I spent my fourth grade and my  first year at Anderson Chapel. We had to walk to school. And in walking  to school, I remember our father and parents   I can say this, and I even  said it at my father   s funeral   that while my parents were unable to get a  formal education, they always believed the value in education. They saw  to it that all of their children got an education even though they only got  through the eighth grade. And I   ll talk about that later.  My parents, we were living in The Bottom, on a creek, Buckeye Creek,  that   s the creek, and it would flood. A lot of times when it was time for  us to go to school or we were at school, the school was on the other side  of the creek, so a lot of times we couldn   t get to school because the  creek was up. So my father, I remember this just like it was yesterday,  he cut a tree down on the bank of the creek, cut a tree down and got  some kind of railing wire and put it on both sides of a log so that we  could walk across the creek. (Laughs) It had the railing. It was some  kind of wire. I don   t know what you call it. Anyway, we would walk  across the creek, and that   s how we got to school. The dangers, the water  would be four or five feet running under beneath it, but none of us got  drowned, thank the Lord. (Laughter)  I point that out because I value that commitment to his children and for  education, at that time. Of course, at this school, first year, the one  teacher. The second year I was at Anderson Chapel, when I moved to the  fifth grade, Anderson Chapel, the one-room school had the one-room  still, but they had two teachers. They brought a male teacher, whose  name was Mr. Peters, William Peters. (Laughs) William Peters, his  mother, his parents were pretty prominent in the formation of Boley and  early Boley. His mother was   I   ve forgotten now what she was  Annie  Peters was a home demonstration agent . But, anyway, his mother was  in Boley and his  step- father  M.T. Hunter , and they operated the first  telephone. I remember later on, that they, his parents, were in charge of  the hand ringing telephones in Boley.  8  But anyway, I remember so vividly my fifth grade because I had a male  teacher. My first male teacher was Peters. And we stayed at Anderson  Chapel for about three years. We grew up on this farm down there in  The Bottom (we called it The Bottom) and Okemah built this lake. They  decided to build this lake. It was about six miles north of Okemah. It  was closer to Okemah than we were to Boley, when I was living down at  Anderson Chapel, in The Bottom. We lived there for about three years.  And the first three years, I believe in the fifth, sixth, and when I got to  the seventh grade, we moved to another farm in The Bottom. (Laughs)  This farm was in The Bottom, bottom, and then when I got to the  seventh grade, my parents moved. We called it on top of the hill from  The Bottom, still on the farm. And that was in 1942.  I remember that so well because while we were living there   and we  only lived there less than a year   it was the year that the first tornado  that I had ever heard of came to   it really came to Boley. They   d had  this tornado up around Woodward somewhere, just a few months ahead  of that. But this tornado came north of Boley, on the Georgia Line. I say  the Georgia Line because my grandparents on my mother   s side were  victims of the tornado. It destroyed their home. And they were at home  when the tornado came. I had a first cousin, who was my father   s sister   s  family, was also in the tornado. One of their siblings, one of the little  children, he was about three or four years old, was killed. One of my  first cousins was killed in the tornado. My grandparents were hurt, but  they were not killed.  The interesting thing about why I remember 1942, May 2, 1942, so  well   we were at home when the tornado hit. We were in the country,  but were about six or seven miles from that location, the Georgia Line,  but it was kind of open. We could see the tornado. We had never seen a  tornado before. I had never heard of it before, but we could see it. Of  course, my grandparents, they knew   when the tornado came right  down the Georgia Line, it killed a lot of folks. About seventeen people  up in that area, Chilesville area, and one was my first cousin. They knew  that if they got out of the house, some kind of way they were aware that  if a tornado came, that if you got out of the house and went down in a  ravine somewhere, in a ditch, you increased your chances of being  saved. That   s where my aunties, my mother   s baby sister, and the people  and my grandparents who were at home, they all rushed down in the  ravine. This ravine is kind of a ditch and woods and stuff. They caught  on to the little trees, and they survived the tornado. A lot of people  didn   t survive. People who stayed in their homes were destroyed and  killed.  So that all occurred when I was growing up. This is my childhood I   m  9  bringing up, that I remember. (Laughs) We stayed in this place about six  or seven months. After this tornado, we were living up on a hill. And, of  course, the tornado didn   t come in our part, but it came close enough to  scare everyone. From that point on, every time a cloud came up, people  would be in cellars at that time because that was our refuge in the case of  a tornado, or the thoughts of one. So from that point to the rest of my  childhood days, I was going to the cellar every time a cloud came up.  (Laughs) My mother was dragging us out to a cellar. So we stayed at this  site, I would call it, on the hill from The Bottom. We still were going  that one year to Anderson Chapel, but another route.  We moved a little closer to civilization. We moved about two miles  further west, and we lived in this different school district. This school  district was called IXL. So I started school at IXL during my seventh  grade. My seventh and eighth grade, I went to IXL. At IXL, my teacher  was Mr. Charles Barnes, believe it or not. I graduated IXL in 1944.  Believe it or not, the wife of my principal still lives right here at  Oklahoma City. Her name is Mrs. Barnes. Her daughter was teaching at  Langston. I don   t know if she still teaches. She was a nursing professor  at Langston. Her name wasn   t Barnes, her name was something else.  But, anyway, she lives right over there now. You call her now, she  used to tell everybody,    My husband taught the president of Langston  University when he was in the eighth grade  And he knew that he was  going to be this or that     She already knew what I was going to be while  I was a child, according to the husband.  Anyway, I moved to IXL. We were two miles exactly, two miles east of  IXL. We weren   t far from Anderson Chapel. We were really less than  two miles from Anderson Chapel, but we were in IXL   s school district.  And IXL was straight  from our house . I had to walk two miles to  school during my seventh and eighth grade until I graduated. At that  school, they had about four teachers. It was another Rosenwald school.  IXL is the name of the school. My teachers, the other four teachers, like  Mrs. Barnes, the lady I   m talking about, she was teaching like the  second or third grade or somewhere like that. She taught one of my  sisters. I was ahead of her. I mean, I was a seventh and eighth grader.  That was the highest that public school would go. Her husband was the  principal. So there were three other teachers. I remember going to school  there.  I enjoyed my high school. We played basketball out in Nowata, played  in boots. I see the kids growing up now in the country. We almost did  the same thing. Give us a ball, and that   s all we enjoyed. Three of my  siblings were in grade school while I was in IXL. Well, four of us at IXL  were in school, all but my baby sister. And then at Anderson Chapel,  two sisters in Anderson Chapel and myself were in school down there  10  when I was in the fourth and fifth grade. I would say at IXL, we were a  step up because it was the bigger school. They had four teachers there. I  was in IXL right after the tornado. They built a cellar for the school in  case a tornado came. (Laughs) Students and teachers would have a place  to go, and we had a cellar. I really don   t ever remember going to that  cellar from a tornado while I was in school there, but it was there.  Of course, when I graduated IXL   IXL is about six miles from Boley.  We were in the Boley School District, just a feeder grade school for  Boley High School. Boley High School is made up of about six such  communities. IXL was one. Chilesville was another one. Clayton Chapel  was another one. Rosenwald was another one. Henderson Chapel was  another one. I think of Henderson Chapel because that   s where my  father went to grade school and graduated from. Clayton Chapel is  where my mother went to grade school and graduated from. But they  had no vehicles to get to high school because Boley High School did not  have busses at that time, and they didn   t have any friends to stay with in  Boley. So grade school was the end of their education. Okay, there were  other schools, too, that fed into Boley, but these are the ones that were in  my environment, places like Sand Creek, Rusk, Prairieville, Ville   s  Chapel. All those are feeder schools into Boley. People say they were  from Boley, but when they got to Boley, they went to grade school in  these other communities because their parents were farmers. Okay?  Okay, when I got to Boley High School I was in the ninth grade. I rode  the bus every day. The first year we had to walk two miles to catch the  bus. (Laughs) We caught the bus at the IXL school. We were living on a  dirt road, so when it rained it was just impossible for the busses to get  down there. So I walked two miles to catch the bus to ride six. (Laughs)  Eventually they started picking us up when the weather was good. And  of course, I ultimately graduated from Boley High School, in 1948. I  went to Boley High School from 1944 to 1948. Boley High School was  in an all-black town and was an all-black high school.  I had teachers, as I look back, who really, apparently, had an influence  on my life. My cousins, and people, would say I always would say I was  going to be whoever. Professor Hill was my first principal. He wasn   t  my teacher, he was the principal at Chilesville. I always said I wanted to  be like Professor Hill. (Laughs) When I got to Boley High School, my  favorite teacher was Mr. L.G. Ashley, agriculture teacher. We were all  aggies. (Laughs) He was my ag-teacher, and I think he probably had the  greatest influence of my life as a child, as a youngster. Boley was a  small school, but it was ranked a Class-A school at that time. A was the  largest high school, then. Later, they got 4A, 5A, 6A, whatever A   s.  Boley was a small school, but it taught everything.  11  In high school, my first year in high school, I took general science, I  took English, I took algebra, I took agriculture, I took American History.  All of the basic courses, Boley offered. I was very fortunate in a small  school. My science teacher was Professor Henson, who was also the  principal at that time. The superintendent of school my first year, it was  her first year as superintendent. She was Oklahoma   s first female, black  superintendent. I don   t know whether she was the first superintendent,  but I know she was the first black superintendent of any public schools.  It was Mrs. L.G. Ashley, Velma Dolphin Ashley. Her son later came to  Langston. Well, her husband graduated from Langston, but she went to  Spelman  College . (Laughs) Back then, families who could afford it  would send their kids out of state. And a lot of them would send them as  undergraduates to Spelman, and other places like Fisk  University .  Those were big out-of-state schools for black folks.  But anyway, I took English. I had a good English teacher, Mrs. Braton,  Ella Braton. She later left Boley and went to Tulsa, and she left Tulsa.  At Boley, they taught foreign language. I took German in high school.  Ich spreche Deutsch, nichts  I do not speak German . (Laughter) And I  can   t speak German. But anyway, I took German. We had a German  club, and I was real active in all of it. I had athletic potential, but  because I lived in the country, I had no way of getting home. We had  practice after school, and it was just impossible for me to deal with  sports. So I was a cheerleader. (Laughs) I tell people I was a cheerleader.  Everybody thought because I was tall I was a basketball player. No, I  say I was a cheerleader. I was one of about two guys who were in the  cheerleading pep squad, when I was in high school.  I enjoyed my high school days. I was very active. I learned a lot in  agriculture, NFA. That was the New Farmers of America. That was the  school they trained you in parliamentary procedures, how to conduct  meetings. All of the leadership qualities that you needed to learn in high  school, I developed those at Boley High School. And Mr. L.G. Ashley  was my teacher. Mr. Henson taught me all of my sciences, general  science, biology, physics, chemistry, all of those in high school. Under  Mrs. Peters, I took algebra, I took plane geometry. I think plane  geometry was the highest math I took in high school. Then we had the  German club. We had a lot of leadership clubs. I was in the student  government, student council, whatever you call it at that time.  So I learned a lot while I was in high school. It really prepared me for  college, I felt like. People would often say that students from Boley,  when they got to Langston, they were pretty well prepared because we  had had all the difficult courses that were prerequisites for going to  college. While I was in high school, I took some elective courses, like  Oklahoma History. I never liked Oklahoma History, but I took  12  Oklahoma History in high school. And because I took it, I ended up  having to teach it when I went back to work. We   ll get to that later.  When I graduated high school, I did not graduate valedictorian or  salutatorian. I had smarter girls in my class. (Laughs) I know my  valedictorian was Doris Hill. She still lives in Tulsa. Doris Hill  Williams, she lives in Tulsa, she was the valedictorian of our class. She  still lives. The salutatorian still lives. Her name was Yvonne Lee  Sanders. She lives down in Texas. She was living in Tulsa. Both of them  were living in Tulsa. Her husband was a physician. And then I probably  ranked number four. I think I ranked number four in my class of about  twenty-something. But I did not graduate with honors. Oh, I had a B  average, but I didn   t graduate valedictorian or salutatorian. I was maybe  fourth in my graduating class. I don   t think there was a young man in my  class that had a high grade. Graduating third was   she just died not long  ago. Her name was Jackson. She was a Jackson, but she married a  Houston, in Boley. They had a funeral down here about a year ago,  down here between Spencer and here. It   s not Spencer. It   s a little old  town out on Twenty-third Street. I can   t think of the name of the town,  but anyway, that   s Jackie, Jackie Houston. Jackie Jackson Houston was  the third person, and I was the fourth person. Her brother was the fifth  person in class.  So that gets me through high school. And for the rest of that story, I  went to dear Langston because I didn   t know nothing but Langston.  (Laughs) Ms. Dasher would always take us to Langston to NFA  meetings and all of that. Girls would always go to meetings, go to  Langston for them. Now, I want to say this. While I was at Boley, there  were only two high schools in Okfuskee County, that   s the county that  we grew up in, that blacks could attend at that time, and that was Boley  High School and Clearview High School. Those were the only two high  schools that we could attend. It   s so ironic. While I was in high school,  Clearview was our competition, so to speak. Of course, my neighbor  now was my high school competition in Clearview. (Laughs) And that  was Dr. Wesalyn Simpson, the mother of Ms. Lynne Simpson. (Laughs)  We graduated high school at the same time, in 1948. We came to  Langston as freshman and graduated there at the same time and ended  up back at Langston and ended up neighbors. That   s fate. Anyway, she  was one of the smartest students, graduated valedictorian at Clearview.  Clearview turned out good students. She did not physically live in  Clearview, but she was like I was. I lived out at IXL, but I had to go to  school at Boley. She lived in Weleetka. Weleetka had a high school, but  she could not attend at that time. She could go through the grade school  at that time. That   s when I got to know Dr. Wesalyn Alford  Simpson .  At dear Langston, I had four great years at Langston. I had good  13  teachers, committed teachers, dedicated teachers, and I tell people my  four years at Langston prepared me for the world. I may have not  thought it at that time, not thunk it. (Laughs) But I was prepared to go to  the world, and I   ve been to the world as a result of it and back to Boley.  After I graduated dear Langston, my first permanent job was, ironically,  back at Boley. When I first graduated, my first temporary job was not at  Boley, because I   m talking about    52 now, and most blacks that  graduated couldn   t get a job teaching in the school systems around. You  went to California or went to Tinker Field. Most of us went to Tinker  Field. My first job was at Tinker Field, the military base that   s still here.  My job there didn   t have anything to do with my education. It just had  everything to do with a job. I think I was assigned to a warehouse  somewhere.  Anyway, I graduated in May, and I worked at Tinker Field, my first job,  in June and July. My major at Langston was agriculture, but my minor  was in the sciences. A position came open. Mr. Henson, who was the  science teacher during my high school days there, I think he left Boley  High School and went to training school. I think, yes, superintendent I  think. I   m not sure. But, anyway, he went somewhere. The job was  open, and they offered the job to me, my first job that fall at Boley High  School where I had graduated four years earlier. A lot of the students felt  that I was  one of them . They were just as old as I was.  I was fresh out of Langston, I was twenty-one years old, and I was  teaching high school kids. I felt like I was prepared to teach them, and I  taught them. I taught all the courses that I had had at Boley High School  because the science teacher teaches everything. I taught general science,  I taught biology, I taught chemistry, I taught physics, and I taught  Oklahoma History, which I didn   t like, but I taught it. (Laughs) While I  was in college, I had to take Oklahoma History to get a teaching  certificate. See, I got a teaching certificate in agriculture, but in that  process, I had to take Oklahoma History to qualify for any teaching  ticket at that time. So I had Oklahoma History and that was all that was  required to teach it. So naturally, I was one of the few teachers at Boley  at that time that had Oklahoma History, and I taught it.  I enjoyed my four years at Boley teaching. And, of course, it   s so ironic,  my second year at Boley High School, I knew the person, but I wasn   t  dating the person in college, my wife. So ironically, her first job was at  Clearview. (Laughs) So I knew her at Langston because we were in a  dance club together. They had our Dean of Women organize a dance  club, and I was one of the dancers, and my wife was one of the dancers.  So I knew her through that process. But, anyway, we were not dating.  We ended up, she teaching down at Clearview, and I was teaching at  Boley, and we were both adults, single. So we were in the dating mood,  14  Simpson  Holloway  and I ended up dating her. And in a couple years we ended up married.  She was down at Clearview, and those students there, then, they teased  me. They continue to tease me, I stole their teacher. (Laughs) She taught  first grade and second grade down at Clearview. My wife was a piano  teacher, too. I married her, and that   s when I physically moved to Boley.  That was in 1957. I met Lula May Holloway. Lula May Reed  Holloway, now, Holloway. Of course, she was from Tulsa, a Booker T.  hornet. (Laughs) She   s from Booker T. and they have lot of pride.  It was a home wedding. We got married. My wife was the fourth child  out of a family of five. We got married in Mamma   s house. It was a  home wedding. She was the last one of the siblings to get married. The  youngest sibling had gotten married a month ahead of us in the same  house. My sister, Dr. Julia Hare now, she lives in San Francisco. She got  married Christmas of    56, and I got married in    57. January 19, 1957  was my wedding day. December 26, I think, 1956, just a month apart,  was my wife   s baby sister   s wedding. So Mamma had just kind of fixed  her house up for weddings, and we had our wedding there. I had rented a  home in Boley where I was working, and she was working in Clearview.  Clearview and Boley are about fifteen, twenty miles apart. Not far apart.  So we   d commute. She was living in Clearview before we married. She  was renting, staying with one of her fellow teachers.  So I enjoyed living physically in Boley, the town itself. I lived in two  homes in Boley, two different homes. One of them, the one that I was  living in when I left Boley, it was a rock house. It   s still there, still  standing. Antique, but old, definitely still standing. But my four years at  Boley High School really gave me a great opportunity to give back, to  mentor, to encourage, inspire young students, particularly young African  American men, who probably otherwise wouldn   t have gone anywhere,  just like I wouldn   t have gone anywhere.  I was influenced by the fraternity during my high school days, and I  didn   t a bit know more what it was than the man on the moon. My  fraternity had given me a project when I was an ag major. They gave me  two little pigs for my home projects. I just thought somebody had given  me some pigs. I was raising them, because Mr. Stash was my ag teacher  and he was also in the fraternity, I was one of the students that got a  project.  What fraternity are you referring to?  Alpha Phi Alpha, the first fraternity of color in America, founded in  Cornell University. Founded in Langston, Oklahoma, the college  chapter, Beta Kappa, which I   m a member. So I said all that to say that a  lot of time we assume that kids know a lot of stuff in high school, but  15  they don   t. They   re exposed to a lot of stuff, but I guess it does not   I  don   t know how to define it. But, anyway, I knew what I had. I had a  project. And I knew who gave them to me, but I didn   t know what they  were until I got to college. Then way after I got to college, we got to  talking about them, almost when I got to grad school.  When I  came  back to Boley to work is when they told me that Boley Alpha Chapter is  the one that bought them little pigs, paid for them.  But, anyway, I had an opportunity to influence young men to go to  college, get an education, to do good. And in college I tell people, when  you   re working in a small high school, anywhere that   s particularly  small, you do a lot of things. When I was in Boley, I was not only the  science teacher. I ultimately ended up being the principal of Boley High  School. Before that, I was a bus driver, I was a janitor, I was a baseball  coach, I was assistant basketball coach, all of the above, while I was   working  in the high school. (Laughs)  My first year at Boley High School, the position that was open was a  half-time position. So I taught half-time at Boley High School, which I  taught full-time, but I got paid half-time. And that was like four hundred  dollars a month. That was my pay, four hundred dollars a month from  Boley High School. I had a good friend who was superintendent of  schools at the   it wasn   t a prison then, it was a training school for black  boys, negro boys. That   s what the Boley Training School was. So I got a  job there. Mr. Chandler, Wayne Chandler, he gave me a job there, half-time.  And I worked at a lot of different places. I worked at a shoe shop.  Just a job is all I was looking for, just to get paid. I got paid maybe four  or five hundred dollars. Eight hundred dollars was a whole lot of money  then, a month.  So I stayed at Boley and taught at Boley from 1953. That   s when I was  hired at Boley High School   yes, 1952. I graduated    52. Yes, it was    52.  From 1952 to 1962, I taught school at Boley High School and lived in  the town of Boley. In 1962 I was a science teacher, so I got a lot of  opportunities. Then, it was Sputnik, 1957. Everything was focused on  trying to rush to the moon. I was in the sciences, so the National Science  Foundation was created, and through the National Science Foundation,  their job was to see to it that America and American youth got prepared  in the sciences. So those of us that were teaching in the sciences had  opportunities to apply for fellowships in the sciences.  My first fellowship I applied for while I was at Boley High School. I  went to school at OSU. I got my degree at OSU. Even though I was  working, I never stopped going to school while I was at Boley High  School. I taught, and I went to school in the evenings and on Saturdays.  Then, that summer, I went to summer school. I got my master   s degree  16  pretty quickly by the standards then. I graduated Langston in    52, and I  got my master   s from OSU in    55 by going on Saturdays and in the  summer. So my first fellowship in the sciences was at OSU. I went to  summer school there. Dr. Richardson was over the education, science  education. Science education is what my degree was in at OSU. He had  an institute, and I applied, and I was accepted. I already had my degree,  my master   s degree. So I went one year there, in    57   I mean, one  summer in the institute.  The next summer I applied, and that was in    58. And I applied to  Emporia, Kansas, Kansas State Teacher   s College in Emporia. At  Emporia, I was on the science fellowship, and I never will forget that  summer. I was married then, so I was in married housing,  student/faculty, student housing. But the tornadoes, I call that tornado  alley  It   s in Emporia, Kansas, and in the Flint Hills of Kansas. Flint,  that   s a mineral. That   s a rock. Honestly, it was like every night we were  running to shelter. (Laughs) But, anyway, I completed it. My wife  finally came, too. She was there with me part of that. I went one year at  Emporia State, in the sciences, all of the sciences in this institute, in    58.  In    59, I went to summer school every summer because that was just like  a job. They were paying   I got paid better on the fellowship than I did  teaching, then. In    59 I got another fellowship. At this time, I went to  school at East Central State in Ada. I   d forgotten I spent a summer there.  I   ve forgotten exactly what year. It was a part of the sciences fellowship.  I could back up a little bit because I got married in    57, and in    57 would  you believe the Army drafted me? (Laughs) So I had to go to the  military. So instead of being drafted to the military in    57, I joined the  Reserve, and I was a lifetime Reservist. I had to do six months. See, they  had what they call six months of active duty, and then you didn   t have to   go into the Army . So I did my six months in    57.  I was teaching at Boley and in August of    57, I had to go for my six-month  training. I spent my basic training at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas. It   s  no longer there. It was just outside of Fort Smith. I spent eight weeks at  basic training. Then the next four months, or whatever period of time to  make up the six months, they were kind to me, they sent me to Fort Sill.  I did that at Fort Sill, so I was still close. But I had to stay down close to  Ft. Sill. I had to stay on that base. So I spent that six months in Fort  Chaffee and in Fort Sill. After I graduated from the six months active  duty, I was relegated to the Reserve for life. (Laughs) Almost for life  because I really didn   t get discharged from the Reserve until I was  teaching at Langston. I had been teaching at Langston a long time. I had  to go to training every summer. It was just like a job, two weeks  training, but they paid me. I considered it a job. I went to different sites.  I went all over, wherever a military base was.  17  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  But, anyway, back to school. I   m still at Boley. In 1960, I got a  fellowship, a science fellowship, at the University of California at  Berkeley. That   s where I ran into all of my Nobel Prize winning  professors. All my teachers at Berkeley were Nobel Prize winners, and I  studied under them, in the summer, in the sciences. I took all of the  sciences. In    61, I reapplied and back at Berkeley. Thank the Lord, I  completed it, got through the science institute. So I went to Berkeley two  different summers. I enjoyed going to school at Berkeley. There was a  lot of stuff going on at Berkeley. It was one of the    liberal American  universities.    They tried to outdo the schools out east. I gained a lot of  knowledge in the sciences.  Then I decided my last year at Boley High School to apply for   the  Science Foundation was having a year of science fellowship. I applied at  Ohio State. I had a good friend, Dr.  Henry  Ponder. He got his PhD at  Ohio State. He had gotten his master   s at Oklahoma State. He   s a  Langston grad. He was ahead of me, but he was at Ohio State, so I knew  somebody at Ohio State. I was married, and we had one child at that  time, but I went to Ohio State. This was    61 when I applied. It was    62  when I was granted a leave from Boley to go to Ohio State to school on  a fellowship,    62,    63. While I was at Ohio State, my fraternity had its  national convention in Ohio, in Columbus, during the Christmas  holidays, and I ran into the president of Langston University. He was  also president of my fraternity. He knew that I had been a principal at  Boley High School and, of course, I was there in grad school. I was not  aspiring to be a science teacher. I was just getting prepared.  In August of 1962, I started school at The Ohio State University. The  Buckeyes. I moved from being a bear to a buckeye, Boley Bear.  (Laughs) But, anyway, there I was in the science institute, Doctor   I  can   t think of the name of my professor over in the college   it was in  the College of Education, even though it was a science institute, but it  was in the College of Education at Ohio State. Of course, I took all of  the sciences, the biological, the chemistry, the physical, the biological  and the physical. So I was prepared in all the ways. I even took, at Ohio  State, I took an elective in photography. (Laughs) Back then, they didn   t  have the high tech that we got now. Let   s see, what was just coming out?  That you develop it right after you take it. What did they call it?  An instamatic?  No, it was before instamatic.  Oh, okay.  18  Holloway  Finchum  Holloway  You take the film   you buy the camera. You take pictures, and it was  developed at the time you take it. I can   t think of the name of it.  (Laughs)  Maybe a Polaroid?  Polaroid  That   s it, Polaroid, Polaroid cameras. Polaroid was just  coming out in    62. My mother-in-law, she had already bought a  Polaroid. As her grandkids was coming, she would just Polaroid them.  But, anyway, I messed up a whole lot of those. Took pictures and used a  whole lot of them. I had to go into the lab and develop and all that kind  of stuff. But, anyway, I enjoyed my year. I just had one year. So while I  was there and during that Christmas, the president of Langston came and  invited me and my wife to Langston the next year, which would be    63.  So to Boley   s dismay, they didn   t want to see me leave, but I decided to  move on. And he said,    Well, you   ve been a principal.     I was first hired at Langston as the assistant registrar because Mr.  Batchelder, who had been the registrar there for twenty or thirty years,  was retiring. Then you had to retire at sixty-five. See, that changed when  I got to retire. The others, after that, after Reagan became President of  the United States, they changed the laws of age. Age alone became a  factor in that. So I came to Langston. My wife taught piano over in the  music department the first year. I was assistant registrar my first year at  Langston, and then the rest is history.  I would say my experiences at Boley, literally, prepared me. I was made  with it. It prepared me for dear Langston, and Langston prepared me for  Boley. I would say that now that I have had the opportunity to attend  school and work in both places   and it   s just so ironic that both of them  are historically black towns. I felt like after I reach retirement, my career  was spent in the latter. I thought the least I could do with the town, if  they needed me to give back during my retirement years, was to do  whatever I could to be effective. I didn   t wish to take on another job. I  felt like I   d already worked my jobs out. (Laughs)  The board gave me my title, President Emeritus. This is something they  hadn   t done before. Unfortunately, all with the exception of one of  Langston   s previous presidents had never had an opportunity to retire.  They were all fired. I was the second Langston president to retire. The  first one to retire was during my college years, Dr. G. Lamar Harrison.  He retired from Langston University after twenty years. I retired out of  Langston University after twenty-six years. The board said they were  going to give me my extra year   twenty-six years as president, but forty  years as an employee because I had been up the ladder. A lot of students  would come in and tell me,    Dr. Holloway, we want to be president just  19  Simpson  Holloway  like you.    I said,    Okay. You   re going to do all I   ve done. I just didn   t  walk into this office. Go to the Student Union, I washed dishes in the  kitchen. Go over there  That   s how you get to be president. (Laughs) Go  out on the campus yard. I used to work for the person in charge of the  yard, keeping the yard, picking up the paper. I used to go out and farm.  So those are the things that you do.    I say,    There is no cut pattern.     I had kind of spent a couple years after I retired in Oklahoma City, kind  of, downtown in a condo, in an apartment. I enjoy down there, but it still  was not Papa   s house.  Tell us about the positions you had between assistant registrar and  being president of Langston University.  Oh, assistant registrar and president. (Laughs) Well, I became the  registrar in 1964. I was registrar until Dr. Hale, the president, selected  me. In 1965 Congress passed the    65 Higher Education Act, which  included in it fellowships and scholarships for teachers in historically  black institutions. They could get fellowships to get their degrees,  terminal degrees. I was one of the first five that was selected. James  Simpson, myself, Mrs.  Almeda  Parker, Mrs. Zella Patterson, and Dr.  Flasch, we were the five that were selected in 1965. We could go to  school full-time, we   re still a part of Langston, but were given release  time to go to school. I elected to go to OU. The other four went to OSU.  So there I went to school that first year, we didn   t have to teach. During  that first year, we were able to put in our residency requirement. So I  was able to put in my residency requirement that first year, and I just  continued the next two or three years to complete my degree  requirements. I completed my degree requirements in    66, and I got my  degree in    67. That is right, yes. But, anyway, Dr. Hale, after I got my  degree or completed the requirement to get my degree, unfortunately, in  November of 1966, my vice president, Mr. Breaux, he was killed on his  tractor right down from the school. My youngest son was being born  over at the hospital in Norman. He was in the hospital there in Guthrie.  And that opened up the position for Dean of Students. He was the Dean  of Students. So Dr. Hale asked me to be Dean of Students.  In    67 he appointed me as Dean of Students, I had gotten my degree.  I got my degree in    67 and became Dean of Students in    67. Dr. Hale  was president up until    69. It was    69 that Dr. Simms became acting  president because they terminated Dr. Hale and put in Dr. Simms. That  was in September of    69.  I was there when Dr. Hale was fired. I was on a recruiting trip when Dr.  Simms was fired. He was fired, so Dr. Simms was terminated in    74     20  yes, in    74 he was terminated in September. That   s when I was  recruiting. He had asked me during his tenure to continue to serve as  Vice President for Dean of Student of Affairs. When they terminated Dr.  Simms, they asked Dr. Mosley to be president. So Dr. Mosley finished  out that year as president, and then that summer they hired Dr. English.  Dr. English, when he came on, he asked me and the rest of us to stay in  our positions. We were willing to give up our administrative positions if  he wanted to bring in somebody, but he wanted to keep us. And then, in  addition, he wanted me to take on a position as his Administrative  Dean/Dean of Students. (Laughs) And, of course, I was young, active, so  I did it. He was hired in    75, because Dr. Mosley served from    74 to   75.  And Dr. English started in July of    75 until July of    77. (Laughs) Just  two years. That   s all. I had been his Administrative Dean through what  I   d done, between that point to that point. My wife had died the year  before.  In    77, I had decided to take my kids to a fraternity meeting with me to  Atlanta. So I was away, we were traveling, driving the car. We didn   t  have cell phones like we   ve got now. I was with my kids, and we were  driving through Mississippi to see our friends, the Thigpens. My wife  had worked with the Thigpens out in Langston Laboratory School. And  while I was away, to make a long story short, they terminated Dr.  English  (Laughs) My mother-in-law knew when I was coming back,  because my wife had passed away. She knew when I was coming back. I  had my three boys. She called me and said,    What is this I   m reading in  the paper, you   re acting president?    I said,    What are you talking  about?     I really didn   t know. (Laughs) They just got rid of him and put  the duties of the president in my office because they couldn   t contact  me. They didn   t know where I was. And for one year, I served as  acting   or interim president, I think, is what it was, interim president  from when I got back in July to when they hired Tucker. (Laughs) I   m  just going through the litany of presidents. All of my career was tied up  with Langston and Boley.  Of course, when I found out about what they had done, I told them, I  said,    Don   t consider me as president because I   ve got to rear my kids.  So I will keep it together until you find somebody.    And that   s what I  did. I was interim president until they found Tucker. They went on this  national hunt. They got a whole lot of folks, and they ended up with  Tucker. Tucker came in   it   s interesting, his kids were very good  friends with my kids. They all went to school together. See, when I was  interim president, I didn   t move in the president   s home. I stayed out  there in my personal home. So I was interacting, but I was not with the  office. But, anyway, when Dr. Tucker became the president   he wanted  to and all of us accepted   we would just go back to the classroom. He  21  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  could bring in his top administrators, and he did.  So I went back to the classroom when Tucker became the president. I  finished out the year as whatever I was, but I assisted him in that area, in  Student Affairs. But the next year I went back to the classroom. I went  to the College of Education. That was    78. And in    78 I was in the  classroom. I never shall forget. By that time, because I was going to the  classroom when I was on the Langston Campus, my oldest son, when  they made me interim president, see, that was the year my oldest son  graduated Coyle,    77. I didn   t let him come to Langston because I was  acting president. I sent him to a junior college up here at Ponca City.  They   re working with OSU now. They   ve got a campus on OSU   s  campus because whatyamacallit started. It   s not     NOC? Is it NOC that   s there now? Northern Oklahoma College?  Yes, Northern, Northern  That   s right. That   s the school where Ernest  Jr., Ernest, he went to Northern Oklahoma, but it was in Tonkawa. It  was in Tonkawa. It wasn   t in wherever they are now. It was in Tonkawa.  Well, they   re in Tonkawa still, but they   re also doing something in  Ponca City, I think, and Stillwater. (Laughs) Yes, but anyway, Ernest Jr.  didn   t come to Langston his first year, he went there because I didn   t  want a student in the university while I was president. So    78 rolled  around, I thought I was going to be still in the classroom. That   s when  they ended up putting me back as  acting president . See, they start out  with Tucker. Tucker didn   t last a year. He came there in March, and in  December, they had terminated him. I told them that I had planned to  take my kids to California, and I was going to take them. If they were  going to make me president, fine, but I was going, and I did.  I went on to California, my sons and I. That   s where their kinfolks were.  They had suffered a lot of loss, and they had aunties on both sides. I had  sisters out in California, and their mother had all of her sisters in  California. So we spent the Christmas in California, the Christmas of     78. Then, of course, they made me acting. I had kind of gotten settled in  and gotten my kids pretty adapted. I was a parent and an administrator. I  had three sons to rear. They were all small. When my wife passed away,  my youngest son was like seven or six. My oldest son was like twelve or  thirteen, something like that. So here I go again, and I was interim  president   acting president this time. So I was the interim president one  time and acting president another time. (Laughs) Then on October 10,  1979, I was made the fourteenth president of dear Langston. That   s my  life story.  Well, we   ll segue back to Boley for a little bit. What was your  neighborhood like where you raised your family in Boley, those ten  22  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  years?  It   s kind of interesting. My neighbor at that time was the Fishers. It was  Marvin Fisher   s family. He was a kid, he was my little neighbor. I was  going to say I lived in a country town. I lived in a nice little  neighborhood, the Spans were   you may have heard of the Spans. I  think they   re related to you in some kind of way. (Laughs) We   re all  kinfolks in Boley and in Okfuskee County. But, anyway, the Spans, they  taught school with my wife a couple places at Clearview. And I lived  right across the street from the church. I was an adult, and so it was nice.  It was just as nice as  when I was a kid . Boley was a good place to rear  kids, I think. They would have night watches, watching us going  downtown. Saturday night, we   d like to slip off downtown and go to the  clubs and hang out   to dance, that   s all. We just had a good time. The  teachers, a lot of them would sit on the street in their cars and watch and  see who is passing down the street and tell the parents. (Laughs)  Where were your neighbors from, and what did they do for a living?  Well, they were just from Boley, really, most of them. Their families  came into Boley during the early days of development of Boley. Some  of them lived out in the rural communities, and when they got grown  they moved into the city, kind of like I had. I would, for the most part, I  could walk to school. The Harrises, the little lady   she   s an Anderson  now, but Mr. Anderson married her mother, who grew up in Boley.  She   s down here in one of the programs here at Langston. So Mark  Fisher and Nettie Joe Fisher, I taught them in Boley High School, oh  yes. They were my neighbors. Of course, Nettie Joe   s mother worked at  the training school, and that   s where I knew her.  How would you describe Boley today, and how has it changed over the  years?  I think Boley today has naturally kind of followed the suit of America. It  has changed because people have changed. Laws have changed, cultures  have changed, but I still see just a small glint of that,    I can do it.    We  grew up thinking we could be all that we could be. We were told we  could be. We   re not growing up in that timeline now, but Boley has still  captured enough of the old guard, at least DNA of the old guard. It   s still  around, that when they want to fall, falter, there   s someone kind of like  me, picking them up. Just like when we farmed this community as a  group. The leaders of the town, literally, grew up around the town. They  didn   t necessarily grow up in the town, but they were determined. They  had that can-do,    We can make it.     The theory that is told behind the founding of Boley, see, Boley himself,  23  Simpson  Holloway  Finchum  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  the name Boley is a white man. He   s a white American. He was in  charge of the railroads that were running from Guthrie to Fort Smith,  Arkansas. The train ran from there through Langston, all the way to  Boley, all the way through small towns, all the way to Arkansas. It was  there that this bet was made that black folks can govern themselves. It  was through Boley himself saying that   I think he was on the side of it,     Yes, they can, if given the opportunity.    That   s how the community  was born. He, Boley himself, was the owner, I was told, of the train.  Who makes up the Boley community now compared to when you lived  there?  Boley, now, is made up of individuals that, for the most part, are third  and fourth generation Boleyites. The environment has changed. This was  this can-do spirit. One of the Boleyites decided that he could put up a  business. I   ve forgotten what they call it. They   re not senior citizen  homes, but they   re homes where the state     Group homes?  Yes, group homes. That   s what they were, thank you. Group homes. He  opened up group homes. He went and bought a lot of the homes that  people had moved from, and he put them together to meet the minimum  requirement. It   s a business. He   s the only employer in Boley  (Laughs)  We   ve got about eight or nine or ten group homes. One person, Spears.  His grandfather   s name was Boley Spears. He was named Boley Spears,  S-P-E-A-R-S. His father, this boy   s father and I went to school together  at Boley High School. His name Kite Segal we called him Kitus, Kite,  Kite Spears. His step-mother, she   s at Boley now. Her name is Jovella.  She still lives. But he has the biggest house in Boley. Beautiful   (Laughs) Beautiful  And he bought one for his son. So he and his  children run those. After he got the group houses, he came up with  another thing. He went out at Sand Creek and built some kind of group  home where they bring patients in for treatment.  For like, rehabilitation?  Yes, rehabilitation something. He owns that. They say he owns Boley, in  a sense. He has invested in Boley. And then you have a lot of former  Boleyites like my cousin, Henrietta, who had moved and retired. They  had gone to California and made a living in California. They had retired,  and they decided to retire back in Boley. They came back to Boley to  retire. You have quite a few of those kinds of people that now live in  Boley. One thing, because it   s cheaper, in a sense, and it   s keeping the  tradition, and for other reasons. So that   s who makes up Boley now.  24  Simpson  Holloway  The fact that Boley does not have a school now   and I went there to try  to save the school, but unfortunately, we had some miscommunications  and mishaps, and we don   t have a school there now. So they have to  overcome that. We   re working on that. That   s what this group is. I meet  once a month here, a little small group of us. We meet with politicians  and people trying to get a replacement of a business there. The school  annex, it   s up to Okemah, but Okemah, a lot of the parents will not send  their kids to Okemah. They chose to send their kids to closer schools  like Paden and Prague, which is a little further. People have their own  reasons for where they want their kids to go. So it   s facing some of these  challenges, but some of us Boleyites are not going to let them fail. So  that   s how we come in. I tell people my biggest contribution to Boley is  to keep Boley from destroying itself. Nobody else is going to destroy it.  The only way to destroy it is to destroy itself.  Who were some of the town leaders, and how has the leadership  changed over the years?  Over the years   oh, it has changed tremendously. Over the years it truly  was self-governed because in all of the positions were Boleyites and  people who believed they could run the town. It was insulting if you talk  about   you know,    We can do this.    They were everything. And they  did. Today, that has changed. When you look at it realistically, I guess  they   re doing about as well as you can expect them to do today. But  they   re doing it without the same kind of commitment because they  don   t have the same orientation. My cousin, who is the mayor, she is  doing the best she can, doing good, about the best she can. She doesn   t  have children. She doesn   t have a husband. They got a divorce and all  those kinds of issues. She   s lucky to be able to do anything. She   s a  Langston grad. She   s got an education, that   s one thing she has. She   s  my first cousin. Her parents were able to send the two of them to school,  their parents. Her mother, herself, finished high school.  Some of the families that traditionally have kind of helped on the  education side, the Ashleys, and the Lees, the Sanders, on the medical  side, the Hensons, the Owens, the Stevens. There   s a whole lot of  families. There   s a whole lot of them that help to keep the town together.  The McCormicks, got to talk about the McCormicks because they  played a major role. Different sets, there   s so many of them, and there   s  so many different sets. Some of them, the banking and this and that. But,  Boley, when you look at it from just an objective standpoint, it   s a  miracle that it   s still survived because a lot of small towns have gone  under. I ain   t talking just about black small towns. I   m talking about  small towns, period.  So when you look at it from a realistic frame of view, it   s a miracle. I  25  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  understand that somebody has got to keep you going. And I   ve found,  like Boley, like most small towns, there are a lot of personal issues. A lot  of stuff that ain   t got nothing to do with nothing gets in the way of  progress. I see my job as to not let that stop you. Don   t let it get in your  way. And I have been fortunate enough to have enough influence  because most of them I have either taught their parents or I   ve taught  them. I had a reasonable record of getting things done at Langston. I  don   t have no trouble in saying what I say and getting away with it.  (Laughter) I knock on wood, there. So usually, we don   t take too much  stuff from nobody.  What did people do for a living compared to what they do now?  Then, they had various jobs. They had every kind of job there was. They  had every job in Boley. And then they worked away from Boley, and  they had all educators. Boley has always had an environment that  supported education. Then you had the state school for boys. That   s  working up there with all kinds of jobs. Most people who worked there  were blacks. Now, all people work there. And people who work are not  necessarily Boley connected. They just come in, get their job, and go  home. Some of them have never been down to the town of Boley. So  you   ve got kind of a different culture there, but they   re still making it.  What were the major organizations in town, and how did they contribute  to the community?  Well, now you have the Chamber of Commerce. Boley Chamber of  Commerce was very, very active at one time. Tim McCormick still  existed then, in 1960, during the time that I was there. We started the  rodeo then, even though it had once been a rodeo. The Boley Chamber  of Commerce, there   s a women group there that   s pretty active. I can   t  think of the name of the group, but   the Ladies Club or something.  The Ladies Industrial Club.  Ladies Industrial Club, and then there   s another group. There   s two  groups there that are both women groups, but they   re not the same. I  ain   t talking about sorority sisters, now. But they have played a  tremendous role, and then the churches have played a tremendous role.  Religion has always played a role in the lives of anything that has been  predominantly black in America. For some kind of way, we have always  depended on the Lord. (Laughter)  Would you mentally walk us through the town and tell us what the major  landmarks were, as far as buildings and things like that?  26  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Finchum  Holloway  Simpson  You said can I?  Would you?  Oh, yes  Oh, yes  Yes  Oh, would I? Oh, yes, sure   Thank you. (Laughs)  I can tell you what it used to be. It may not be there now. If I can   t,  Henrietta can because she knows it, she   s it now. Now, Henrietta can do  this and will do it. That   s her role in Boley now. She   s kind of the  historian and the person who receives all of the groups and takes them  around and shows them. And I   ll join you all, so I can re-learn. They   re  trying to save that old   one landmark is that old stand pipe.  The water tower?  It used to be the water source after the reservoir   not reservoir, but  stand pipe. But now, they   re trying to preserve it. They   re putting it on a  historical  register , and they   re trying to get the money to restore it, but  they haven   t succeeded. Now, money is tight everywhere. I told them  they should have done that back in the    60s, when America was  celebrating its bicentennial. That   s when America was giving resources  to preserve historical things. Now, there   s only one town in America that  I know that took full advantage of that, and that was Guthrie. They took  advantage, the only town in America that took advantage, total  advantage, of that bicentennial and resources, government. They redid  their whole downtown and preserved all that old stuff. Everything down  in Guthrie is old, but it   s usable because they preserved it.  I was at Langston during that time. I worked with a lot of them, and it  wasn   t an easy fight because a lot of people didn   t believe in that.    Let it  go, tear it up     When I first went to Langston to work under Dr. Hale, he  couldn   t get resources, money to preserve. Like, we could have  preserved Old Page Hall. All the alumni wanted us to. But the money he  got, it had to be torn down, had to be new. All the money that was  available then was money to build something new. That was just prior to  the bicentennial, and Guthrie was able to capture on that timeline. They  had the right players in place. They had people politically and people  even in the town when a lot of the old guard didn   t want to do that. They  wanted to get rid of it. Believe it or not, a lot of them wanted to get rid  of it. They were just,    You don   t need to be spending money on stuff  that is old,    but then all of the sudden it got very fashionable.  Do you have a particular building that you really remember?  27  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Yes, well, the Masonic Building, people claimed that people burned it  down, but I don   t know. I have no proof of that. But, anyway, that   s one  building that was known, very prominent. Boley Grade School was a  two-story building, it was known by everybody. All these buildings just  arbitrarily, capriciously burned during the time that I was working there.  So the talk downtown and up and down the street is one thing and the  reality was another one. So it   s the same town, but yet it   s a different  town because there   s different kinds of people. So much of the town,  even though they   ve preserved it, they have been able to hold on. But  there   s still more preservation going to have to be to keep the physical  structure. We are talking about coming up with some resources that we  can still preserve, but we may have to start looking at some private  people with money that believe in that. Right now, the buildings are  almost too unsafe to be allowing people to use. That   s what I remind the  mayor of the town and the town leaders, is like, we have the rodeo and  people from all over America come to Boley. Boley, which is a town of  four or five hundred folks, all of a sudden becomes a town of five or six  thousand folks.  Young kids, you think any of them young black kids, and they   re all  here. All up and down the street  I said,    Where are these kids coming  from?    But they come. And they   re allowed to use some of those things  that could fall in anytime. I told them,    You don   t want to wait until the  tragedy happens. Let   s just do something about it.    So that   s what we   re  looking at now, so it   s used. We are now requiring anybody who uses it  to have someone to come in and check it out to be sure that it can  withstand this kind of use.  The rodeo now has still sustained Boley   s spirit. It   s the one thing that     and they   re getting a few little infrastructure projects, like walking trails,  fitness places, and things that people can do. They   ve renovated the  rodeo grounds and got some playground equipment there. So it   s livable,  but we are looking at some other things. Like, we   re trying to see if we  can   t get   you   d be surprised how a lot of people who own property in  Boley don   t want to sell it nor use it. (Laughs) Oh, someday, all of a  sudden it   s going to be this or that. Got a lot of people who live in  California. That   s where the city government is coming up with some  rules and regulations. If you   re going to keep it, you   ve got to keep it at  a certain level. That   s going to force them to either do something with it,  or use it or lose it. (Laughs) I   m kind of trying to push that on Langston,  too, philosophy, the town.  What community traditions are celebrated today, and how are they  important?  I think the tradition that   s celebrated today, well, nationally, the rodeo is  28  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  one. That   s a community tradition. And it   s still going on and is just very  committed. Then, homecoming, they still try to sell   even though the  school is gone, there are still elements, want to have some of  homecoming. They had a little homecoming, I didn   t get down there this  year, but they had a little homecoming something this year. Alumni just  play each other, but got to have some homecoming. So it   s two or three  things like that. I don   t know all of them, but some of them, two or three  things I see like that.  Describe the interactions with the neighboring towns there, in Okfuskee  County.  I don   t have a good handle on a lot of the current interactions.  It doesn   t have to be current.  I don   t really know too much about the current. You just always had a  very interesting interaction. Boley, sometimes, it depends on who in  those towns that you   re dealing with, on both sides. But for some reason,  at the end of the day, they all find a way to kind of coexist in the county.  That   s the best answer I can give. (Laughs)  Tell us about the role of the boy   s home and, later, the correctional  facility.  I was one farm Boley citizen who didn   t favor the correction center. I  thought the correction center was a mistake. And I told the governor  then, who was pushing it. That was Governor George Nigh, and George  Nigh even was convinced at first. He went out and convinced a lot of  African American people that he was going to do this or that, but it  hadn   t turned out that way. Yes, you can do this, but it   s going to require  you to have this, and Boley doesn   t have the haves. For example, you  can use the prison to help your town, but you   ve got to have somebody  to oversee them and to pick them up, that   s responsible. Boley itself  doesn   t have that kind of person now. So that   s being a negative now.  I think that if some kind of way we can find some kind of resolve   we  are looking at history within the last twenty years ago or thirty years  ago, maybe forty years ago, that the county road that passes by the  prison, the bridge, it crosses the North Canadian River, which is just to  the south of Boley and the Boley prison. That road goes all the way to  Highway 40, but because the river floods and washes the bridge out, you  can   t get across the bridge. They never did replace the bridge, in forty  years. So we   re, forty years later, trying to get that bridge rebuilt and  connect Boley to Interstate 40. The prison, you have to go to Prague,  you   ve got to go to Okemah, you   ve got to go to Castle to get to Boley  29  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  from any place on Interstate 40. There is no direct connection from  Interstate 40 to Boley. And we are saying that   s a negative, and  particularly, with a state school or correction center there.  So we   re using that, politically, to try to get the state to fix that road,  rebuild the bridge, and then connect the prison to Interstate 40. That   s  where all the traffic is. See, Boley now only gets to old 62. See, old 62  Highway, traffic is not like it used to be, 62 used to be, because there   s  40. And most people ride 40, and I don   t blame them, I do too. (Laughs)  Because you can drive faster, but Boley is connected to 62. It   s on 62.  That   s a negative now. All of those towns in there, it   s a negative. But at  least Highway 40 is connected to all of the towns. Prague, it   s connected  to Prague. Well, it   s 177 connects you from I-40 to Prague and Meeker,  and all of those towns but Paden and Boley, even Castle, Highway 48  connects 40 to Castle, which is a little old town there, and then to Boley,  six miles. All keep straight to Bristow and on to Tulsa.  What do you see as the impact of segregation or integration on the town  of Boley?  I think the impact may be difficult to connect. However, the problem     people have access to utilizing facilities anywhere, which is a plus, but  they lost that access of ownership to have your own grocery store, to  have your own    Boley had its own everything. It was self-contained.  That was lost in the process. The need was not as tremendous as it once  was, and you have a whole new generation of people that just didn   t see  the value of that as much as they once did. That   s the only thing I   ll say.  There is no law that requires it.  What was taught about Boley   s history when you were in high school?  I   m not too sure if anything was taught. It was just experience. It was  taught through people, expectations. Teachers expected you to know this  and know that and do this and do that. It   s expectations as opposed to  teaching. If I expect you to be somebody and go to college, you   re going  to go to college, and I   ll be following you up in that process.    Why  aren   t you going to college tomorrow? Come on  Do you need me to  take you out there?    That   s the kind of history that was taught. I don   t  think we necessarily went in the book and said this is history 101, Boley  was this and that. Now, we learned some of that, but it was just not  taught all together. I would say the part that   s really, I think, long-lasting  and is necessary was not formally taught, but informally practiced.  What world events had the most impact while you were growing up, and  how did they affect your family and the community?  30  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  Holloway  Events?  Like World Wars or assassinations, things like that.  Oh, yes. I would say, during that time, World War II probably had the  greatest impact on the town of Boley because all of its young men of age  went to the war, World War II. That   s the war. Now, of course, you   ve  got the Korean War and the Vietnam War that came along right after  that, but the one that I think that had the greatest impact was World War  II. In many ways it had a positive and a negative impact. The positive  impact was they had programs, veteran   s programs, they formed veteran  groups. They had teachers that had veteran programs. I had a lot of  people that were not my age group that were in classes with me because  of the veterans. They had been a veteran. They were veterans. They were  older, but they were given an opportunity to go to school. And that was  always a positive, there at Boley, as well as at Langston, at the  university.  What is it about Boley that keeps the connection alive for its citizens?  I guess it   s the DNA. (Laughs) I don   t know what it is, but I think it   s  individuals still holding on to believing that we cannot fail. I think it   s  that determination. That   s why we have to work harder now. Because  when you lose part of who you are and that   s the school   schools are  such a part of the community. I don   t care what community it is, good,  bad or indifferent schools. It   s a central part of a community. The loss of  that has adversely affected it. They have to work harder.  If Boley gets a charter school, how do you think it   s going to impact the  town?  Oh, I think if Boley gets a charter school or some kind of school, I think,  in a very positive way because it would attract more people there. People  are attracted to where there is a school. One of the things that we are  looking at right now is getting us a charter school or some kind of school  there, and then getting these homes either up for sale or we can get a  developer to come in and build some homes. There are people, believe it  or not, that would move their family there. Commuting to Oklahoma  City is not a big deal. My father commuted many years, and they   ve got  better roads now, to commute. So I think you could sell it. I think Boley  would be more sellable to citizens if it had a school.  What do you think is the most important thing that people should know  about Boley?  I think they should know that Boley still exists, and all people are  31  Simpson  Holloway  Simpson  welcome to Boley. Boley, historically, was a town that was historically  run by blacks. I think they need to know that. And they survived. I think  that the theory, the hypotheses at that time that was developed in the  creation of Boley, I think one could say when given the opportunity and  the support, the people can govern themselves. I think that would be my  resolve. I think they should know that live people, real people do live in  Boley, and that Boley is open and friendly and willing to accept any and  everybody.  How would you like to be remembered?  As somebody that was alive and well, thank the Lord. (Laughter) No,  just be remembered as someone who cared. That   s all. I do care about  people. And even that caring, I   d be willing to back it up with support  and help. That   s as friendly as I is, or as I was. (Laughs) I done tell  people, every day was not Sunday and every day is not going to be  Sunday, but you can draw from it an opportunity and take advantage of  it and not waste time.  Well, thank you so much for sharing your time with us.  -------  -------  
