 Little Thunder  Gray  Today is October 19, 2010. My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. I  am here interviewing Gina Gray for our Oklahoma Native Artists  project, sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at  Oklahoma State University  Library . We   re here in Gina   s home at  Pawhuska, and I appreciate you taking the time to talk with me, Gina.  You   ve been a really prolific and innovative artist over the years, and  you   re an Osage tribal member. Let   s start with where you live here on  the Osage Reservation.  Yes, we   re located on the east side of Pawhuska, just off the highway  here. The house was purchased by my son. He   s been overseas for the  last ten years, and we ran into a friend of ours that was moving. He was  looking for someone to buy the house, so it was perfect timing. It was  meant to be. And we   re just about a half a block from our dance arbor   where  we have our traditional dances. In June, we have Gray Horse,  and then Hominy, and then Pawhuska dances, and we   re usually at the  end of June. So we   ve got it set up out here, we have arbors where our  dancers can get dressed, and then we have a cook arbor, and then we  have a dining arbor. So when our guests come, they can come and eat,  and just wait for the dances to start,  or  come afterwards. You get to see  family that you haven   t seen in years and years, and it   s just a good time  for everybody.  Great place to be rooted in as an artist.  Yes.  Can you tell me a little bit about your background, your folks, where you  were born and attended school?  Well I was born here in Pawhuska   all of my sisters and brothers. I   m  the fifth out of seven children. Mom and Dad left here in the early  5  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  sixties, and we moved to Denver, Colorado. We grew up there, and then  we would come back here. Spend summers, and of course, go to the  dances and things, and visit family, and learn about our culture. So we  had the best of both worlds. And starting in the early seventies, we got  so lonesome for home. Mom and Dad decided it   s probably time to take  the family back to Pawhuska. That   s when Dad got the idea to start the  White Hair Trading Post, but before they left to come here, I had already  left to go to the Institute of American Indian Arts.  How old were you?  I was fifteen. At that time, it was a high school, and two-year post-graduate  school. It hadn   t turned into a college yet, so I went there my  junior year.  Was it your idea, or did your folks suggest it?  Well, I was with a program with the Denver Indian Community Center,  and they had a teacher there   he was a retired commercial artist   and  he saw my interest in art. I was about ten or eleven at that time, and it  got to the point where I wanted more instruction, and he was willing to  teach me on Saturdays. They would come and get me, or my Dad would  come take me over there.  My teacher  had a strong relationship with the  Southwest, and he   s the one that told me about the Institute of American  Indian Arts. So when I was about thirteen, I had been working in  his   studio. Before I even actually got to do a painting, Mr. Poole   his name  was Kenneth Poole   would have me clean all his brushes. He had these  beautiful pottery bowls, and he had windows all around the top of his  studio. So I had to clean all those brushes.  Then, I had to learn all the colors of the oils, you know. At that time I  could barely pronounce them. Azure and crimson, cobalt blue. (Laughs)  He gave me a little history about each color. Even when I didn   t think I  was being taught, I was being taught,  through  conversations he would  constantly have with me while I was cleaning those brushes. He was  older. He was retired, so he lived with his mother, and she had to be  close to a hundred  years old . She would cook us lunch, or fix us a little  lunch, and we would stop what we were doing, we   d get all cleaned up  and then we   d go in there, and she   d have the table set for us. And I  thought it was so cool, because I came from such a big family, and to be  treated special, I was just so excited. I thought it was so cool that they  had a separate little plate with a piece of bread on it. (Laughter) We   d  get done, and I   d work a little bit longer, and it   d be time for me to go  home. But those were wonderful memories of my early training.  He also introduced me to the Red Cloud Indian Art Show, and we got  6  Little Thunder  Gray  the papers. I was so excited. I had been working on this oil painting of a  Thunder Bird    I   ll never forget it   it took forever for those paints to  dry. Now there   s a medium that you can use, it   s a quick dryer, but back  then, there wasn   t such a thing. So it just took forever, and it said on  there that you had be fifteen to enter this competition. He just went,     They   re not gonna know.    (Laughs) So I sent it in, and I sent a little  pen-and-ink drawing as well. We sent it up there, and time went by, and  Mr. Pool got a letter, and I got a letter. It said the museum had sent me a  check, and they had purchased my piece for the Red Cloud Museum.  The little ink drawing took a place in pen-and-ink. And they said there  was a gallery in Omaha that was interested in my work, and was it okay  if they gave them my information. Of course Mr. Poole and I  were  just  elated. We were like,    Yeah      Because you were fourteen.  I was thirteen at the time.  Mr. Poole  says,    Well, you really don   t have  any work, you just have those two pieces. Why don   t I do this? I   m  going to write them a letter, and tell them that you   re just a student, and  that we   re trying to get you into the Institute of American Indian Arts,  but throughout the next few years, if you   re still interested, we   ll try and  contact you again.    But I never did. At that time, communication was  where it was. It was not like today, with Internet and texting, and all this  technology. So then, there was trying to talk Mom and Dad into letting  me go to IAIA. At the time, I was going to Arvada Senior High School  in Colorado, and I had a teacher there that went to school with Ken  Poole. So they were about the same age, but she was still teaching there,  and she was getting some kind of funding for her program. But when I  came into the program, she was so excited. She had this young woman  that could really draw and paint. Jefferson County always had this yearly  big art show, and her students usually won. So when she found out I  wanted to go to the Institute of American Indian Arts, I asked her if she  would write a recommendation and she said yes.  Well, we got Mom and Dad on board, reluctantly. They didn   t really  want me to go because we were a close family, but  Mr. Poole  told  them,    This is a big opportunity for her, and I really would hate to see  her miss it. It   s a special school just for Indians, and they   re from all  over the country. She   ll be working with professional artists, some  Indian, some not.    He really poured it on, but they got on board with it.  But come to find out, we got a letter, and it was from the administration  at IAIA. They said,    We   re a little puzzled about somebody you asked to  recommend you.    And I said,    Really?    And we were reading the letter  together, and  Mr. Poole  did a little investigation, because he knew that  teacher. And he called the man  from the Institute  on the phone, and he  said,    Could you read that letter to me?    And he said,    Well, that is not  7  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  true. I   m going to tell you this is one of the most talented young Indian  artists that I   ve taught, and I   ve been teaching at the Denver Indian  Center for quite some time.    So he confronted her and said,    Could you  please write a real letter? Don   t hurt this young girl   s dream.     So the letter of recommendation was not a recommendation?  It said I had no talent, this  was  really not something that would be  beneficial to me, and to them, it would be a waste of time. I was just  crushed.  Mr. Poole  got it all straightened out, to where I could go, and  my Dad drove me down there. It was a quiet ride all the way to Santa Fe.  But, in time,  my parents  realized that it was the best place for me, and I  was like a dry sponge when I was there. I couldn   t believe a school was  just dedicated to art. You had to take your academic classes, but there  was really no pressure for it. They were interested in teaching you some  art. I also got interested in performing arts, and I was in the modern  dance classes they had.  Taught by Rosalie Jones?  Rosalie had left then. It was  another man named Juan . That was the  only teacher I had at that time.  Rosalie  had just left and I was in the  choir. It was called the Iyapaha Singers, (laughs) and so I worked with  Eddie Wapp in that program   Did you perform  in Washington D.C. as part of that?  No, they stopped doing that by the time I got there. That was all the  sixties bunch. This was the early seventies, so yeah, we would pour over  those pictures and go,    Wow, maybe one of these days we   ll get to go.    I  don   t know what happened, I wasn   t there at that time, but they picked  some students to go to New York City for a special program for a couple  of weeks, to work with the theater company there. I think it was because  that semester I chose not to take any performing arts classes. I was  concentrating more on painting, and drawing, and printmaking. They  went up there, and I was so envious. They just sounded like they had a  wonderful time. So that was my first introduction to hearing about the  Native American Theater Ensemble directed by Hanay Geiogamah  a  Kiowa/Delaware from Oklahoma, who was a seminal figure in U.S.  Native theater movement .  Was that the company they went to work with?  Yes. And after that, I met Allan Houser. I used to spend a lot of time  sitting, watching him sculpt, not so much talking about art, just talking  about anything.  8  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Did you take classes from him too?  No, I didn   t. I wish I would have, but I wasn   t a sculptor. I did take  ceramic classes and jewelry making classes, but I didn   t take any  sculpture classes. But I did know him quite well, and spent a lot of time  in the studio, because it was in between   there was the printmaking  studio, the painting studio, then sculpture, and jewelry, and ceramics. So  I   d start off in printmaking, and then I   d make my way to my other  classes (laughter), but I was stopping along the way, visiting with  everybody, and seeing what  Allan Houser  was working on. He was a  wonderful man, just full of knowledge. I would show him my paintings,  and he would give me little critiques, something I   ll always remember.  My printmaking teacher made quite an impact on me, Seymour Tubis.  The same  teacher  Ben Harjo had?  Yes. He was very   well, you learned about his humor, and he was  hysterical. The way he taught, he   d let you sit there and think that you  got it, and you had it, but then he   d come back and just tell you,    No,  you didn   t do this right. You didn   t do that right. You needed to take  your time, you   re going too fast.    And so I learned some patience with  him. He was very encouraging all of the time. I would even spend extra  hours after school, and go and work in the studio, just to try and get it  right, because you   re trying to get the perfect print. We did etchings, and  that   s where I first learned to do monotypes with leaves. I entered a  piece for the Heard  Museum  show, sold my piece, and took an award  there.  Was this like your first year?  Yes, that was my first year. Then he turned me on to aqua tints, and he  says,    We   ve had people do aqua tints here before, but nobody has done  color.    That   s all he had to say, and I said,    Well, I   m going to do  color.    But it was a lot of work, a lot of work, just getting it right, and  trying to impress him. He saw how hard I worked, and I think I only  managed to get three that were somewhat similar to each other. It was  very hard, but I do have that print here, the one from 1970. I had given it  to my mom. My mom passed away a few years ago, and so that was  something that she gave me, and I really treasure it. It   s a beautiful  piece. There   s no Indians, there   s no horses, it   s just a nice little  landscape. At that time, they weren   t encouraging us not to do Indian art,  but to explore other mediums, and ways of expressing ourselves, and  then trying to come back and incorporate that into our culture. Thus,  came out a lot of very contemporary works. Some of the best  contemporary artists have come out of IAIA, but during that time, too   I  think we were talking about this earlier, about it really being a man   s  9  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  world, for Indian artists   the women artists, we were just expected to do  the pottery, jewelry, and all that. But not the big paintings, and of  course, me being from the Gray family, we love a challenge. That   s all  you have to say,    You can   t do that,    and we   re right in there doing it.  (Laughter)  So did you find you had to kind of push yourself harder  than the men ?  Oh, yeah. I applied to several art schools. The Rhode Island School of  Design, Chicago Art Institute, there was another one in New York     Cooper, was it Cooper Union? There  were  about five or six that I  applied to. And I also applied to the California Institute of the Arts. It   s a  Walt Disney School, and Walt Disney was probably, when I was  growing up, a big influence on me as far as color. When you view my  work, you can see how rich in color they are. I was so impressed with  their artists, and I thought,    Well, gosh, if I go to that school, maybe I   ll  have a chance to work with some of those artists.    Because Fantasia is  one of the  movies  that was just a masterpiece, as far as color and  design, and how they worked it with the music and dance. It was just  great. So I narrowed it down to them. So I went out to Cal Arts, and that  was a big cultural shock, from being in a school with nothing but  Natives, and I didn   t blend well. I tried. I tried, and I didn   t get along  with my teacher. She kept saying,    You   re never going to make it with  this Indian painting stuff.     You were doing Indian subject matter?  Yes, I was, but in a very contemporary way. I will say that I did have  some influences with some of the teachers there, but I wasn   t taking  their classes. I would just go to their lectures. My art history teacher  loved Indian art, and crazy enough, he was married to my painting  teacher, the one who was discouraging me. (Laughs) Yeah, it was an  interesting year. I only spent a year out there.  You were about eighteen?  Yes, eighteen. Because I went two years of high school at IAIA, and  then one year, post-grad, and then I went out to Cal Arts. I got involved  with   there weren   t very many people of color out there. There was one  Chinese girl. There was like two Hispanics. There was like five blacks  and there were three Indians, Native Americans.  Art majors?  Well, the four black guys were dancers. The black girl, she was in  painting like me, and there were two other Indians, a Pima guy and a  10  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Navajo guy. The Navajo guy was in commercial art, and the Pima guy  was in performing arts, he was in dance, and the Chinese girl   I think  she was music. So, of course, we were all on scholarship, and our  monies hadn   t come in yet that first semester, and we were struggling.  And that   s when my friend, Manny, came. I didn   t know he was going to  school there for about the first month or two. I couldn   t believe he was  there. I went to school with him at IAIA. He had a car, but he didn   t  know how to drive (laughter) and I said,    I can drive.    So we hung out  together, and became really good friends. For Christmas, we were all  trying to get Christmas money to go home, so we put on this big party.  The four black guys worked with the Flip Wilson Show. They were the  Solid Gold Dancers. And so they had that Chinese girl, that black girl,  and they (laughs) did a whole routine with us, made our costumes and  everything. Manny danced with them, and the Chinese girl did the  music, and technical stuff. I mean, we had lights, we pooled our money  together, got food and drinks, and they had to pay admission to get in  there. At lunch time, we would all be sitting around, just talking about  our backgrounds and stuff, and just laughing. We   d always pool our  money together and share, share all the food.  You found a community there.  Yes, and there were some other pretty famous people. Pee Wee Herman  was going to school there at the time. He would always be sitting there,  in the corner, just watching us, laughing with us, but he would never  come over and sit with us. He was just watching us. And Lorraine  Newman from Saturday Night Live was there, and Ed Harris, and so it  was kind of an interesting time of my life. And so I came back to  Oklahoma, and then I got married to my kid   s dad, and we went up to  New York. He was working in the theater     Was he from Oklahoma?  No, he was from California. He wasn   t acting, he was working in  production. The first day that we were there, we were walking around  New York, just trying to get my bearings, and I run right into Ed Wapp.  From IAIA?  Yes. (Laughter) I go,    This is too weird.    He said,    What are you  doing?    I go,    We just moved here, we   re trying to catch up real quick.     And he says    Well, I   m helping do the music with the Native American  Theater Ensemble.    He said,    Why don   t you come? You   ve got  background in this.    It turns out they owned a building, and that   s where  they housed everybody, so we ended up moving over there  11  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Was it Caf   La Mama?  Well, that was on Fourth Street and Second Avenue. We were on First  and Second Avenue. It was right around the corner. But we were one of  the La Mama groups.  So you had paying work for awhile?  Well, at least, we were paid by having an apartment we didn   t have to  pay for. And from time to time they would give us  something    it just  depends on how the monies came in. And then, just after I joined, they  moved to a new performing space, which was six flights up. The first  day we get there, the elevator breaks, and was never fixed. So all  summer we were in tip top shape because we had to run up and down  there. Had to flip coins, or draw straws for who was going to get the  lunch (laughs), because you had to carry it up six flights of stairs, but we  had a blast. We even made the cover of the New York Times when we  were getting ready to do one of our productions. We were all standing  around a drum, and we were singing one of our songs from the  production.  Was it in 1972?  This was    74. And then they decided to move the company back to  Oklahoma City, and it didn   t last too much longer. I got pregnant with  my daughter, Addie, and she was born in Claremore.   Were  you doing any artwork during that period?  Well, I started doing my artwork again, during my time of my pregnancy  with my daughter, and then I started working for a gallery in Tulsa, the  Tulsey Gallery, it was over there on Lewis.  Who owned it?  Dr. Ron Coleman. So I worked with him, and he was another one of  those,    I   m not a man, and so I can   t possibly produce anything.    He just  did not like my work, it was too contemporary, too     Was he showing other Indian art?  Oh yes. He was showing just about everybody. And I remember, we  were doing a show for Minissa Crumbo   Woody   s daughter   and she  was there. This man came in, and so I was talking to this gentleman, and  I said,    Well, would you like to meet the artist?    and he said,    Yes.    I  introduced them, and it turns out that   s who she ended up marrying.  12  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Jim Halsey?  Yes. I did a show with  Minissa  not too long ago, and I said,    Do you  remember when I introduced you to your husband?    She goes,    That   s  right  I didn   t ever realize that.    I said,    I didn   t really realize that until  years and years after. I   m the one that introduced you to Jim.      Why did he do a show for Minissa? Was that because her style was  more traditional or because she was Woody   s daughter?    She did traditional work, it was good. I liked her use of color.   That must have been so frustrating to be working in a gallery  and  to  be an artist.  And have the gallery owner not believe in you.  Did he let you hang your work in there?  Occasionally. I   d been working on my paintings, and the Philbrook   Museum  was getting ready for their annual art show. So I   d worked  real hard   it was an oil  painting . It was a man sitting and praying, and  there was a big waterbird coming up (the waterbird is used as a symbol  of the Native American Church, among its other meanings, and appears  frequently in works by Native artists), and I thought,    Well, if this is  what they want (laughs), I   ll go for it.    But I still had a little Gina Gray  in there. So I entered my piece at Philbrook. It was only first and second  in the painting, no matter what medium. There weren   t very many  awards in drawing and painting. I don   t know if they did printmaking or  not back then. They might have. But I got to the reception, and I said,     Oh, Allan Houser   s here.    And I said,    Oh, T. C. Cannon   s here.    And  I was just so excited that they were there, and I was there.  T. C. Cannon  was an early alum of the Institute of American Indian Art, and one of its  most celebrated artists.   In the show, or present?  They were present there. I didn   t know that they were the judges.  (Laughs) And when they named us  winners , called us out, I just was  overwhelmed, because Solomon McCombs took first, and I took second.  What a wonderful moment.  Yes, and I looked up at that gallery owner (laughs), and I said    So?     Have you changed your mind yet?  13  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  It did change his mind, but it took something like that, instead of going  with  his  own gut, because I knew he liked my work, but he just  thought it was too out there.  Every generation has kind of redefined what Indian art is. Sometimes  you have to bring people along, but he seems to have come along   slower  than the public. Did you often encounter that?  Yes, when I would approach different galleries, I knew you had to have  some awards behind you, and you had to have put your time in. Going to  an all-Indian art school isn   t going to quite do it. But I was starting to get  some awards, something to make a resume, a bio graphy  at least, so I  just kept plugging away at it. I moved back to Santa Fe after that, and  that   s where my son, Dante, was born. Not too much longer after that, I  got divorced from the kids    dad. I decided to go back to school because  IAIA was now becoming accredited. They were still on the old campus,  but they were getting ready to move over the college of Santa Fe     Are we talking    78?  Let   s see, Dante was born in    76,    77   I guess    77,    78   and that   s  where I met Earl Biss. Linda Lomahaftewa was my teacher at the time,  and they went to IAIA around the same time, so he went up there to visit  her, and he brought her a poster. I was working on this huge painting.  And that was the great thing about IAIA, you tell the carpenter what size  painting you wanted. I thought,    How can I get one of those big  paintings?    So I started painting very big.     So they built the frame for you and stretched the canvas?  Yes, and you had to go down there and get it, and it turned into a kite   (Laughter) Back then, I was a little bit of a thing, so it about took me off  campus. (Laughs) Anyway, I was working on this one piece, and I saw  this photograph of this woman in one of those recliners, like a fainting  couch thing, and I think she was in a Kiowa dress. I don   t know if you  have ever seen that photograph of this woman. Her legs are extended,  and she has leggings on. So I was painting that, but I added   instead of  her holding a fan, she was holding these roses. (Laughs) And I had this  turpentine that made the roses look like  they were  dripping, and I kept  working on it and working on it. I don   t know whatever happened to that  painting. But  Earl  came up, and he was visiting Linda, and he poked  his head around the canvas, and he was going,    Hey, how are you?    I  said,    I   m good.    And he was just standing there, waiting for me to say     Oh, are you Earl Biss?     Because he was fairly well known at that point.  14  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Yes, he was, but I didn   t know who he was. I had always admired his  work, but I never saw a picture of him. And the one picture I did see of  him, he had hair way down past his waist, and he wore one of those  cowboy hats  with a  big round top. I just wouldn   t notice him enough.  Finally he came out there and tried to talk to me again. He says,    You  want one of these posters?    I   m just painting, and I said,    Sure, lay it  right there. Thanks.    And he goes,    Well, do you want me to sign it?    I  said,    That   d be great. There   s a pen there.    (Laughs) So when I got  done, I got all cleaned up and stuff, and I went out of the Fine Arts  building (at that time I was living off campus, so I was getting in my  car) I noticed someone was staring at me, and I kind of looked around,  and there he was. And he says,    Would you like to go and just visit  somewhere, have some coffee or a drink or something?    I said,    Well,  I   ve got about an hour. I   ve got to go pick up my kids from the  babysitter in just about an hour.    So we went to the La Posada Hotel,  and our friend Presley La Fountain, he was there, too, and he showed up.  We were just laughing, and they kept going,    Why don   t you get a  babysitter?    And I said,    Well, I   ll see you again. I   ll see you again.    So  that   s kind of how it started.  And you know, I think from the moment we were together, it was just  nonstop laughing, and doing our art, and working on pieces. This one  time, I was asking him how he did something, and he goes,    Well here,  let   s get two canvases.    And so we got two canvases, and we started  painting. I started painting, and watching him, and then I was doing  those horses like he does, and the riders, and then  I  just start splattering  that paint around, and we were just laughing. He goes,    Well, that   s  really pretty good.    (Laughs) We didn   t think anything of it. We shoved  those paintings off to the side, because they were still wet, and just let  them dry. We didn   t think anything of it. After we got married, he says,     Hey, honey, you need to come down here.    And I said,    What?    And  he said,    Just come down here. You   re not going to believe this.    So I go  down there, because I knew he was meeting a collector. I pop in, and he  goes,    Well       I can   t remember the gentleman   s name, but he said,    So  and so wants to buy this piece.    And I said,    Oh, great. Do you need  some help packing it up?    And he said,    Yes.    So he hands me the  painting, and I   m going,    But, uh       And he goes,    I   m going to tell  him.    He says,    You can still buy the painting, but you   d have to write  the check to her, because it   s her painting.    He just went,    You   re  kidding? Oh, my god     He says,    Well, Earl, you better cut her hands  off.    (Laughter) He was just kidding, but he was going,    Oh man, I   ve  been collecting this guy   s work forever. You got me on that one      So technique wise,  he couldn   t tell it wasn   t Earl   s?  No.  15  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Sounds like you fed off each other creatively.  Yes.  Did you show together at the same galleries?  We showed in a few galleries, and we had a show together in Wichita  at  the  Joan Colley Gallery. We had a good show there, too. My mom and  dad, my sisters and brothers all came up for the show, and we were all  pretty excited. It was fun.  And by that time your folks were reconciled to the fact that you were a  professional artist. (Laughs)  Oh, yeah. This had already been eight or nine years. That was a nice  time, but unfortunately, some things just didn   t work out, and we kind of  went our separate ways. But we always kept a friendship going, and we  would see each other once a year, sometimes twice. He always kept in  contact with my children, especially my son. My daughter lived in  Oklahoma, and so did I, but my son was in and out of Santa Fe, because  that   s where he was born. He feels like that   s his home. After Earl had a  real massive heart attack, Dante was one of the men that were there  when they took him off of the machines. And I was really proud that he  was there for Earl. I couldn   t make it back there for the funeral. They  had it   I guess it was in Montana, but I couldn   t make it up there. I was  working around Santa Fe for awhile after that, and then moved to  Albuquerque for awhile, and then came back to Santa Fe. The kids were  getting older, so we were able to all go as a family to art shows, so I  started taking the kids around to the art show, and I started competing,  and started kind of making my mark.  What were some of the shows that you were going to?  Red Earth. I went to Red Earth. I was one of those artists down there for  many, many years, and, of course, Indian Market.  What was your first year to do Indian Market?  Actually, IAIA used to have what was a booth there, back in the  seventies. You   d just run by and throw something in, and then  everybody took turns watching the booth, because at that time, you  could get our work for next to nothing. A lot of early pieces went flying  out the door. But I just kept doing a lot of shows and I had my studio. I  moved to Tahlequah after my father passed away in 1990, and opened a  studio there, and a gallery. I did have a gallery in Santa Fe, too, and a  studio. I had several studios there.  16  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Were they called the Gina Gray Gallery?   I  actually named it after my great-grandfather, Henry Roanhorse   the  Henry Roanhorse Gallery.  Yes, I remember seeing that.  And I had pretty much the same name down in Tahlequah, too.  What is it like running a gallery and also producing?  It just doesn   t work, because every time you got to go to a show, you   ve  got to clean out the gallery. And if you have anybody working the  gallery, there   s nothing for them to sell. I tried it for awhile, but now I  work at home, and I like that. I did have a gallery in downtown  Pawhuska, but I closed that a couple years ago. They made some  changes with the buildings down there, plus it was an old building. It  was hard to heat and hard to cool. It was a lovely space, but     That can be hard on paintings.  Yes. (Laughs) In the late nineties, I got a call from this lawyer in  Washington D.C., and he says,    You   ve been nominated as one of the  people they   ve been thinking about to be a commissioner for the Indian  Arts and Crafts Board.    I went,    Really? Well, sure, I   d love to do that.     He said,    Well, they   re meeting and we   ll get back to you.    A couple of  months later, I got a call that I was asked to be the commissioner, and  Lloyd  Kiva  New was on the Board at the time, so I got to be on the  Board with him.  And he had been important at the IAIA?  Yes, he   d been there from the beginning. He was the director, and it was  kind of his baby. Everyone really loved Lloyd. He   s just a fountain of  information. We would all go out to eat, and it was a nice time. I was  with them for about four years. I got to spend a lot of time in  Washington, D.C., which I loved, because I liked going to the  Smithsonian, and I love history. Throughout the years, I pride myself   on  when I   m asked to do some commission work, I do try to do the  history  research , because it   s an honor to be asked to do something  special. I was featured artist for the National Congress for American  Indians, and I did a piece   they wanted something that represented all  tribes. So I did that, and I had some Northwest Coastal influences in  there. Had animals in there, had warriors in there, the Four Directions. I  had Mother Earth in there, and had the waters for the fish, and the turtles   for  East and West Coast Indians, and I just like doing stuff like that. I  17  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  was asked to do a cover for a book on Osages, but that research had to  be during the Cahokia Mounds period, and it was a book that talked  about present day and back then, but I chose the ancient days. So I had  to read a lot of books on that, and find out the time period when Osages  were around there, and possibly this was the type of work that they were  doing at the time.  People don   t realize how much artists research. It   s important. When  you think about your painting, how has your style changed over the  years?  I think I   ve been blessed with the fact that, even when I switch mediums,  you still can see a Gina Gray influence in them. With the monotypes, of  course, there   s a different type of imagery because of the medium itself.  It   s just a one-of-a-kind printmaking process, and I use a lot of warrior  images and animals.  In your monotypes?  Yes, in my monotypes. Now the paintings   Monotypes don   t  lend themselves to detail.  Yes, there   s no detail, so what I did to get detail was I would cut out and  use these stencils. Because the plates are different sizes, I had to make  stencils that were small, medium, large, really large. And so, over the  years, you come to have hundreds of stencils.  But in terms of your style, you always had that graphic bent, and that  love of color that you were talking about   the Disney influence there.  Yes.  I remember you mentioning that you didn   t often do a lot of women in  your paintings.  No. I don   t know if that was a conscious choice. I just didn   t feel like I  did them justice. But the last few years, I   ve been doing a lot more  women. I was asked to do a piece for an international child and infant  conference. It   s hanging on the wall in there, and I did a woman that had  a blanket on her back, and a little girl next to her. I had fun doing that  one. But yeah, people always ask me, and I say,    Well, you know my  good friend Dana Tiger, that   s her specialty. Mine   s warriors and  horses.     And yet, I know tons of women who are very attracted to your work.  18  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  You   ve had this love of printmaking from the beginning. Are there any  other approaches to your printmaking that have changed over the  years?  Yes, because I started working with some different printmakers.  Do you do monotypes and silk screen?  No, I just do monotypes. I don   t do any etchings, or woodblocks, or any  of that type of thing. With monotypes, they have different press houses  you can go to, and you can work with a master printer, so that all you   re  doing is concentrating on the painting itself. They run the presses, and  curate your prints for you, because it   s a whole process, and you come to  have a working relationship with your printer. You almost have your  own language. I mean, when people come to visit, they go,    What are  you talking about, double-drop plate? What   s that?    She   ll look up, and  she   ll say,    You want a ghost?    and I go,    Yes, if you think there   s  enough ink on there.    Sometimes in monotype printmaking, if there   s  enough ink on the plate, then you can get another one. Or you can re-ink  your stencils, or change them around. I   ve been working with Michael  McCabe out in Santa Fe, and he showed me a lot of different techniques  I hadn   t seen before, so he was able to get a different look with this  overlaying. I would do the print, and he   d print one, and then the  ghost   we would put this other layer on there   it was almost like  another overpainting, almost. It really made the ink subtle, and whatever  you couldn   t see, it would bring it back up. It was remarkable. I thought  it was a neat little trick. (Laughs) But I   ve only gotten to work with him  one time. I   m wanting to go back in the spring and work with him, but  we   re all getting older now. I had to have a helper with me, and she was  helping him, and helping me, and she was just running back and forth.  What kind of a role does stylization play in your work? I   m thinking  about things that aren   t necessarily realistic or representational, that  are stylized.  I describe my work, at times, as being impressionistic. People are  constantly bringing me pictures of their children, and saying,    Can you  paint this?    And I say,    Hats off to those who can do that, but I am not  one of them. I don   t think you want me to.    When people come to me  with ideas for a project, or if you   re going to be a featured artist, you  kind of have something in mind. But it   s my impression of how I see  things, and as I   m painting, I   m constantly trying to put myself there  with our people from long ago. I think a lot of that comes through.  Although it   s a contemporary medium and colors, the feeling of the  story that I   m trying to tell comes through in traditional way.  19  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  I was wondering how important cultural content was to you.  Well, like I said, my mom and dad made sure we had the knowledge,  and the best of both worlds. Even though they didn   t want us to forget  our traditions and our ways, they still knew we had to walk in that other  world, and I   m very proud of my brothers and sisters, because we have  achieved that in so many different ways. My older sister, she used to  work at IAIA. She worked on several projects there with the Title V  program. One of the big things they did throughout the year was the  Indian Foods Day, and she worked tirelessly on that project. You had to  work with all these different tribes, and get their foods flown in, and  then make their dwelling. We had tipis up, we had hogans up, we had  wikiups. We had all these different dwellings. It was really a fun day,  but it took a month for us all to get ready for it.  Then she worked with different Indian organizations, and she   s turned a  lot of her work to her Christian charity work that she does now. She goes  all around the country, and she prays for people, and she has her prayer  group here   that   s my sister Jackie. My brother, Andrew, he   s always  been a history buff, and he was like our in-house tutor when we were all  growing up, because if we didn   t get it, he   d sit down with us and we   d  be sitting there, trying to understand, and he   d work with us. But he has  always been interested in history. He tried different schools, and then he  finally just went back to work. Then after he turned fifty, he decided he  was going to go back and get his degree. So he went to Kansas, back to  school there at Pittsburg University, and he got his Bachelor   s and got  his Master   s. Now he   s teaching at the Pawnee College in Pawnee,  Oklahoma. This last semester, he   s still teaching history classes, but he  also added a class. He   s teaching Indian gaming classes, so he gets to  take his classes to all of the different Indian casinos. He   s really working  very hard to make a program, because this is big for Indians. If they can  get the training, and the knowledge, it helps us go towards being more  self-sufficient. Andrew really has helped those kids, and they really look  up to him, and we   re all very proud of him. My sister, Mary, she does  our traditional ribbon work. She   s been in the Smithsonian, and so is my  aunt, for her ribbon work. My work is in the Smithsonian, too, so it   s  kind of nice. We   re hoping to get some of the nieces and nephews in  there, too.  And I feel like there   s overlap between your work, design- wise, and  weaving, and Osage ribbon work, and all of the traditional Osage arts  Well, that was growing up with my aunts. They used to have a store here  called the Red Man   s Store, and they produced our ribbon work for our  skirts, and for the men   s suits, and the blankets, and they made the  moccasins, the belts, the shirts. This is a traditional Osage women   s shirt  20  Little Thunder   I   m wearing , and that was the go-to place if you   re getting ready to  dance. You   d go there, and it would take about a year to get women   s  clothes together, about two years to get men   s clothes together. It   s all  done by hand. So Mary grew up learning that from our aunts, and she   s  taught her daughters, and they   re all really good in their own ways. They  all have their own style, and now they   re teaching the granddaughters.   Mary  was working with the language. She and her husband worked  with our Osage Language Program for many years, and he   s now the  director of our Osage Cultural Center. She   s working with the tobacco   program  to stop smoking. In fact, she   s in Oklahoma City right now  doing some training on the traditional  uses of tobacco .  And then my brother, Louis, is a writer. He   s always working on  different projects with his writing. I was trying to think the other day  how long he   s been working up at that program. It   s our drug and  alcohol program. He   s councilor up there, and he   s had many, many  successes with it. Also, he   s a political analyst, and he blogs and he  writes, and he   s a very funny guy, and very talented.  And then there   s me. My younger sister, Margo, is president of an  engineering firm, plus she sits on different boards  on  the national level,  different women   s groups, and has taken many, many awards for her  accomplishments. She owns two businesses now, with the engineering  groups, so we   re proud of her, too.  Then comes our younger brother, Jim. Jim was a former Osage Nation  Chief for the past eight years, and now he   s starting his own consulting  business, and very happy. That was a long eight years. (Laughter) We  wanted him to go another term, but when you   re the chief   s family, it   s a  blessing, and then it   s not. But we had his back, you know, and  supported him. And he   s still young enough to go in   he   s got a great  business mind, and he just got back from Hawaii.  President  Obama is  getting ready to sign a contract with  Native Hawaiians  that they can be  like us, like a tribe. So they   re starting from the ground up with their  government, with their health programs, and so he   s involved with that.  And he   s got some other groups around he   s been working with. He   s  getting ready to go out to Las Vegas for another conference, and he   s  keeping busy. He   s very ambitious, and really loves his Native people,  and wants them to do better, and wants to help them do better. He   s a lot  like my father, likes to right those wrongs and make them right in a good  way. He   s also working with his wife on their businesses together, so  now they   re spending a lot more time together, and with the family, and  it   s good to see them just relax. I go and visit them quite often now.  I   m thinking about the fact that artists give us pleasure with their work,  but what other kinds of responsibilities do you think Indian artists have?  21  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Well, we   re keeping history going, and the stories that we   ve been told  as youngsters, and teaching those that are up-and-coming artists that it is  possible to have a career and a life of an artist. When I was growing up  in the seventies, I knew I wanted to  be an artist , and I knew I wasn   t  going to give up, but I knew it was going to be hard. And it was. You sit  down and do all these paintings. It   s like, people always ask me to go to  the casinos, and I say,    What I do is a gamble. I   m gambling every day.     I paint this painting, and I don   t know if it   s going to sell. (Laughs) But  you get to a point where you   ve got to learn to believe in yourself, and I  think that   s a lot what gives back to people, and these young people, that  you know you can do almost anything if you put your mind to it. If art is  one of them, you can make a life doing that. It   s a career, and there   s a  lot of benefits to it. You meet so many people when you   re on the road.  Like I said to you earlier, I   m kind of semi-retired from that. I can   t  believe how many shows we used to all do all the time, like two or three  a month, and you   re out of state and you   re driving here and there.  That   s a hectic schedule.  Yes, so I do about one show a year, and I do other projects. And I do a  lot of charity work, like with the Osages. We have a Christmas tree  auction every year, I do that. I don   t know if you noticed those bird  houses over there. That   s a fundraiser, so they   ve asked a lot of Osage  artists to paint these bird houses, and they   re just cute. I like that green  one. (Laughter)  What is your creative process? How would you describe it?  Sometimes I have to get the heck out of the house, and just go  somewhere and look at art. I mean, it gets to that point. Or I just start  reading, or it could be I pick up the phone and I call one of my  contemporaries, and just start saying,    I   m looking at this blank canvas.     You call another artist.  Yes, I call another artist, and they go,    Oh, don   t you just hate that?    and  I   m going,    Yes, gosh.    Because I don   t want to just do another Gina  Gray warrior. I can knock those out all day long, but I care too much  about not being too commercial. I mean, like signed and numbered  prints. I only have six of them out. I   ve never done a gicl  e. When you  see my work, ninety percent of it is originals. I do have some  reproduction works, but not very much, as far as the signed and  numbered print business goes.  It does get harder, doesn   t it? My husband has told me that.  22  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Yes, it does. You   re so excited when you   ve done something that you  know nobody has seen, and you know it   s different. It   s yours, but it   s  different, and every once in awhile, you   ve got to get off that main road  and see what   s on those little side roads.  In printmaking, you need access to a press, and you need that other  person. I wonder if maybe that   s something that draws you to the  process.  Yes, because you   ve got one day to do it, and you   ve got one try at it.  When it goes through that press, it   s either going to make it, or it   s not. I  feel very blessed with the fact that I know how much pressure to put on  that breyer. I know how much ink to put on there, and I know a lot about  what   s going to work, and what   s not going to work. But I still like to try  to experiment. I love to experiment. I   m always trying different things. I  think that   s the exciting part of Gina Gray   s art, the experimentation that  I put into it because I like to push myself. I don   t like that word    can   t.     I   ll try it once, and if I don   t quite get it, I   ll try again. And maybe I   m  not going to get to the point where I wanted to get, but I got something  different out of it. I   ve taught a lot. I   ve done different teaching projects,  and I try and teach that to my students. They want to paint that tree  (laughs), and they want that tree to look like that tree, on that paper. And  I said,    Let   s try something different.    I try to show them different  techniques, different ways of coming at it, and looking at it. But I enjoy  teaching the kids.  What kind of benefits do you think that has for an artist? The chance to  teach?  You get to look inside yourself, and say,    Well, I do know something.  Something did stick in that head after all these years.    Some gallery  people say,    Oh, don   t be showing them how to do this and that.   And I  go,    What am I going to do, take it with me?    I would like to know that,  long after I   m gone, someone   s going to say,    She taught me how to do  this. If it wasn   t for her, I wouldn   t be doing this.    There would be an  empty spot inside of me   always   if I didn   t fulfill that.  How would you define Oklahoma Indian Art? Or is it possible to define  it?  Well, I can   t quite put my finger on it. A lot of the artists do try to depict  the old ways, or in a contemporary sense, try to depict in a contemporary  sense, that feeling of a ceremony or something. But the early days,  where you outline with one blue, and you come back in with another  lighter blue, and then, another lighter, lighter blue, and it   s like,    Oh my  gosh. Is that what we   ve got to look forward to?    That little, crazy bird  23  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  flying up there? (Laughs) And then, those little clouds, and the deer. But  you learn something from each other. I really can   t put what it is, that  when you look at Oklahoma Indian artists, you know it   s from  Oklahoma. You just know it. Just like the Northern Plains, you know  that, and the Southwest. I guess it  has  a lot  to do  with the design and  the subject matter.  When you were on the Indian Arts and Crafts Board, they   d already  passed the Indian Arts and Crafts Act, to prevent knockoffs from China,  among other things. But it also stipulated Indian artists must have proof  of enrollment or be certified by their tribes. Do you remember how that  impacted the art scene in Oklahoma?  When it really was starting to have an impact, I wasn   t living here in  Oklahoma, I was in Santa Fe. But I saw when it hit there, and some of  my fellow artist friends, it really hit them hard. Some of them just never  recovered, because they just did not have the proof. And a lot of us stood  up for them, because we knew their history. It   s just that they couldn   t  get it certified. So that was unfortunate. And then when I moved back  here in the nineties, it was still going on. You   d go to galleries, and  they   d go,    Well, do you have a CDIB card?    I was like    Well, yeah.     Because they were worried about the Indians Arts and Crafts Board  coming in. And they were threatening people with fines   individuals,  and groups.  When I was on the Board, we found out about this one group from  Taiwan. They completely renamed their whole city, Zuni, because they  had to have a stamp   because the jewelers had to have stamps, a  hallmark, and they renamed their city Zuni, and it took awhile to get that  stopped. I was in a store in Gallup one time, my friend Eunice Kahn and  I, she works for the Navajo Museum. She   s an archivist, and she goes,     Boy, that sure looks like your painting.    We were looking at these  women   s scarves. It was in this Indian woman   s  store    a Navajo  woman owned it. I said,    Oh my god, that is mine.    And it   s that  original right there.  Your designs?  On a scarf. It was on a silk scarf. That face, and those horses were on  there.  What did you do?  Well, there wasn   t any way for us to contact  anybody , and the lady  who owned the store wasn   t in, so we never made a connection as to  who was doing that. And it was like,    Wow. They can take anything and  24  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  print it.     I think it   s been hard for artists to get the tribes to back them, to really  put some money and resources into the work of their own tribal artists.  Do you feel like there   s more support nowadays?  Yes. I mean, in the seventies and eighties, our tribe really wasn   t  purchasing any art, and the collection was at a standstill. There really  wasn   t an outlet. We did have a little store here, Clifton   s, that artists  could go and sell their art to, but they   ve closed. And just recently, our  Osage Nation gift shop closed   it just wasn   t making the money. You  kind of felt like you got kicked in the stomach, because maybe they  didn   t buy a whole lot, but it was something, and it was steady. So now,   you  just have to look elsewhere and find another outlet.  Maybe they can reopen it at some point.  Yes, that would be nice. Even the ribbon workers, that   s where they got  all their ribbon and their supplies, and they had built up such an  inventory. I mean, not everybody carries those ribbons. And the  blankets, Pendletons   all the Osage Artists sold something out of there.  What collections are you most proud of having your work in?  Well, the Smithsonian, of course. And I have work in Philbrook   s  collection. And the Institute of American Indian Arts. Eitlejorg   Museum . I   d have to say those are the top ones.  That   s a great picture I saw on the refrigerator of you and your fellow  Oklahomans at the Institute. Can you quickly list who   s in the picture?  There was Parker Boyiddle, Karita Coffey, Sherman Chaddlesone, Allie  Chaddlesone, myself, Bill Glass, Richard Whitman and Marcus  Amerman. I think there was more, but that   s just who happened to be  standing there.  What art awards are you most proud of?  The Fellowship award that I got from SWAIA  the Southwest  Association of Indian Arts .  What did you use it for?  At the time, I had my studio gallery in Tahlequah, so we made some  additions to the gallery   mostly maintenance things, building some  more space, and work tables, and supplies   lots of supplies. I bought a  25  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  bunch of supplies. As you know, we   re like crazy when we go to art  supply stores.  Right. (Laughs) That   s where all of an artist   s money goes. Is there  anything  else  you   d like to add to our discussion?  Well, my children. My daughter is going to school down in Texas right  now. My granddaughter, Anya, is down there. My grandson, Ezra, he   s  with his dad in Coweta, and my son just recently got married to Yanti     she   s from Bali. He has a place in Santa Fe as well, so she   s living there,  and he went back to work for the Department of Defense in Afghanistan,  and his son from his first marriage.  My son  Dante   s a very  accomplished artist as well. He   s won several awards at SWAIA, and  Eiteljorg, and Red Earth  Indian Arts Festival  and Tulsa Indian Art  Festival and different places. His son Neo Thor is from Iceland. He lives  there with his mother, and he   s a special kid.  He spent a summer here, didn   t he?  Several summers now, but he told me,    Amma Gina, it   s just too hot.     And poor thing, he comes from Iceland, and had to come here in our  traditional dances. I said,    Son, you need to bring him in the fall, or the  spring, or something.    We   re working on that. But he   s just miserable  hot here. (Laughs) I bought him a big swimming pool last summer, and  oh, they had a good time in it. I said,    At least they   ll be cool.    (Laughs)  All the grandkids loved that, and the nieces and nephews   the little  ones. There were so many in there, they couldn   t hardly move.  We   re looking at the first piece of art. This is the first piece which is  called Clan Seeker. Is there anything you   d like to share about it?  In 1992, I was asked to be the featured artist for the Tulsa Indian Arts  Festival. They said that they were going to need a painting for their  auction. They ask that of all the featured artists, and I said,    Oh, okay.     Then I started thinking, and thinking about it, because they said they  were going to make a poster. And I said,    Oh, my. I better really do  something really different and really cool.    And so I started working on  it, and as I was drawing his face, I immediately saw    In the early  eighties I did a lot of paintings of landscapes, and feathers, so I thought,     Well in his fan, I   ll put a little landscape in there.    And then I thought  he needed some horses. So I put some horses, and just kept going from  there.  Like I say, when I   m doing my work, I like to put myself where they   re  at. This is a proud warrior and I   m depicting a little bit of his home, and  his thoughts, and his feathers. His favorite ponies with the clans   the  26  Little Thunder  Gray  clans are very important in the Osage Tribe. We still hold naming  ceremonies, and we still keep the tradition of passing these names down.  My name is Pah-pu-son-tse and I   m of the Deer Clan. The names come  from every aspect of the deer, each name, and I   m always intrigued with  that whole clan system. So I did a lot of research. We have sky clans,  and earth clans. When the Sky People and the Earth People in our  creation myth came down and met together, and joined each other, they  sent different ones to find out the clans, and to look at all the things  around them   the environment, the animals   and decide on one that  they thought best suited them. So this is why I call this Clan Seeker,  because he was one of the ones that went out, and searched out the  different clans. That   s why they   re depicted in black and white, because  he hasn   t brought them over to our world yet. So we have birds, the sun,  stars, thunder clouds, lightning, buffalo, turtle, fish. That   s about all of  them in there.  This was the first one of a series of signed and numbered prints that I  did, along with the  Tulsa Indian Arts Festival . They helped publish  them. It was one of the best selling posters the Festival had. (Laughs) I  think it set a record. They also made some signed and numbered prints  of it. That was nice, but  the original  belongs to my dear friend, and  brother, Dr.  Patrick  Tinker. That was the first time I had met him was  when he came to the auction, and bought this piece. Over the years our  families have eaten together at I   n-lon-schka dances, and they   ve joined  our Native American church, and the Tinker family   s been right  alongside with the Gray family. We   ve all become very close, and he  was nice enough to lend me a few of my works, so that I   d have  something to show. (Laughter)  This next painting is a painting I did in 2004, I believe. I was in Italy  visiting my son. He was stationed there in the Air Force, and I   ve always  wanted to paint in a European city. It   s just like   I don   t know what was  in my head   but even as a young girl, I said,    One of these days, I   m  going to paint in Europe.    And so I got busy and I did quite a bit of art  while I was there, and my son really, really liked this piece, so this is  Dante   s piece. It was just a warrior. I don   t think there   s even a title for  it.  It   s  just that it was painted in Italy. Lightning Chief, I called it  Lightning Chief. My mother is Lightning Clan, and my uncle. I like their  clan name. It   s Sun Carrier Clan. That   s a really neat image, someone  carrying the sun.  It   s interesting  because  to me, it shows Italian influence because of the  golds.  This is a painting of my grandpa, Clarence Gray. I painted this in   I  don   t think I put a date on there   in 1978. This is after I had been at  27  Little Thunder  Gray  Little Thunder  Gray  IAIA, and Cal Arts, and then IAIA again, and people were just finishing  up this sort of style of painting. I was influenced from a few artists at  IAIA that were trying to do this style of painting. The photograph that I  took this off is from a larger photograph up at the Osage Museum. It   s  one of those big panoramic  photos , just a whole row of Osages. Off to  the right you see my grandpa, and once you see him, you know it   s him.  I   m quite proud of this piece, and it   s signed with my Osage name, my  clan name, and my last name.  Is that how you signed your work for awhile?  Just for a very short time, but it was hard for people to pronounce it. I  don   t think it   s that hard to pronounce, but it was hard for some people,  and also it   s hard to paint all that when you   re used to just doing Gray.  (Laughter) You probably know that with Merlin. Merlin   s got quite the  signature with clouds and all that.  That   s nice. I have a question for you about the landscape, because you  lived in Colorado all that time. There  seems to be  some overlap  between those two landscapes.  This piece is one of my very first etchings I did in Santa Fe, working  with Seymour Tubis. I think I spoke earlier  about  how he challenged  me, saying that students had done aqua tints, but nobody had done a  color aqua tint. So not only did I use one color, I used two. (Laughter) I  was quite proud of myself, and it was so hard to make each print exactly  the same. I really don   t call myself a printmaker, because I don   t  actually do the turning  of  the press. I do now. I have my own press  now, and I   ve gotten a little more confident in that. But in the early days  of my career, as a student  who  was trying to reproduce something, one  right after another, my mind just wouldn   t let me go there. I kept  messing up   I   d see myself purposely try to make it different from the  last one. It used to make Mr. Tubis so mad. (Laughs) He goes,    I know  you can do it. Why did you do that?    Because I would make this orange  too much lighter, or make that yellow a little darker. He says,    Well, I  think you have plenty of artist proofs. Let   s start on one out of       How  many? I think we got one out of three. (Laughter) So this is actually an  artist   s proof.  Back then I was signing Gina Gray. I don   t know if all artists do that, but  you go through this whole little thing about how you   re going to sign  your painting. Are you going to use your whole name? Your last name?  I started thinking,    You know, if I   m going to take this seriously, I   m  going to have to cut this name down, just to the Gray part.    I had a  distinctive Gray signature, so I made sure it was different from anybody  else. I was told by R.C. Gorman   I was painting up in Taos one  28  Little Thunder  summer, up in the mountains, and I asked him if he would look at my  work and kind of critique me. Back then, I was painting my signature  real tiny. Because they taught you in art school, don   t be putting a big  signature out there. I just went the opposite way. It was so tiny. And he  says,    You know, I love the painting. Hate the signature.    I was just  crushed. (Laughs)    What do you mean?    And he goes,    I can   t even  read it. I can   t even find it. You want them to like your work, but you  also have to learn where to place your signature, and for it to be  readable.    And I said,    Okay, I will do that.    So the next time I saw him,  about a year later, I was in Taos, and I was carrying some paintings. He  says,    Gina Gray.    And I said,    Yay  You remembered me     And he  said,    Yes, of course I do. Made that name a little bigger, didn   t you?    I  said,    Yes, I did.     What a great story. Gina, thank you so much for a wonderful interview.  -------  -------  
