 Finchum  Reynolds  Today is July 18, 2009. My name is Tanya Finchum and I   m here with  Nadean Reynolds in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This is part of the  Spotlighting Oklahoma Project featuring the 1930s. Thank you for  coming today, it   s a pleasure to meet you. Let   s have you start by telling  us a little bit about where you were born and your hometown and then  we   ll work our way forward.  Okay. I was born in McCurtain, Oklahoma (that   s eastern Oklahoma in  the hills) in 1925. I was an orphan. My mother died when I was born and  I was left with my maternal grandparents. My grandfather was a  postmaster in this small town and in 1929 when the crash came, I was  four years old and he was the postmaster. But in 1932 when they  changed administrations and Roosevelt became President, my  grandfather lost his job. He was a Baptist minister at first and there  weren   t any jobs at all during that time for ministers. They paid them  with food. You know, they had the food Sunday and they paid the  minister. My grandmother was an invalid, pretty much. He gave me so  much love and so much attention during those first years as a baby, but  by the time I was eight years old, he felt like he could no longer care for  me. And so he placed me in the Methodist Children   s Home in Britton,  Oklahoma.  During those days, there were no nursing homes, but there were many,  many orphanages. There were five in Oklahoma City alone. There was  the Baptist orphanage, the Methodist orphanage, the St. Joseph Catholic,  the Sunbeam, and then some kind of a County or something like that.  But I was placed in the Methodist. And, of course, it was right in the  middle of the Depression. The home was two large buildings, it had  been a college and then the Methodist church bought it. Two large  buildings with a basement kind of thing in the middle for the dining  room and the offices and the chapel and laundry and all that kind of  stuff. There were about 40 children in one dorm and about   40 girls and  5  then 40 boys in the other one, approximately 80 children is about what  they could handle.  So my grandfather and the Methodist minister drove me from McCurtain  to Oklahoma City. This home was about seven miles north of Oklahoma  City, which is Britton. I don   t remember much about that day of driving,  but Grandpa had told me that there would be many, many children there  and I   d have people to play with and he had built me up for this  experience so I was not dreading it. The home was a farm and we had  cows and pigs and chickens and rabbits, so we were really not hungry  during those years. It was very simple food, but we weren   t hungry. We  had electric lights but no heat except coal, a coal stove. We cooked with  coal. We had a coal stove in the basement of the girl   s dorm and the  boy   s dorm. Just one stove. (Laughs) And I do remember dressing in bed  because it was so cold.  You heard in those days about orphanages where people were mistreated  and children were mistreated, that wasn   t the case with this one. We just  had one lady that was over all 40 of us girls and same way with the boys.  A couple took care of the boys. And never was I mistreated in that  home. We had, like I said, real simple food three meals a day. The  children came from all kinds of different backgrounds. One of my best  friends, her father had lost his farm, lost his wife, had five children,  couldn   t take care of them, couldn   t feed them, had a baby. He actually  was so desperate he gave the baby to some people on the bus and took  the other children to the home. My friend said he gave her a stack of  postcards and told her to write him and she never saw him again. He  died about a year later.  Another child, children that were there, their father had killed their  mother in front of them and was in prison, so I guess the state put them  in the home. Different stories like that, you know. Mine was one of the  easiest. I didn   t have that kind of background. But everybody came     some of them, the father had died, their mother couldn   t feed them. Like  today, they have welfare. They don   t need to have that kind of life. But  that was the way the home was. We had chores. It wasn   t a very  comfortable place because the roof leaked but we were all together in it.  And there is a psychology of orphans that I   ve heard about that you feel  guilty, you feel guilty about being an orphan. And I do remember after I  got out, I never wanted anybody to know I was there. It was like a  stigma. But while we were there, we were together. We were all in one  boat, you know, having the same kind of problems with sisters and  brothers that most kids do in homes.  But the one thing that I remember about the poverty of those times was  tuberculosis was rampant and they gave us tests for tuberculosis. We  6  who were positive went in to Oklahoma City to St. Anthony   s Hospital  for chest X-rays. And as we came up to the hospital, we would see these  long, long lines of people. A block, two blocks, standing in line. The  sisters were feeding them soup. It was a soup line. That was real  amazing to us as we saw all these people, what are they doing? And I  have found out later that I imagine the state or somebody was  subsidizing the nuns and I did read where Governor Murray, who was  the governor,    Alfalfa Bill    Murray at that time, had asked the sisters to  feed these people. That was part of how people were getting along, you  know.  Then as we went across the South Canadian River bridge, we would  look down into the river bottom, which the drought was on and there  wasn   t water in the river, but people were living all along the bank in  cardboard boxes and had pieces of tin put up. That was called  Community Camp, hundreds of people living like that. As children we  didn   t think about it much. We   d go,    Oh, there   s Community Camp    as  we passed across the river. That   s where I saw poverty. Then we went  into the grade school, we went to the public school. We had a bus and  we went into public school. And I did see children that you knew were  very, very poor. They didn   t have lunches, there was no lunch program.  They didn   t have lunches and we did. We had a little sack lunch with us  each day. We were never ever hungry thanks to the Methodist people of  Oklahoma. But I did see poverty around me.  But I also noticed that Americans are resilient. And there was the good  and the bad during those times, you know. There were people who were  absolutely destitute and then there were people that didn   t have it so bad.  And there was happiness, there were dances and we had a little radio in  our dorm, one little tiny radio that we would hurry home from school to  listen to the soaps on. (Laughs) We listened to Young Widow Brown and  Stella Dallas. The radio was a big thing. Children today wouldn   t even  understand plays on the radio. There was one called Gangbusters and it  was like detective stuff of today. You heard it and then your imagination  worked. We all were totally enthralled with those. The radio was a big  thing and the movies. Hollywood was a magical place where all these  beautiful people lived and we would take their picture and put them on  the wall, Clark Gable, Tyrone Power, and all of them. Hollywood was  just some dream place for us. We got to go to a show once a month.  Today my son is an actor in Los Angeles and when I go there and he  takes me to Hollywood, I think,    Oh, my gosh. If I thought I could ever  be in Hollywood when I was a little girl.    It   s just so     But there were good things and the bad. I never was unhappy as a child.  There was no one to brag about me if I did well and no one to fuss if I  didn   t. So we just were each other   s discipline. It was a religious home,  7  Finchum  Reynolds  Methodist, and we were taught goodness. I guess what we missed more  was not having parents. I particularly missed a mother. And I didn   t  know I missed her until I was grown and had my kids, then I knew, oh  gosh. You know. But back home, after I went, my grandfather couldn   t  visit me but about once a year because he didn   t have a car, he didn   t  have any transportation. There was an interurban from Oklahoma City to  Bethany and he would ride the interurban out and walk across the field  to see me.  The boys in the home would look out the window and they would see  these campfires out close to the railroad track. So they   d slip out, go  down and see what that was   it was the hobos. It was the hobo jungle  where the hobos would gather and they would   ve got a little bit of food  from one place, a little bit of food from another, and they   d make a big  pot of soup and they called it that. Then they would be close to the  railroad so they could hop on the trains and go someplace else. We were  all familiar with the hobos and were not afraid of them like today our  children would be afraid, but they would   ve never hurt a child. So that   s  kind of what I remember about poverty. But I never felt it. The  Methodist churches, each church adopted a child and then they clothed  us. Twice a year I   d get a box, in the spring with summer clothes, a box  in the fall with winter clothes. And I know now that I probably had  clothes that maybe their own children didn   t for those times. They saw  that we were fed and that we were clothed. And I will ever be grateful to  the Methodist people of Oklahoma.  We had running water but we didn   t have washing machines so we had  to boil the sheets. We boiled all of our clothes. Didn   t have electric  irons, we had what they call sad irons. We had to heat the iron and then  sprinkle the clothes, roll them in a basket and then iron them with these  and then put it back on the stove and heat it and iron.  So you   d have to work quick.  Yeah. And the clothes were cotton. And the boys    clothes that we had to  iron were that cotton duck cloth. It was a hard life, then by the time you  hung them on the line   in the wintertime they froze before we could get  them on the line because we had to hang them all out. And then in the  summertime it was the dust storms. We could see them coming in the  distance, black, looking like our tornadoes today. We would have to  grab washcloths, wet them, put them on our face. Then when the dust  storm would pass, when they just passed through, then the dust would be  all over everything. But fortunately we were well kids. There was not  much sickness among us. Perhaps that was having three good meals a  day, and if that bell rang, you went to bed. (Laughs) So it was really a  healthy life. There were five children who were accidentally killed  8  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  during my time there: drowned, electrocuted, run over with a truck, but  not any who died from disease.  So how long were you there?  I was there seven years, from the time I was eight until the time I was  fifteen. They were going to build a new home for children in Tahlequah  and we always heard about it. We saw the blueprint, we always heard  about it. And so they began to put the older children in foster homes in  preparation for this big move. And I just did not want to go to a foster  home. So I wrote my grandfather and I said,    Please come get me, I  don   t want to go live with somebody else.    And the very next day they  came and I went home. But by that time we were becoming dissatisfied  and we were teenagers. We didn   t dress as well as the kids at school. We  knew that there was a difference and we couldn   t enter into any of the  school activities because they couldn   t be taking us in to things at night.  Some of the boys did play  sports . They gave them a little bit more  freedom but the girls they protected a little, which was good. (Laughs)  The boys did the farm work and we changed jobs. Every month we   d  have a new job, whether it was the kitchen or the laundry or the dairy or  housekeeping, whatever it was. And the lunches, we had prepared  lunches for the next day. But I really don   t think that we worked that  hard. We had plenty of time to play. We had plenty of time to do  whatever we wanted to do. It wasn   t free, you know, we couldn   t go  anyplace. We had to stay at the home. We were not allowed to go. But it  wasn   t really a bad life at all. We played baseball and they took good  care of our health. One summer they took everybody   s tonsils out.  At once?  Everybody went, two a day   two boys, two girls a day went into the  Polyclinic at Oklahoma City, had their tonsils out, they brought them  back home at night. The house smelled like ether all those days   (Laughs) So we were taken good care of. I was sick one time in that  whole seven years. Sick one time, and not very sick then.  What were holidays like?  Holidays were great. Brown   s in Oklahoma City, Brown   s and there  were about three stores that gave us a paper saying what we would like  to have for Christmas. It was a list of certain things, you know. We  always had skates, was our big one. And we would say two or three  things and we got them. Different organizations would    And we had a  great big Christmas tree in the dining room. They   d go into eastern  Oklahoma (back in my country) and get the tree. And on Christmas  morning, it was the only time of the year that we ever had a grapefruit.  9  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  But we had grapefruit and a fried egg plus many other things, but never  did we get fried eggs except for on Christmas morning. It was always  scrambled or hard-boiled, but not fried. Christmas morning, grapefruit  and a fried egg, and biscuits and gravy and everything else, you know.  We were fed well. That was Christmas.  On Easter we went into Oklahoma City to a sunrise at the zoo, Spring  Lake. In the summertime, we had a two-week vacation at Turner Falls.  Halloween we had parties. Thanksgiving, we always had a turkey. We  were treated well. And we went into the public school. One thing I  thought about with myself, there was nobody to say,    Get your  homework,    there was no one to say,    Oh, you did good today.    So I  really didn   t try very hard. You know, no praise, no getting after it. If we  made really bad grades, we had to go to the library at night and study.  Before I went to the home I made wonderful grades. When I was at the  home, just average or worse. When I went back I was top in my class  because somebody cared. You know, and that just shows you the  difference. I was happy-go-lucky and I was out and about playing and  everything. Some of the kids were real smart and they took care of  themselves (laughs) and studied and made good grades. But I didn   t. I  thought,    Nobody cared    so I just didn   t try, you know.  What were some of the movies you remember seeing? If you went once a  month, can you remember some?  Yes, I do remember the first time we saw Gone With The Wind. We  went to see Gone With The Wind. We would go once a month to see a  movie, if we didn   t have too many demerits. If you got ten demerits, you  didn   t get to go to the movie that month. And demerits were given for  many things, like talking too loud or not doing your work or whatever.  They   d just have it on the wall and they   d go and mark it. Well, I got ten  demerits in about three days. (Laughs) The person that was over the  kitchen sent me to the superintendent and he said,    Well what did you  do to get ten demerits in two days?    And I said,    Well, talking too much  and talking too loud.    So every time I would talk loud, she   d go over  and mark it. (Laughs) And he said,    Well, go on back and quit being  boisterous.    And I thought he was saying that I was being a boy, that I  was like a boy. But that was the discipline. You know, that was the  worst discipline, not getting to go to the movie. But we loved the   we  went in to the Tower Theatre in Oklahoma City. It   s still there. It   s still  there on 23rd Street. Errol Flynn, the swashbuckling stuff, they pitched  all movies and, of course, there weren   t any bad movies in those days.  But I do remember when we saw Gone With The Wind, four hours long.  I   m surprised they let you see it actually.  10  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Yeah, we saw Gone With The Wind. I can   t remember, but I do  remember the actors for people like Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson  Eddy who were singers, Clark Gable, Tyrone Power, Don Ameche,  Errol Flynn, and we loved them. We had movie magazines that we cut  out the pictures, put them on the wall, kissed them goodnight. (Laughs)  So movies were   Shirley Temple.  It seems like Wizard of Oz was in that time period.  A little bit later, a little bit later. Yeah.  And Grapes of Wrath was probably later, too.  Uh-huh. And Shirley Temple, they have often said that she gave  America hope. She was so cute and her movies were a little orphan,  usually, that had a hard time, but she overcame. (Laughs) So it   s been  said that she saw us through the Depression, with always the hope  because the movies always turned out good. Most movies did in those  days. But that was a big thing for us was movies. And big sports figures,  like Joe Lewis, the fighter. We would listen to the fights on the radio.  We did a lot of outside stuff. We were always outside. But I think the  people who went through it   mothers, I heard my mother-in-law after I  got married and what she  went through . They never forgot the  Depression, they always thought it would come back. They were always  saving and everything. So it must   ve been a terrible time for adults  during the Depression years.  How did your grandparents make it?  They moved in with their children. There was one aunt and uncle that  wanted me to live with them, but my grandfather wouldn   t let them have  me. And we   re not sure about why he didn   t. But that   s what they did.  They moved in, they lived to be very, very old. They lived until I was  out and married before they died. But I think they just eeked it out, you  know. My uncles were coalminers and they didn   t make very much  money at all. But my grandfather had come from Tennessee so some of  his family was still back in Tennessee. I think, yeah, just eeked it out.  And I look back on that, that was a good thing he did for me, you know.  Because I got a good education there and I was treated well and I got a  good religious background. The Depression, I know, was desperately  hard for the people who lived through it, especially people who had  children. But not having ever heard anything about money or I didn   t  hear the stories like,    Oh you can   t afford that because       like kids in  their own homes did. I have a sister-in-law who   s so frugal because  that   s the way she was raised. She heard,    We   ve got to save this, we   ve  got to save that.    So I know that was very, very hard and I   ve read all  11  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  the stories of the Dust Bowl days.  Did you have an allowance?  A dime a week. And they did withhold that when we were bad.  What would you use your dimes for?  Three lemons.  Lemons?  Three lemons I got for a dime. Instead of candy, my girlfriend and I  bought three lemons. We put salt on them   cut the tops off, put salt on  them and (laughs) so yeah, lemons. That   s what we used. The Kiwanis  Club in Oklahoma City had a picnic every year for all the homes, all the  orphans in Oklahoma City. And it was something we looked forward to  so much. They had it at the fairgrounds and we got pop and hot dogs and  picnic stuff. And then we had races between the homes, the different  sports events, contests between the homes. And, of course, we always  wanted our home to be the best. I had two cousins that were in the  Baptist home so I would see them every year at the Kiwanis Picnic. That  was the only time I saw them. But my grandpa had put them in the  Baptist home and put me in the Methodist. We never understood why,  why he did that. But we had the Kiwanis Picnics and at the end of the  day, we all lined up and they gave us a quarter. A brand new quarter. It  was a banker, I think, in Oklahoma City that provided the quarters for us  and that was a big treat. You know you could buy a lot of stuff. I could  get a lot of lemons with a quarter. (Laughter) And I do remember when  Eleanor Roosevelt came and we went to hear her talk. We had some  advantages that I   m sure kids in their homes didn   t have, you know.  Did you sew or make any of your clothes? I know you said you got them  twice a year, but did you learn to sew while you were there?  We had homemaking at school, I wasn   t good at it. (Laughter) But the  matron of our home did a lot of sewing. And she was so wonderful  because she could just buy a pattern, cut it out of the newspaper, and by  the time we got home from school she   d have a dress made. She did a lot  of sewing. What happened to her was her husband died or committed  suicide, actually, because of the Depression. And she wanted a job that  totally blotted out everything in her life, something that would keep her  totally, totally busy. And that did. She came there and she was  wonderful. I kept in touch with her after I got out.  How many children per room?  12  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Two.  Just two of you?  Uh-huh. When I first went there, there were three. And then two, uh-huh.  The superintendent decided that all the children weren   t getting as  nice clothes as   like my people, we called them our people, my people  were Broken Bow, the church at Broken Bow and they were wonderful.  In the box each year was school clothes, play clothes, Sunday clothes  and a hairbrush, toothpaste, toothbrush. I don   t think there was soap or  anything, maybe shampoo. But anyway, it was a little box of whatever  our needs were. I since then have gotten a copy of the churches and how  much money they sent to the home. And some of the kids didn   t get that  good of clothes so they stopped the boxes and they started having the  church send money. Then we would lay out our clothes on the bed twice  a year and the superintendent   s wife would come and see what we  needed (which made a lot more sense really) and bought what we  needed. We would hide some of our things (laughs) so she wouldn   t see  them. That   s how they finally dressed us and we always got, like on  Easter we got an Easter dress. I don   t look back on those years as  anything but gratefulness to the Methodists, they were wonderful.  Once you finished high school, what did you do next?  I went into nurse   s training and I became an RN. But after I went back  home, I lived with an aunt and uncle, my mother   s brother and his  wife     So by that time the Depression was already over     The Depression was over, yeah. The way I like to think about it was  throughout the    30s I was in the home. And in April of 1941 was when I  left and we were preparing for war. The war started in December of that  year so we were preparing for war in    41 after I went home. And people  in the small towns were going to the shipyards, airplane factories,  making money, and the Depression was over and that   s when I got to go  home.  And then you finished a year or two of high school once you went home?  I went in my sophomore year of high school and finished two years. A  small little school.  And then straight into nursing school?  Uh-huh, and then went straight into nursing school. The government  13  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  then   my aunt   I went to St. Edward   s Mercy Hospital in Fort Smith,  Arkansas. She wanted me to go to a Catholic hospital because she felt  that the nuns gave better training. And I believe they did. And so that   s  where I went. But then RN   s were joining the service and the hospitals  were needing nurses. The government had a program called the Cadet  Nurse Corps. If you joined the Cadet Nurse Corps, they would pay your  way through and give you a little stipend through nurse   s training if you  signed that you would join the Army or Navy or Marines or Air Corps  when you got out because the war was still going on. And so I went into  the Cadet Nurse Corps and that   s how I went through nurse   s training. I  had signed that I would join the Navy when I graduated. The war was  over in August 1945 and I graduated in May so I didn   t join the Navy, it  was over. I kind of wished I had now, but that   s what happened. That   s  what happened when I went back home. And this aunt and uncle were so  wonderful. They saw me through high school and they were the ones  that wanted me in the first place but Grandpa wouldn   t let them have  me. They really struggled through the Depression years, my aunt and  uncle did.  Did they have children of their own?  They had one that died. My mother died in childbirth and their baby had  died a month before, so that would   ve been wonderful if they   but it  didn   t happen.  You can   t go back and figure out why.  No, I can   t figure it out. (Laughs) I can   t figure out Grandpa. But thank  God for him, too. You know, my kids did a little video over my life and  I said on the video that I think my life was the way God wanted it and it  was perfect for me and I was always happy. Still am. (Laughs) Met this  wonderful man, had these wonderful kids.  It worked out.  Yeah. So the Depression, it just didn   t touch me. You know as far as the  poverty of it, as a child you don   t know, you don   t think about it. And I  think that also I never heard money talk. Nobody talked money to me  like,    We   ve got to save money,    and I   m kind of understanding of my  sisters-in-law who lived in a regular home and heard that, you know. It  has never meant anything to me. Conservative, I   ve raised nine kids and  I had to be, but I do think that there was a plus side to that especially as I  see dysfunctional families, abuse in families. I wished I   d had parents,  but I do sometimes think,    Well this was good for me.    I survived it.  Do you stay in touch with any of the girls from those years?  14  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  We had a 30 year reunion. It advertised in the paper, anybody who had  been in the Methodist home during these years, get in touch with us. We  did and we had a big reunion. And it was very interesting, because we   d  all done well. We had all done well.  That is interesting, isn   t it?  Uh-huh. Everybody who was there had. We   d say,    Well hey, we did  okay     (Laughs) The one that I told you about that her father gave the  baby away, she just became a wonderful, wonderful person that did so  much good for orphans in Guatemala and even went and talked before  the Senate and gathered up food and clothing. It turned into really a  mission for her. I cried for three days after I left those people and I had  never cried about that, any. It was just like, when I walked in there for  the first time I thought,    They know me. They know where I   ve been,  they know something.    I just felt so close   and I   d never kept in touch  with them through the years. It was just like I   d repressed it, I guess.  After it was over I cried for three days, had been with people who knew  me, who knew where I   d been, you know. Because I was always having  to explain myself to everybody.  They understood.  They understood. And it was really a wonderful thing, because the tears  were not sad, they were just release or something.  Sure, needed to go.  Yes. You have to have been an orphan. There   s pain that you don   t feel  until later in your life, until you know that,    Okay, this is why I can   t  handle abandonment. This is why I feel the way I do and I have to please  people.    This is why I   m a people pleaser, because I had to.  That   s why you went into nursing, I   d say, had to help fix people.  Yes, fix people. And then I met this wonderful, wonderful, wonderful  man and we were married 52 years. At some time you have to face the  pain because it was abandonment. I had to leave everything that I  knew   my grandfather   but you don   t think of it. God protects you as a  child, I think.  It probably made you a little stronger, too? I mean you made your own  decision to go back.  Yeah. I   m not sorry about any of it, it was my life. But thank God I met  my husband who was Lynda   s father-in-law, she loves him, too. He was  15  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  a great man.  I think you are a great woman. It   s been interesting to hear your story.  After Linda told me,    You should come and tell your story,    and I oh,  I   ve had all these wonderful things that I was going to say and that I  knew, this this this, and then I   m not sure I did. The things that I  remember most were the things that I told you about, the hobos and the  people in the soup lines.  And the camp by the river, we haven   t had anyone else tell us that.  About the Community     Community Camp. There was a book that I kind of went through, one of  my people in the home, he was older, but when he got out, he went to  Central State College and graduated and he wrote a book called Mommy,  What   s an Orphan? I don   t know if it   s in your library or not.  I   ll check.  It   s called Mommy, What   s an Orphan? It   s about that home, my home,  with pictures.  I   ll take a look.  It   s by Harry Hicks. So I was reading Harry   s book to kind of remember  some of the things. In that book he told about the hobos, how the boys  used to go down and see about the hobos. But anyway, I thought am I  making this up about Community Camp? Is that something   and also  the soup lines. And so I got on the internet   Community Camp, 1939.  Boy, it all came up, described it exactly like I remembered it. And also  the soup lines at St. Anthony   s and it told about how Governor Murray  encouraged or asked the sisters or anyway he was involved in that. You  can get anything on the internet. But it did make me know,    No, that is  true, that was my memory.     Turn you into a librarian now, a second life.  Yeah, I knew that   s what I should   ve been in the beginning instead of a  nurse. But that was something that a child would remember, seeing  people living like that. And I don   t know how their sewage or their how  they survived.  Probably made you appreciate where you were even more, seeing that.  Yeah. I didn   t think about it at the time, but it was a great lesson. I   m  16  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  forever grateful to the Methodist people. I   m not a Methodist today, I   m  a Catholic. But I always think of it with a grateful heart. Because the  Catholic Church was also doing the same thing for their kids at St.  Joseph Catholic. And that same home that   s in Tahlequah, it   s not  orphans now, it   s for troubled kids. My daughter went down when she  was doing this video of my life and got my records from them. They had  a picture of me and they had the papers that my grandfather had to sign  to give me away, you know, because he had to release guardianship to  the home. That was kind of hard to look at.  I   d say it would be.  But my daughter was afraid that I would, you know, not   but I   m just  grateful, it   s in my book now.  It   s been an interesting story, and an interesting life, really.  Yeah. Then I went home and lived life. But that was where I was during  the Depression years, being totally protected.  You were one of the lucky ones then, really.  Yes, I was. I   m sure there   s some really good stories that you had that  people had a lot harder time than I did.  There just seems to be a wide variety, so you need all the parts.  All the pieces, yeah.  And this is one that we didn   t have, so we appreciate you sharing it with  us.  Well, I hope you have that book Mommy, What   s an Orphan? I think it  was published by Oklahoma Press. He told in that how when you   and I  didn   t know this, but when you were 18, you had to leave. You had to  leave. And they gave him a little money and a suit of clothes and then, of  course, he had his own clothes, and said,    Goodbye.    And he was gone.  And he took that little dab of money and he went to Central State  University and enrolled. He got a job, worked his way through college.  Where there   s a will there   s a way, I guess.  Yes. That is a good little book. It   s the total story of what I went  through, told by a boy whose life was a little bit different than ours.  I will definitely check on that.  17  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Reynolds  Finchum  Yeah, try to check that out, it   d be good.  Anything else?  Can   t think of anything else, honey.  Thank you for sharing, it   s been great.  Well good, I hope it was what you needed.  It   s just fine. If you think of more later, we can do a round two.  -------  -------  
