 L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Today is April 25, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library.  Also joining me is Randy Wilson, who may chime in  with a few questions.  I   m in Tipton, Oklahoma, today and I   m talking  with Erma Lou Dunlap. Thank you so much for talking with me. We   re  interviewing Erma Lou as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma oral  history series.  Thank you.  Let   s start by having you tell me when and where you were born.  I was born in Tipton, Oklahoma, southwest of town two and a half  miles. I was born on January 31, 1926 at my home on Sunday morning  at ten o   clock. My mother missed church that morning.  Uh-oh. (Laughter) What were your parent   s names?  My daddy   s name was Cloyse Alvin Parks, and my mother   s name was  Audrey Wilson Parks.  And were you their first child, or did they have several others?  I was the first. We had four all together, but I was the oldest and my  sister was the youngest, and we had two brothers in-between.  How long had your parents lived in that house before you were born?  Three years.  Where had they lived before then, or where did they come from?  5  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Well, when they got married, they built that house. That   s where we  lived and that   s where I was born.  Did they both grow up in the Tipton area?  Yes, they did, and they both graduated from Tipton High School.  Do you know what years they graduated?  1922, I think it was.  And they were high school sweethearts?  Yes.  Did you ever hear details of their wedding or their courtship or  anything?  Well, my daddy was a big basketball player, and I don   t know exactly  about their courtship, but they got married and lived on a farm out there.  My daddy   s father gave them eighty acres and they built a house, and  that   s where I was born.  How many bedrooms were in the house?  We only had two. We had a bathroom   well at first we didn   t have a  bathroom, but I remember that we had one, about the first one that  people had indoors. (Laughter)  So would you have neighbors coming over to your house to see your  bathroom?  Yes, we did. (Laughs)  And your father was a farmer?  Yes, he was.  What were his main crops?  Well, he was a cotton farmer. I think we had alfalfa and maybe some  wheat or oats. He put in the first irrigation that was put in Tipton, the  first irrigation well.  Do you remember any details about that?  6  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  I just remember that he did, and there   s a plaque out there, a concrete  plaque that   s got my brother   s name on it. Where we used to live, I went  out there one day and the only thing   s left is that.  Where would the water come from for that first irrigation set up?  He put down an irrigation well.  Oh, the well.  We had the first irrigation well, I think, in Tipton.  Did you have many animals?  Yes, we did. We had a dairy.  Oh really?  My daddy built a dairy barn. We milked a lot of cows and sold to  Steffen   s Dairy Company.  In Tipton?  In Altus. Yes, they picked up our milk.  So would you help out with the milking?  Yes, I had to wash the   we separated some milk, you know, to have  cream. I had to wash the separator. (Laughs)  So would you take that all the way into Altus?  Yes.  And how would you get to Altus?  Well, I think they may have picked the milk up. I think they did.  Did your family have a car early on or     Yes, we did.  Do you remember what kind it was?  First one we had was a Model T, and I have a picture when I was  about   well, I was walking, just probably two out there by the car. I  7  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  remember I got that picture somewhere. (Laughs)  What were some of your other chores around the house?  Well, as I grew up, I was oldest, so I got all the chores of helping mother  cook and dress chickens to put in the freezer. We raised a big bunch of  chickens, and then every morning, she and I would dress ten chickens  and put them in the freezer. Then all winter we had fried chicken.  And did you collect a lot of eggs?  Yes, we did.  Did you have pigs?  Yes, we did.  Did you have a smokehouse on your property or     Yes, we did.  Did your family have a big garden?  Yes. Mother did most of the gardening, and so she   d leave me in the  house to wash the dishes. She   d go get the garden stuff, which that was  okay for me. (Laughter)  Did she do a lot of canning?  Yes, she did, and freezing. We had a freezer when we first got  electricity, and so then we   d begin to freeze, put things in the freezer,  but we canned. We liked canned fruit, so we canned a lot of peaches. I  remember my cousin and I would visit each other when it was canning   time  and help. Of course, we enjoyed each other   s company.  What were some of your favorite meals that your mother would prepare?  Everything she   d make was really good, but I remember she used to  make hamburger gravy. That was my favorite, hamburger gravy.  (Laughs) We   d have hot biscuits and hamburger gravy. Oh, that was  good. Mother would make homemade biscuits, and that was so good. I  probably couldn   t make a biscuit today if my life depended on it  (Laughter), but she made a ton of them.  Did you help out in the cotton field any?  8  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  Well, I did a little bit, but mostly Daddy said,    You stay at the house and  help Mother keep...    I had brothers and they worked in the fields. He  said,    You stay at the house and help your mother.     What about laundry?  I helped her do the laundry. We had an old Maytag washing machine out  in the washhouse, and I remember putting the clothes through the ringer.  If you ever got your hand in that, it sure did hurt, which I did. (Laughs)  Do you remember any tornadoes coming through?  I remember when I was a teenager that my grandmother was living with  us. She was an invalid, and she couldn   t walk. We looked out. I said,     Well, it looks to me like there   s a tornado coming.    And Grandmother  said,    Push me over to the window. I want to see it.    So I pushed her  over to the window and we watched the thing dip down out there.  Wow. So you didn   t run to the cellar for that one.  Didn   t run to the cellar for that one, but I remember going to the cellar  because we would hear when it was coming and we had a cellar.  Did any tornados ever cause destruction in Tipton?  Yes, my mother   s house, the roof blew off of her house. She was out at  my house and here came a tornado and blew the roof off of her house. It  was over in the yard at the neighbor   s.  Did the contents of her house stay put?  Yes.  Wow.  Yes, they did.  Do you remember at all what year that was? Or what decade?  I got married in 1946. It was after that.  What about school? When did you start school?  Well, I started school in first grade here at Tipton, and I went all through  high school. I graduated from Tipton.  9  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  And what year did you graduate?  1944.  How would you get to school?  By school bus. I remember the first year I went to school, I had to walk  to the corner to get on the bus and it was a quarter of a mile. But, I was  scared to walk because the neighbors down on the end of the road had  some dogs, and I was scared of those dogs. Mother would have to walk  down there with me. Protect me from the dogs. (Laughter)  And do you remember some of your teachers?  Yes, I do. My first teacher was Miss Rolsten, and I thought she hung the  moon. I wanted to please her, so when I first started school we had a  bunch of little chairs at the front of the room where we sat to read. My  cousin and I were in the same school. We had bought some bubble gum  (Laughs), and so we wanted to chew that bubble gum. We had it in our  mouths, and we went in and had to sit in those chairs to read. I knew  when she came to me I couldn   t read because I had my mouth full of  bubble gum. So, I put my bubble gum in my hand and I thought I   ll hold  it, and when I get through reading, then I   ll put it back in my mouth.  Well, I was holding my book, and so when I wanted to put my gum back  in my mouth, it stuck on the back of my book. (Laughter) I had to pass  my book in and when the teacher found that bubble gum on it, you  know, she was very incensed. She went around and asked every one of  us if we did that, and I stoutly denied it. I know she knew by my face  that I did it. (Laughter)  But you never actually got in trouble for it?  No, I didn   t, but I should have. (Laughter) And then when I was in the  second grade, Miss Johnson gave me a whipping, and she wasn   t even  my teacher. But she was just, I think, in the change of life. That   s what I  always thought (Laughter) because she was ill as a hornet. We were in  her room to eat lunch. I wasn   t even in her class, and so when we got  through, we were going to march out, so she said,    Get in line.    And I  walked real fast because I was needing to go to the bathroom real bad.  She said I ran, so she snatched me out of the line and gave me a  whipping in front of the whole school. Well, I was needing to go to the  bathroom real bad, so I just wet all over her shoes and all over the floor.  (Laughter) Oh, I was so humiliated. I just thought I   d die. I went out and  sat on the sidewalk and cried. Finally, I called my mother and I said,     Mother, I wet my pants.    I didn   t tell her I got a whipping. Told her  that years later, because I thought if I got a whipping at school, you  10  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  know, that was a disgrace.  And you might get a bigger one at home.  Yeah. Now, my brothers, they didn   t care if they got whipped at school  or not, but I did. So she came up there and brought me some dry clothes.  I got dried out. (Laughter) Back then, Mother made all our panties at  home, you know, all our clothes, pajamas and everything. So she  brought me some clean panties to wear. (Laughter)  Did she ever make any clothes out of flour sacks?  Yes, she did. She was really a good seamstress. She sewed quite a bit.  And did she quilt also?  Yes.  Do you have some of her quilts now?  Yes. And I have one that was made out of my grandmother   s dresses. I  cut the material out and made blocks, you know, and I still have it. It   s  not a full-sized quilt but a smaller one, a nine patch.  Did both sets of your grandparents live nearby?  Well, my grandmother Parks died when I was just real young, but they  lived out toward the river. Out there right across from where Raenell and  them lived. And then my grandmother Whitaker lived right there in  town.  And she   s the one that later lived with you?  Yes. She had Parkinson   s disease and she shook. First her thumbs started  shaking, and then her hands started shaking, and she finally just shook  all over.  And did they know it was Parkinson   s then?  Yes. She always thought it was because she had been in a car wreck and  got a brain injury, you know. But, she shook.  Do you know how either of your grandparents came to settle in this  area? Where did their families come from originally?  Well, I think they came from Georgia, the Parks did. So I don   t  11  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  remember exactly where Mother   s family came from. I know she grew  up in Hess.  Did you go to Hess much since your mom was from there?  Not much, because there wasn   t anything there. But when I was little,  we used to go over there because my mother had a farm over there. My  uncle lived on it, Uncle Lelas, and we went over there. He made  homebrew. (Laughter)  What do you remember about that?  I just remember doing it. (Laughs)  Would people talk about it?  I imagine. (Laughter) And then we   d go over in Jackson County and get  molasses. They made molasses over there.  And would you eat that on some biscuits?  Oh yeah. I still like it. (Laughs)  Would your family come to Tipton on Saturdays?  Yes, we came to Tipton, and we   d visit around, sit in cars and visit with  each other. We would buy candy and eat candy. (Laughs) I had a friend  named Alma, Alma Joe Shotts. In fact, she lived right next door here and  she always had money, so we   d always buy nickel or dime   s worth of  candy and sit in the car and eat it. (Laughter)  The drugstores, there was one on each end of town. We   d stop at the  drugstore and get us phosphate   isn   t that what we got? I think it was  called a phosphate, cherry phosphate.  Did they have ice cream shakes?  Yes. I remember the first ice cream milkshake I got. It was down at Paul  Largent   s drug store. Oh, I thought that was good.  Do you remember the first film you saw?  Well, I used to go to the show every Saturday afternoon when we   d  come to town. It   d cost a dime to go to the show. I   d have a quarter.  Daddy would give me a quarter, and I could go to the show, buy me a  coke and a sack of popcorn for a quarter. (Laughter) And the first show I  12  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  remember seeing is Hopalong Cassidy. I can   t remember the name of it,  but I thought Hopalong Cassidy was really something. (Laughs)  So would you ever go to Altus or Frederick or other towns around?  Sometimes we did. I had an aunt that lived in Altus, Aunt Mini, my  daddy   s oldest sister. I   d go over there and stay a week or two every  summer with her and my cousin, Joan. They had a basement. It had kind  of a tunnel that went from the house to this basement. So we   d really  play in that, you know, and my Uncle Moss was a hunter. He had bear  skin rug on the floor, had kind of a head on it, you know, where he had  had it fixed into a rug. We played in there on those animals and things.  She always made us peanut butter cookies   so good. I made myself sick  eating peanut butter cookies. (Laughter)  Was there much peanut farming around here?  Not then, but later there was.  I wonder why the basement was connected with a tunnel? I wonder what  that was designed for?  I don   t know. I guess just for storms, I guess.  Were you involved in sports?  Yes. I played basketball. I was a forward, but I was the middle forward.  It used to be we had three divisions on the court, both ends and then a  middle. You had two guards and two middle ones and two forwards, and  I was a forward.  How old were you when you started playing?  I made the high school team when I was a freshman.  And played through your senior year?  Yes, I did.  And would you all travel around to other towns and play?  Yes, we did.  Who were some of your biggest opponents?  Well, we always had to play at Weaver, and that   s about the only one we  13  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  ever won. (Laughter) We didn   t win too many. I   ll tell you why. We had  football in Tipton. And they practiced football clear up to, I guess it  was   was it Christmas? How long did football last? And our basketball  got off to a late start because we had our football, so we never were as  good as the other teams in the county. (Laughs)  Would you go to football games?  Oh yes. I did.  Would you watch the boys play basketball and then have the girls  games?  I was in the pep club, glee club or whatever you called it in high school.  What were the women   s basketball uniforms like?  Well, I thought they was real pretty. They were real old when I first  started it, and it seemed like we got some new suits before I graduated.  And did they look anything like women   s basketball uniforms today?  Pretty much, they did.  Just shorts and a tank top?  Yes. I remember some of the Tipton Home kids couldn   t play because  they wouldn   t let them wear those shorts.  Would you have to provide your own basketball shoes?  Yes, I did.  Are there any particular games you remember or anything else involving  basketball?  Well, I just always loved it, and my daddy always came and watched me  practice. Every day after school, we practiced. He   d come and watch us  practice, and I was always glad he did that because he was a good  basketball player. He always gave me tips on what I needed to do.  Did you have a basketball hoop at home ever?  Yes, we did.  Would people pay to come to the basketball games?  14  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  Yes. I really loved it. I   d rather play as eat.  Did you brothers or sisters play basketball too?  Yes, they did. My brother especially. Sue played, but she   well yeah,  we all four played.  Was there baseball in Tipton in the summer?  I think there was. It seems like there was. I think Shirrel played baseball,  but I don   t remember Dean playing baseball particularly.  What holidays were celebrated the most in your family?  Well, we always had a big Christmas. We usually had big Thanksgiving  and always had company at Easter. Every Sunday night, I had company  after church. We   d go out to my house and Mother would fix a big roast  and we   d eat after church.  With your friends, or your parents    friends, too?  My friends. We would have a table full.  Was anyone in your family musical?  Yes, my mother was musical. She taught herself to play the piano, and  then my sisters took piano lessons and learned. When I was growing up,  we didn   t have a piano until I was already too old to take lessons, I  thought. But I did take lessons on the ukulele. So I learned to play a little  bit. Miss Capps was my teacher.  In Tipton?  Yes. She lived down at Laing, but she taught music. I learned a little bit,  but not too much. We didn   t get a piano until I was older. My sister took  piano lessons, but I never did.  So how often would you go to church?  Every Sunday.  In the morning and the evening?  Yes.  15  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  And then people would come over in the evening?  Yes. After church, we   d have a young people   s meeting across the street.  There was a building across the street on that corner, and that   s where  the young people met. One time we had the young people   s meeting  over there. They called on Ray Blan to say the benediction, and I  remember he said,    Amen. Brother Ben shot a goose and killed a hen.     (Laughter) Kind of broke up the meeting. You   d have to know Ray  Bland to appreciate that. He was something else. He had hair that was  kind of reddish.  Were you involved in any afterschool activities besides basketball? Like  4-H or     I was in FHA  Future Homemakers of America , home economics. We  went to Oklahoma City to the FHA Convention, about my first time to  ever go to Oklahoma City like that. I think Mother gave me ten dollars.  (Laughs) I thought I was rich, and we got up there and some of my  friends, Thel, myself and Joanne   I forgot who all. We went to town  and we all had some money, so we all bought a hat. (Laughter) Back  then we all wore hats on Sunday, you know. So we all bought us a hat.  First hat I ever owned.  What else do you remember about that trip?  Well we ate at   I think it was kind of a cafeteria that was there then.  Seemed like, I can   t remember the name of it.  Did you stay in a hotel? Did you stay the night up there?  No, we just spent the day. It was a long day though. (Laughs) We went  with Miss Mayes. She was our home economics teacher and she had just  a little old car that was kind of like a coup. We went in that and I got car  sick  (Laughs) I was always prone to get car sick. So I had to get out and  throw up, and I was so embarrassed. (Laughs) I think that before I threw  up though, we got up there and the bridge was covered with ice as you  go into Oklahoma City. It was that old bridge. So we had to stop. I got  out and I kind of got over my car sickness before I threw up. But I sure  was fighting it. (Laughter)  Well was your first job you were telling me about while you were in high  school?  Yes, I worked on Saturday at Jemison and Taylor, and I was the cashier.  They had a bunch of people that worked there. So they made me cashier.  Isn   t that funny?  16  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  What did they sell there?  Well, they had everything. All kinds of clothes and shoes, anything you  need to buy. I bought my first dress in there that I ever owned, my first  bought dress. I think I was about twelve years old. I had never had a  bought dress in my life. Mother had made every dress I ever wore. Yes, I  got my first bought dress. I remember getting it. I don   t remember  exactly what it looked like, but kind of.  And what else do you remember about Tipton and the community itself?  I thought it was great myself.  And it was pretty good size?  Yes. I had a lot of friends, and we had wonderful times. I just lived out  in the country and I thought,    Oh, if I just lived in town.     How old were you when you started driving?  Well, I didn   t get my license until was sixteen, but I   d have to practice  out in the field and on the country road. (Laughter)  Did you drive a tractor ever when you were growing up?  Daddy wouldn   t let me. He said that was a boy   s job. I needed to stay at  the house and help Mother. I had two brothers, so they drove the  tractors. But one time, Shirrel and I went out and Daddy was working on  the tractor. There was a guide wire that went to the back, something he  had on there. So we were up there playing, and he had the motor going  because he was working on the tractor. And some way or another we  kind of hit it into gear, and he had to run along, reach over and stop the  tractor. (Laughter)  Did he have many other helpers, or was it mostly your two brothers?  We usually had a colored family that lived on the farm. We had a house  for them to live in that helped us. Sometimes the woman, Millie Ann,  she   d come help Mother in the kitchen.  Did they stay out there all year long?  Yes, she had adopted a little baby. Somebody didn   t want it, so she had  this baby. The baby   s name was  Pauline . We thought she was so cute.  17  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  Would you play with the baby?  Oh yes. (Laughs)  Did you have any hobos or gypsies come by your house from the train?  I don   t remember that. I was in the country. I think my grandparents did.  They lived up here in town, and they used to have hobos that   d come by.  What were some home remedies for sickness or bee stings or     Well, I remember castor oil. (Laughs) Mother would put orange juice in  it. You know that didn   t help much   What did you use castor oil for?  A laxative. One time I got real sick, I think I had broke out with  something, measles, I guess. I remember I was really sick.  And that   s what she gave you?  And then one time I remember I had diphtheria when I was little. Dr.  Collier gave me a shot, and then later they came and gave me another  shot. I had two.  And would the doctor usually come out to your home?  Yes, Dr. Collier was his name.  Were your other brothers and sisters born at home?  I think they were.  Well did you have a high school sweetheart?  Oh yeah, but mostly I was just in a group. We really didn   t have  sweethearts.  Just a group of friends?  Yes.  What did you do after you graduated from high school?  Well, I went to OSU to college. I went to college two years and then  Bob persuaded me to quit and get married, and so I did. (Laughs)  18  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  How did you decide to go to Oklahoma A M in the first place?  Well, I don   t know exactly why I decided to. I just always thought I  wanted to. And then I had that friend that went with me, Thelma Tensly.  And where did you all live?  We lived with her aunt that lived right on the edge of campus, Clara  Perdy was her name. She   d been my first Sunday school teacher when I  was a little bitty kid. I was in the little card class we   d call it and we got  a card every Sunday with a picture of the lesson on it. So she had moved  to Stillwater, and so we   June, Thelma and I lived with her.  Do you know what she was doing in Stillwater?  She worked at the college. That's when they had the Navy men and  women there at school. She worked in the kitchen for the Navy and  brought home the food, leftovers you know, to feed us. (Laughter)  What was your first impression of the campus in Stillwater?  Oh, I thought it was big   Had you ever been there before you went there for school?  I don   t think I had. I think that was my first impression. (Laughs)  Do you remember anything about your classes?  Yes, I enjoyed my classes very much.  What kind of things were you studying?  I was in home economics. Home household science, I think they called  it.  Do you remember any of the professors?  I remember one lady professor, but I forgot what her name was.  Did you attend the basketball games at A M?  Yes, I did.  Do you remember who was coach then? Was that when Mr. Iba was  19  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  R. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  there?  Yes. Sure was. So I enjoyed that. Like I said, I lived there with Aunt  Clara. I remember they had a free movie on Saturday nights and we   d go  over there and see a movie.  Where was that, do you remember?  On the campus, but I don   t remember just where it was.  Was the Student Union built yet?  No. It wasn   t. And I remember when I went up there at school one  semester, I lived in one of the     Willard or Stout?  No. Anyway     Murray Hall?  Murray Hall. That   s what it was, Murray Hall. I remember Theta Pond.  Would you stroll around Theta Pond?  Yes, I did.  So did Bob come visit you in Stillwater?  No, I didn   t know him then. (Laughs) I met him when I was home one  summer.  Okay, so tell me about meeting him.  Well, I   d been out to Lubbock, Texas, to visit the Bozemans. They were  good friends of our family. So I caught the bus to come home, and came  into Vernon, Texas. When I got to the bus station, I was going to call my  mother to come get me. But when I got there Cap Laing was in there,  and he was the first boy I   d ever gone with. I met him at church, and he  was waiting for his girlfriend to come in on the bus. So he said,    Why  don   t you not call your mother, and as soon as my girlfriend gets here,  we   ll take you home.    I said,    Okay.    So that   s how I met him. He  brought Cap over to pick up his girlfriend. When we got home, I started  to get out and Bob said,    Well, Cap and Maureen are going to a rodeo  tonight. Why don   t you just go with me and we   ll go to the rodeo?    And  I said,    Okay.    So that   s how it all started. (Laughter)  20  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  Was that rodeo in Tipton?  No, it was in Vernon, Texas. It was a big deal back then. Everybody  went to the rodeo and the big parade. The Santa Rosa, that   s where we  went. (Laughter) And we went a lot of times after that, too.  And so how long did you date?  Oh, we only dated a year and then we got married.  Where did you get married?  We got married in my home. My grandfather married us. He was a  preacher, R.F. Whitaker was his name. He was a great Bible teacher.  At the Church of Christ?  Yes.  And then where did you all live after you got married?  We lived out in the Weaver district.  That   s where he was from?  Yes.  And you said that doesn   t exist anymore?  They made a work center out of it and have inmates out there now. Or  they did.  Where is it? Can you describe?  Well, as you go down the highway going toward Frederick, you know,  before you get to the curve, just go straight on and it was down there  about half a mile.  And was it a very thriving community at the time?  Yes, it was. We had all kinds of basketball games and things there. I  remember making home fried donuts and selling them, out of biscuits.  (Laughs) (To Raenell:)Do you remember that, when we   d make those  donuts out of those biscuits? Then we   d dip them in the sugar glaze and  boy, they was good. I forgot what we sold them for. Was it a nickel a  21  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  piece or two for a nickel? Something like that. But they was really good,  we thought. (Laughs)  And your husband farmed?  Yes, he did. He   d been in the military, but just as soon as he got out of  high school in 1943, he was inducted into the Army. His brother was out  on a furlough for farming. He couldn   t get out on the furlough for  farming because his brother did.  Do you know where all he served in the war?  Well, he didn   t serve very far because he got hurt in training at Camp  Gruber. He got shot in the neck. He had a big piece of shrapnel in his  neck. It was a training accident. So he spent a year in the hospital, in and  out. They   d furlough him some so he could come home. That   s when I  met him was on the furlough. He had that big old slug that came out of  his neck. He had a big scar here on his neck where that just barely  missed his jugular vein.  And was he a cotton farmer?  Yes, and he was a carpenter. He was left-handed.  And when were your children born?  Well Mike was born in 1947. Patti was born six years later in    53.  Were they born in Weaver?  They were born in Frederick at the SNA Hospital in Frederick. It was  right across   I   m trying to think what   s there now. But that was the first  time I was ever in a hospital. (Laughs) I wasn   t in there for very long,  but then I had to stay in bed for two weeks. Well, it might have been six  weeks, because it used to be they wouldn   t let you get out of bed like  they do now, you know. I remember I had some big old bands they put  around us. Remember that?  Well do you have any more stories about anything right off?  Well, I remember when we killed hogs it was a big day. The neighbors  would come and would have to pick a cold day, you know, to do it, so it  wouldn   t spoil the meat. We had a house where we kept the meat, and I  remember I used to   it was cold enough that Mother would go out there  and cut off the steak to cook for dinner, and we   d can the sausage. I  remember we had to turn the jars upside down, you know, to stand them  22  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  so that the grease would go up to the top.  What about ice cream? Would you have an ice truck or would you get a  block of     We had an old ice box and we   d have a card to put in the window that  would say twenty-five, fifty, or 100 pounds and he   d put it in the  window. When the ice truck came by, they   d bring in that ice. The man  would always have pieces that had chipped off, and he   d bring us kids  all a piece of that ice to eat. We   d put it in this big old refrigerator and it  had a pan under the bottom where it dripped, you know. We   d have to  empty that and keep it empty so it wouldn   t run over. (Laughter) We had  milk, cream and stuff, and Mother always made her own cheese. She   d  make cottage cheese. Of course, I thought that was just fit for the  chickens. I never did like cottage cheese. (Laughter) She made cheese  and she had these molds to make it in. It was kind of like this cheese that  you buy in a box like Velveeta, about that size.  And how would she keep it cold before you had your  ice box ?  Seems to me like we had a place that we put in a window that was wet,  you know to be cool. It seemed like we put it there.  Would you ever go down to the river and go swimming?  Oh yeah, down at the creek mostly. Daddy would take my friends and I  down there every Sunday afternoon, down here at Otter Creek. We   d  take our shoes and socks off and wade in the creek, play, and have a  good time. Then we   d go home and Mother had made a freezer of ice  cream, and we   d have ice cream.  Sounds wonderful.  It was. (Laughter)  Straight north of Tipton is where you went to Otter Creek?  Yes. Sure was.  Was Blue School out there still or     I don   t think it was out here when we went. One time we went out there  and Joanne and I, there was steps built down into the creek where you  could get in to go swimming. Mother, Daddy, Aunt Irene and Uncle  Flemon were in there swimming. Joanne and I were sitting up there on  those steps with our feet hanging in the water. So she and I got in an  23  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  L. Wilson  Dunlap  argument about something and she pushed me in. (Laughs) Nobody saw  me, you know, and I went under, but when I went under I felt the steps  down there in the water, and I pulled myself out. I was so mad.    I   m  going to throw her in and going to drown her     (Laughter) But anyway, I  got out.  Then one time, years later, we were out there one Sunday afternoon and  my friend Thelma Givens got in the water. She had on some new, what  they called Huaraches. You remember those shoes they used to wear that  was kind of made out of straw or something? She had on a pair of those.  She   d lost her shoes in the river in the water, and we never could find  them. (Laughter)  What does Oklahoma mean to you, having grown up and lived here?  Well, to me, it   s home. I love Oklahoma.  And when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  I   d like for it to say that I was a wonderful Christian lady.  All right, well thank you for visiting with me today.  You   re welcome.  -------  -------  
