 Larson with the Oklahoma State University Library.  Today is September 3, 2009 and I am here today interviewing Dr.  Virginia Schoats at the Muskogee Public Library in Muskogee,  Oklahoma as part of the Muskogee African American Heritage Oral  History Project of the Spotlighting Oklahoma series. Thank you for  joining me today. If we could talk a little bit about some basic  biographical data, starting with when and where you were born.  I was born June 25, 1931 in Bonham, Texas. My mother is an Oklahoma  native and her parents and grandparents were born and raised in  Oklahoma. She   s from Hendricks, Oklahoma and my grandfather and  grandmother were both native Oklahomans with Indian background. My  grandfather was Creek and my grandmother was Choctaw. But my  mother married a man from Bonham, Texas. His name was Hugh W.  Flanigan and his father was what they call    Black Irish.    He was an  Irishman, but he lived in the black neighborhood with a black woman, so  I assume they were married. I   m not even going to go there, but that   s  who my father married was my mother, Lorena Russell Flanigan. We  lived in Bonham, Texas for five years and then my mother decided that  she and my daddy could not get along, so we left. I have a sister that   s  three years younger than I am and  the three of us, my mother, Delores,  my sister, and I moved to Madill, Oklahoma which is where my  grandfather   s sister lived on a farm outside of Madill, Oklahoma. We  lived there for awhile until my mother could get on her feet.  Then we were kind of scooted back and forth from Pauls Valley,  Oklahoma to Bonham, Texas where my sister and I went to school the  first two or three years of our schooling, in Bonham, Texas, with my  aunt and uncle, F.C. Flanigan. So my basic first, second and third grades  were done in Bonham, Texas. And then finally, Mama got a job as a  maid and we were able to stay in Pauls Valley, Oklahoma until the great  flood of 1940. After that flood in 1940 or    41, I don   t remember exactly  5  Larson  Schoats  which year, but I think it was    41, we moved to Ponca City, Oklahoma. I  began school in Ponca City, Oklahoma in the sixth grade and we stayed  there until I finished high school in 1949. My mother was a single parent  with two latch key kids. My sister and I came home every day by  ourselves and basically did the best we could alone until my mother got  off work. She was a maid and she cleaned people   s houses and that   s  how she made the money that fed us and clothed us and took care of us.  Then at the age of eleven I started going out doing housework,  babysitting, whatever I could find to do to help supplement the family   s  income. At fifteen and a half I started working as a waitress in a  restaurant that was right next door to us which was called the Blue  Moon. At the Blue Moon, this is an interesting part of the history of  black people, it was a very, kind of classy restaurant that catered only to  white people, but was owned and operated by black people. I started out  in the small place that W.C. Robinson had and then we moved to a  larger place, but no black people could come into the restaurant and sit  down and eat. They had to take their food to go. He specialized in  barbeque ribs, chicken and steaks. Wonderful barbeque chicken, fried  chicken, shrimp. A steak cost six dollars back in the    40s when I was  working at the Blue Moon, so it was a very exclusive place mostly for  people who worked at the Continental Oil Company, doctors, lawyers  ate there   poor people couldn   t come to the Blue Moon, I   ll just put it  that way. Because the ribs were like  3.50 and that was a lot of money  back in those days.  I worked at the Blue Moon and made twenty dollars a week which was a  lot of money and tips, so I was able to augment my mother   s income and  we lived pretty comfortably in our three rooms. That   s how I grew up. I  graduated from high school in 1949 and my band teacher, who was C.J.  Fowler from Muskogee, Oklahoma, thought I was pretty good with my  instrument, the baritone horn, and he got me a scholarship at Grambling   College  and at Langston University    25 a semester. He asked me,     Where would I like to go?    I thought I   d better not get too far away  from home as poor as I am because I knew I had no financial support  from my mother, who was making probably nine or ten dollars a week. I  think I was making more money than my mother was. People gave me  clothes, people she worked for, so I didn   t have to buy a lot of clothes. It  was like I never had to want for much of anything because the people in  Ponca City were so good to me. They could see we were struggling, but  they also could see that I was working, that I was trying to be somebody.  I was amazed at how generous the people were.  Was that a very tight community then?  Well we lived south of South Avenue, you know, black people did. We  6  Larson  Schoats  lived on three streets basically   11th, 12th, and 13th Streets. The black  people lived in the same area and we had our own church. We had our  own school, our own library. We had our own fun places (laughs)     night clubs or whatever you want to call them. They weren   t really night  clubs, they were just places that people would go and have a good time,  dance and whatever. We had our own grocery store right there in our  community on 12th Street, 11th Street, 13th Street, 10th Street   that   s  where we lived. And then we went out of the community to work. But  white people came into our community to eat, to have parties, to have a  good time. It was strange.  So there was some back and forth.  There was, a lot of it. And the people who came to the Blue Moon were  very generous with me. That   s all I can remember is how nice everybody  was and how they tried to help me once they found out I was going to  college, they were so generous to me. I would have to come back home  from Langston to work on weekends to raise my tuition, my room and  board and whatever I needed. The recession came about that same time  and so I was having a very difficult time because there was no money.  Everybody was out of a job and it was tight, economically. I got through  my first year pretty good, but by my second year I was struggling and  when I went to ask the employment people at Langston for a job,  basically I was told that I didn   t need a job because they could see me  walking around on campus with all these pretty clothes on and there  were kids out there who had only one dress or one pair of pants and they  needed a job a lot worse than I did. I didn   t need a job. Besides I think  being half white, they thought I had money too. (Laughs) So they would  not give me a job.  I kept trying to go back home to work and struggle to get the money I  needed and I almost made up my mind to join the Air Force or to do  something like that so that I wouldn   t have to go back and wait tables for  the rest of my life, but I thought,    That is no future for me.    But a very  kind lady asked me if I would stay with her and help her with her two  kids because her husband was graduating in December and she had a  place to stay, she had food to eat, but she didn   t have any money to pay  me. All she could offer me for helping her with her kids would be just to  live with her and eat with her and I accepted it. So I moved out of the  dormitory in December and moved into what they call Vetville with  Jennie May Jarred. She had a son named Billy and a daughter named  Sondra and a daughter named Jennifer. Well her baby daughter had not  been born at that time. We still correspond with each other. So that   s  what I did for the rest of the second semester of my sophomore year. I  raised enough money during the Christmas holidays to pay for my  tuition and buy my books and I lived with her the spring and the summer  7  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  of 1951.  So at the end of the year, 1951, the summer, she graduated. I was now  working in the infirmary, so I was making  17.50 a month. That was  enough to pay for what I needed. And the nurse asked me if I would stay  with her. She had four little grandchildren whose mother was not able to  take care of them. The oldest was like five and the youngest was like one  and she asked me if I would stay with her and take care of them because  she had to work 24-hour shifts at the infirmary. So I stayed with Mrs.  Watkins and that was a year I   ll never forget (laughter) because I was  taking 18 hours and trying to take care four little children. I don   t know  how I survived it  I look back over my life and I know that God must  have been strengthening me. You didn   t ask for all this, did you?  Oh no, this is wonderful.  So I stayed with Mrs. Watkins in    51 and the spring of    52 and took care  of her four grandchildren and I had the complete responsibility for  getting those children out to nursery school every day and then going to  class, picking them up, bringing them home, cooking for them, washing,  cleaning up, feeding them.  Which is more than a full time job.  She paid me nothing. All I got was room and board. So by this time, I  had met my husband, Albert. He graduated in the spring of    51 and we  got married and by the spring of    52, about the summer of    52 he had  gotten a job in Topeka, Kansas on   he had a college degree, but he  couldn   t get a job in Oklahoma teaching because we were going through  the first beginnings of integration in Oklahoma. They weren   t hiring any  black teachers to amount to anything so he was in Topeka, Kansas and  Wichita working as a carpenter. The summer of    52, I got pregnant and  so I was in Topeka, Kansas with him and he got a job in Paris, Arkansas  as a coach and a principal and I was a teacher. That was supposed to be  my senior year in college, but I was pregnant. So that was kind of the  beginnings of my life.  How did you finish up school? You must have since you are now Dr.  Schoats.  After my second baby, she was six weeks old, in 1954, I said,    I must go  back to school.    He got a job coaching and teaching in Chandler,  Oklahoma which was very close to Langston. Another girl and I roomed  together and took turns babysitting our babies. Mama kept my oldest  little girl and I took Janice with me, my baby, and started back to school.  I finished up my degree in 1955, then came back to Ponca City and  8  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  taught a year. My husband had received a notice from Chandler in the  summer telling him they would not be needing his services because they  were integrating schools. That was in July of    55.  How often did that happen?  All the time. We got letters at the end of the year, mostly in June or July  we   d get letters that said the school was being integrated and they were  closing our school and they wouldn   t need our services anymore. So  then we would have to hustle around and try to find another job. He was  able to get another job because he was working on his master   s degree at  OSU and he met a Mr. Adams from Hugo, Oklahoma who hired him.  Then my principal in Ponca City hired me. So I was an English teacher  in Ponca City, he was a science teacher in Hugo, Oklahoma. We were  that far apart from each other in    55 and    56.  Was it the same school in Ponca City that you had gone to?  It was the same school I graduated from.  Same principal probably?  Same principal I graduated out of.  So he knew that he was getting a quality     Yeah, right. (Laughs) He knew he was getting a workaholic   How did you decide that you wanted to be a teacher? Was that  something you   d always wanted to do?  It was just kind of thrust upon me because when I graduated, I didn   t  know what I wanted to do. I didn   t even know about college. I didn   t  know anything. But Mr. Fowler just kind of led me on. And then my  BTU   Baptist Trading Union person at my church, St. John Baptist  Church in Ponca City, told me,    Virginia, I   m going to take you to  Langston because I know you do not know what you   re doing.    I said,     No, sir.    People gave me the luggage and the trunk. Everything I  needed, people in Ponca City gave it to me and he said,    I   m going to  take you out to Langston because I   m pretty well known.    He was a  chauffeur at Continental Oil Company and he had about five or six kids,  I don   t know. Some of them were my age. His name was Mr. Dewberry  and Mr. Dewberry put me in one of the cars from Continental Oil  Company and took me to Langston. Then he went over and introduced  me to the Vice President for Academic Affairs.    You take care of my     this is my daughter and I want you to take care of her.    So that   s how I  9  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  got on the campus.  Well I still didn   t know anything about majors. I didn   t know anything  about what to do and I remember one of the Deans told me,    Well I tell  you what, since you   re getting a scholarship in music, why don   t you go  ahead and major in music?    I said,    Okay.    So Mr. Davis, who later  came to Muskogee, was over the band. He just kind of took me under his  wings and he said,    Okay, here are the classes that you need to take the  first semester, the ones you need to take the second semester.    And they  were basic classes, English, math, history, government, science. Of  course music. I was pretty good in music, so it was not hard because  we   d had a really good music teacher in high school and we knew  music. We knew notes. We had to listen to opera when I was in high  school and identify the instruments that were playing, the vocalists and  things like that. So in a small school like Ponca City where there were  only a hundred kids from first grade through twelfth grade, it was a top  school. I could play the baritone. I was good at playing the baritone. I   d  had piano lessons. My church had given me piano lessons and I was just  prepared in music.  But the second semester, they told me I would have to take piano lessons  on campus at  18.50 an hour. I could barely raise tuition and room and  board. I knew I couldn   t stay in music. So I switched my major to  English and that   s how I got to be an English major. It was just to escape  the  18.50 fees for piano lessons.  Have you stayed active in music over the years?  Yes, I sing with my choir and any opportunity I get, I participate in  musical things, but not the way I did in Ponca City because I was in the  community, like we   d have the great musical every Christmas, Handel   s  Messiah and I would always participate in that. I was in everything that  they had that had to do with music. But since I   ve been in Muskogee, I  have not ventured out that far. But I do sing in my choir at church.  How did you and your husband end up in Muskogee?  Okay, he taught in Hugo in 1955-   56 and    56-   57. Of course, I got my  letter from Ponca City out of the school in 1956 saying that the high  school would be merged with Ponca City High School. They would no  longer offer high school programs at Attucks in Ponca City so I was told  that they would not be needing my services anymore. They did place the  math teacher, Dr. Percy Hytche, who later became President of  Maryland State Eastern Shore. They placed Mrs. Hunter who had been a  social studies teacher there for years. They placed Mr. Hunter, who had  been in math and industrial arts. But the rest of us, I think, basically they  10  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  let us go.  And that would have been how many of you? I mean     We had a high school. It   s vague in my mind right now, but we had  English, math, history, all the courses and they hired people who had no  degrees to replace us. That   s what was so harmful. All of us had  master   s degrees. I didn   t, but the majority of the other older teachers  had master   s degrees that they had gotten at   we couldn   t get master   s  degrees in Oklahoma because there was no college that would accept  black people. So the state would pay for us to go to Columbia, Chicago  University, University of Southern California, Berkeley, all of these  places. So our teachers had their master   s degrees from other colleges. A  lot of them went to University of Kansas, too. So they had master   s  degrees and they replaced us with students who were still going to  college rather than hire black teachers in the high school. So after    55-     56, fortunately, I was pregnant again so I went to Hugo and stayed with  my husband until Jennifer was born in    57. Then I came back to go work  at the Blue Moon so I could make some money.  He got a job in Muskogee in    57 and he moved here. His mother lived  here. So he lived here in Muskogee in    57 and started coaching football  with Uncle Walter Cox and started teaching science and driver   s ed at  Manual Training High School. I was still in Ponca City in September but  by the middle of September, he found us a house on 18th Street. So we  moved up, my three girls, we moved to Muskogee. We never went back  to Ponca City much anymore. Maybe at Christmas, but that was it. And I  never worked anymore after that at the Blue Moon.  That was the end of the Blue Moon.  That was the end of the Blue Moon for me.  What were your first impressions of Muskogee?  I was really a little bit   I   m going to be frank. I   m going to be truthful.  In all of Muskogee, because I had been here as a girl, we used to have  meetings over here with the Federated Club and I thought it was such a  large city. I can remember the Martin Luther King Center being the  library and sort of a gathering place for the Federated Club girls. We  would come in the summer and it seems like everybody was so  sophisticated and worldly. (Laughs) And I thought   I was kind of  scared of Muskogee. It   s so big  It   s the same way I felt about the house  that my husband purchased while I was in Ponca City in December of     57. We went home, my children and I, again to work and make money  and when I came home, he picked us up at the bus station and he said,    I  11  Larson  Schoats  have something I want you to see.    I said,    What is it?    He said,    Well,  it   s a house, and I think you   ll like it.    So he pulled up in the driveway.  The girls and I got out. We came into the house. All my furniture was in  the house at 715 Fondulac (it   s Martin Luther King now). That house  was so big. It was nine rooms  We lived in a three room house, my  mother and sister and then even after we moved here to Muskogee, we  lived in like a four room house. I had never even seen hardly a house  that big before and I said,    It   s so big     (Laughs) Nine rooms. But he  had bought that house and that   s where we raised our family.  So as far as Muskogee was concerned, I thought it was a really big  place. I think they had 40,000 people living here. It was the third largest  city in the state of Oklahoma. A lot of black people and they seemed to  have been so sophisticated. That   s what I said about the people in  Muskogee. They were extremely sophisticated.  Was Fondulac, which is now Martin Luther King, in the larger African-  American neighborhood?  I   ll tell you about Muskogee. There were three areas in Muskogee that  black people who had money lived. One was the first place my husband  took me which was on 18th Street and in that neighborhood, Ms. Upshaw  lived on my left, Mrs. King, an elementary teacher lived on the right and  across the street, there were Mr. Hudson and Mrs. Hudson lived   Mr.  Hudson was a superintendent. Mrs. Hudson was an elementary teacher  at Douglass. Just all up and down that neighborhood lived pretty  prominent people. They had gardens. They had beautiful homes. The  homes were decorated beautifully. They were just very cultured and that  was one of the neighborhoods that black people lived in that was pretty  prominent.  Then where my husband moved us to, that was a mixed neighborhood.  You had white people and black people living in there. Across the street  were the Hiblers and Reverend Hibler was a minister of a Baptist  church. Mrs. Hibler,  one of their daughters,  worked for the  government. She lived in Washington, D.C., but her other daughter was  a librarian and Dr. Adam Herbert came out of that family. He became  President of Indiana University and was President of Florida State  University. You   ve heard of Dr. Herbert. Okay, that   s who lived across  the street. And across there was Mr. Hodges and Mrs. Hughes  who  were outstanding educators  and just all in that neighborhood, Dr. Riley,  who was a very prominent teacher, lived right next door to us.  Dr.  Wallace, a dentist, lived next door.  We had doctors and lawyers. That   s  who lived on Fondulac. Right down 9th Street, you had lawyers and  doctors and teachers.  12  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Then in the neighborhood they started building houses right up on 7th  Street and on Terrace Place, Terrace Boulevard and that was prominent  blacks who lived in those neighborhoods. So Muskogee had a lot of  prominent blacks. In Ponca City, we had only one doctor and we had  maybe one lawyer. But here in Muskogee, there were lawyers on every  corner. There were dentists and medical doctors and prominent people.  We never had to go to white doctors if we didn   t want to. I remember we  all liked Dr. Reynolds, he was a white doctor and a lot of black people  would go to him. But mostly we went to Dr. Chandler, or Dr. Smith, or  Dr. Tollett or the other Dr. Smith. There was Robert Smith and Fred  Smith. One was a physician and the other was a dentist. We never had to  go out of our neighborhood. We had lawyers. Attorney Kimble,  Attorney Twine, the Twines were prominent lawyers. You just didn   t  have to leave the neighborhood. You had drugstores and grocery stores  and pharmacies and movies. You had fish markets. Whatever was  needed, we spent our money in this one place, Second Street, around in  that area   cleaners, a hat place.  Up where the mall is now?  Yeah. I get teary eyed when I think about what they did to us. HUD  came in and destroyed our neighborhood and I get teary eyed when I  think about it because it was so unnecessary. If they had kept it, they  would have been a lot better off because it would have been a great  tourist attraction. But they didn   t.  And it sounds like it was such a vibrant neighborhood.  It was. It was. But they decided that   s not the way they wanted  Muskogee to look. Of course, now it   s dead. But you could go down  Second Street and anything you wanted was there. You need your hat  repaired, you need your shoe repaired, you need your clothes cleaned,  you need a fish sandwich, you want barbecue, you want groceries, you  needed to go to the bank. You had a place there you could borrow  money. You were just right there.  Everything you ever needed.  Pharmacy, drugstore, you could sit and drink a malt. You didn   t have to  go and get a malt and take it outdoors as we had to do in Ponca City.  You want a movie, you could go inside. You didn   t have to sit in the  balcony.  What were the movie theatres there?  The Roxy. It was right there on Second Street. Then they had a dance  13  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  hall. You   d go up there and they   d have live bands. Ladies would dress  up in their finery and men would dress up in their suits, tuxedos and go  to really nice dances and they had clubs, they had organizations, they  had teas with real silver and finger food. Muskogee was quite a place  when I came here in 1957.  And how have you seen that change over the years?  It   s just not the same anymore. Paper plates   we would have died if you  would have served us on paper plates. We had real china and I had a  hard time because I was a poor girl and didn   t know anything about all  of that. But I   m a quick learner (laughs) and so it didn   t take long for me  to become acclimated to what Muskogee had to offer and was very, very  highly cultured.  Now when do you think that started to change?  After integration.  So would you say the late    60s? Because I don   t know when certain  things in Muskogee became integrated.  We started losing our businesses in the late    60s, early    70s when they  decided   they integrated the schools in 1970 and that was the beginning  of the end for cultural    When I left Muskogee, we left in 1970 because  my husband refused to be a co-coach at the high school. I   m not going to  have time to tell you everything. (Laughter)  We can at least get started.  They had co-principals, Mr. Adams and the principal at Muskogee High  School were co-principals and then they offered my husband, who had  gone to State both in basketball and in football     Because they had quite a team.  My husband, Albert Schoats is a legend because he was, along with  Uncle Walter Cox, an excellent football coach   excellent. They had  gone to State on several occasions and he had one of the better teams. I  mean, people came to his games. It was so crowded they had no room  for them to sit. They had to bring chairs and stuff in. Same with his  basketball team. And so when they offered him    co-coach    at the high  school, he was devastated. He could not accept that because the coach  that he was going to be coaching with had not been successful. So when  they told him that they were going to retire the coach at Langston, they  were interested in him becoming a coach at Langston   Mr. Duncan,  14  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Herman Duncan, who was on the Board of Regents for OSU. I know  you   ve probably heard his name, but he was such a dynamic person. Mr.  Duncan called him and said,    Schoats, I know you don   t want that co-thing  out at the high school.    He said    No.       Would you like to go to  Langston as head football coach?    Albert said,    Yes, sir.    (Laughs) He  didn   t even hesitate and so they retired the coach at Langston and hired  Albert as head football coach at Langston. So we left Muskogee in 1970.  Now had you been teaching at Manual too?  No, my first job in this area   I couldn   t get a job teaching in Muskogee  schools. They had, let   s see how many elementary schools did they  have? They had Douglass, Dunbar, Wheatley, Langston   I think they  had four elementary schools. They had a junior high school, Sadler  Junior High School and Muskogee Manual Training High School and I  could not get a job. I substituted, but I couldn   t get a job teaching  because jobs were priority here and everybody wanted to teach in  Muskogee. So my first job was in Taft. I worked a year in Taft teaching  English and was let go at the end of the year because I didn   t know the  politics of Taft. You had to do some things that were really illegal to  stay on at Taft. But the Superintendent didn   t tell me until the end of the  year when they had to let me go. So I didn   t work another year and then  the next year, I went to work at Haskell and I taught English and French  at  Booker T. Washington High School in  Haskell for a couple of years  and then they hired me in Muskogee because of my French background,  they were bringing French into the school system and they hired me as  an elementary teacher at Douglass and I taught French in elementary  school   sixth graders. I loved it.  That   s very progressive, to have languages at that level.  The children today, when I see them,    Bonjour, Madam     I say,    You  still remember?       I remember that French.    And that was in 1964 or    65.  But I taught French in elementary school and then the last year in   I   m  trying to think what year that was. They took me from Douglass   because they were integrating , they took me out to Pershing, so I had  to go out there for a year and then I got pregnant with my last daughter  and I wasn   t going to be in school in September. The principal came and  said,    We   re going to keep your job open for you, but we don   t want you  to come back to Pershing. We want you to go to West Junior High  School and teach English and French.    (Laughs) And so I said,    Okay.     So that   s what I did in   68-   69 and then    69-   70 they made me a  counselor. So    69-   70 I was a counselor at West Junior High School;  first counselor that they had ever had.  I kept having to go back to school. My degree was in secondary English  15  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  Schoats  Larson  and French and when they hired me as an elementary teacher at  Douglass, I had to go back and get certified in elementary education.  When I was at Haskell I had to go to OU and spend a summer in French  to get my French certification up to date and then when they hired me as  a counselor, I had to go to Northeastern and get my counseling  certificate. So they kept sending me to school to get certified. I thought,     My goodness, when am I going to get stable? When am I going to get  into something I can do?    Then my husband went to Langston. Okay, so  what happens at Langston? I   m in counseling. They put me in  counseling and I teach English too. So I   m now in the college level  teaching English and doing counseling   double duty. I taught nine  hours of English, plus full time counselor. They took full advantage of  me. But it was a good progressive kind of thing because I kept going up  at Langston.  And is that when you went back for your doctorate?  Yeah, we were at Langston for thirteen years and my husband decided  he was not going to build a house or do anything in Langston. He was  going to build us a house in Muskogee. We bought property on 7th  Street. A big old boring, red house. A big old, red, ugly house. (Laughs)  He turned that house around and he made a beautiful home out of it and  when he did that, I told him,    I guess we   re going back to Muskogee.     He said,    No, I   m not going back to Muskogee.    And I said,    You got  this house turned around. All of our furniture and stuff is in it. We have  no locks on the door. You   re not going back to Muskogee?       No.    So I  said,    Okay, I   m going back to Muskogee to take care of my property.     So I took a job back here as a counselor in 1983 and I worked five years  as a counselor  at Alice Robertson Junior High  and then they promoted  me to Assistant Principal. So I went from West Junior High to the High  School. And then I went back to Langston as Vice President of  Academic Affairs in Tulsa. That   s how I ended my career as a Vice  President of Academic Affairs in Tulsa.  Which is quite a journey.  I spent thirteen more years at Langston in Tulsa.  And then you came back home to Muskogee.  To retire. But I just commuted. I never did move to Tulsa. But I   ll have  to tell you more the next time we talk about the culture of Muskogee,  because I didn   t get to tell you. That   s what you   re going to want to  know about, because it was absolutely fantastic.  Well thank you so much for helping us out with this. We look forward to  16  Schoats  talking with you when we come back. We   ll keep in touch.  Okay.  -------  -------  
