 Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  Today is June 20, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson and I am with the  Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State  University Library. I am at Cheyenne, Oklahoma today and I am talking  with Dwayne Roark. I am interviewing Dwayne for the Spotlighting  Oklahoma oral history series. Thank you for talking with me today. Can  we start out with having you tell me where you were born and when?  Well I was born here in Cheyenne. June 25,    52.  What kind of facility were you born in?  I was born in a hospital, which at the time it was made of some, my  understanding, World War II barracks. That is what we had until up in  the mid    60s for our hospital here.  Did you have brothers and sisters?  Had two brothers and two sisters. A brother and sister older and a  brother and sister younger.  What did you parents do for a living?  We had a farm and then my dad worked out here and there, and we had a  tornado in    55 that just about ruined us. My dad worked out for several  years, worked at the Ford garage and the Chevrolet garage, worked at  the feed mill in the winter and then we farmed. Then we hauled hay. I  hauled hay for twenty-one years in this county. There was a lot of hay  put up, because there were a lot of dairies in this county during the    50s  and    60s.  There aren   t many dairies anymore. What happened?  5  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Well, it is just like all agriculture, consolidated and you had to get pretty  big. Part of the deal was a lot of guys dairied for several years, and they  held their farm together and added to it. When they got old enough, they  quit dairying and a lot of them were still farming in the same places, still  live on the same places but they don   t have a dairy anymore. It got  harder to have a small dairy. It had to get pretty big.  What were the main crops that your father farmed?  We farmed cotton and wheat until finally in the    50s when it was so bad,  all of our farmland was put in the soil bank program and we got to  hauling hay. They just quit farming and we just ran cattle after that.  Dairied a couple of times and then we hauled hay. We had a milk route  in town for a few years. Delivered milk in town. Scratched and tried  everything we could to make a living, and pay off that tornado that  blowed us away.  Did you pretty much grow up in Cheyenne?  West of town. Five miles west of Cheyenne is where I grew up.  Did you start to school in Cheyenne?  Yes.  Is that where you graduated?  Yes.  What year did you graduate?     70.  Has the school system in Cheyenne changed much?  Sure. I mean, it   s been a progression. We   ve got a really nice school  facility now. This county has had a lot of oil production, which  translates into more money for schools. Of course, when I graduated I  was going to school in a WPA building that they built in    36, I think. I  believe it was built in    36. One of them was. Maybe the other building  was built in    34. The grade school was one building and the high school  was another. I graduated from there.  Where was the high school located then?  The fire department is there now. It   s up the street from the courthouse.  6  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  About two blocks from where the courthouse is.  Has the size of the graduating class changed much?  Not much. In fact, we have graduated some bigger classes then than we  do now.  I guess there has been a lot of consolidation?  Yes. When I started school there were   let   s see, I think either that was  the year Strong City closed or the year after. There was Crawford and I  think Durham had already closed. Reydon, Sweetwater, Berlin,  Cheyenne, and Hammon. Now it   s Reydon, Sweetwater and Cheyenne.  Crawford is gone, Berlin is gone, Strong City is gone, Durham is gone.  Is Sweetwater in Roger Mills County or is it...?  Barely. Yeah. The town is, sort of. The school is not, but the town is on  the county line. The school is two miles south of the county line, but  there are a lot of Sweetwater students in Roger Mills County.  Well how has farming in this area changed over the years?  It is like farming everywhere. It is consolidated, because you can   t take  such big areas to make a living, such a big farm to make a living  farming. A lot of this country was farmed that shouldn   t have ever been  farmed, because of the Homestead Act you had to farm it. We are so dry  out here that a lot of this country was farmed when this country was  settled. In 1892 was when the Run was out here in this part of the  country. A lot of it shouldn   t have ever been farmed but they had to in  the Homestead Act. There has a lot of it been sown back to grass. Lots  and lots of acres been sown to grass and so there is not near the farming  that there was. There is some bigger farmers on the river and some on  the bigger creeks where the better farming is. There is not much good  farmland away from the creeks and rivers in this country. There is just  one or two areas that has got some good farmland that is not close to a  creek or river.  Do you know much about your family   s history, how they came to settle  in this area?  Well, a little. I know a little about it. My dad   s family settled four miles  west of town in the    20s. His mother   s family had immigrated out of  Prussia when the Czars started running the Germans out of Russia. They  went to South Dakota and then some of them came to Oklahoma when it  was open for settlement over around Clinton and Bessie. Bessie really. A  7  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  lot of them are still there. They came out here and looked at the farm one  year and ended up out here. Well, she didn   t. My dad   s family did. Now  my mother   s family, her granddad was a Texas Ranger and he came up  here when Oklahoma was settled. Him and is brother came to Oklahoma  and settled south of town.  So did you grow up with, would it be your great-grandparents speaking  German?  No, they had passed. I never did know them. My dad grew up speaking  German. He could speak German.  Did he maintain any of their culture that you realized?  No. They came to America to be Americans, and they just immersed  themselves into American culture. His grandparents never did learn to  speak English at all, hardly, very little. But they were older when they  came to the country, but all of their kids learned to speak English. They  made all of their kids learn to speak English.  Did you hear many stories about the Dust Bowl days from your parents?  Oh yeah, from my folks and other people around this country. We  hauled hay so we knew a lot of people in this county and then my dad  had the feed store and had the paper route. He knew everybody in this  country. My wife   s folks were all raised here, or her dad   s side of the  family was. I have heard a lot of stories about the Dust Bowl.  Any good ones you can think of that you would like to share?  I don   t know if there are any good ones. (Laughter) It was all pretty  tough. I remember my dad talking one time about they were farming  several acres of wheat plus crops for their horses and they farmed with a  team. He never did farm with a tractor when he was at home. He left  home before he ever farmed with a tractor. They still farmed with a  team. I remember him telling me one time his folks sitting around the  dinner table about Christmas one year. I think it was    36 or    37 and they  said they were farming 300-400 acres of wheat, maybe a little more plus  for their animals. They had taken cream and eggs to town every  Saturday and did a little trapping on the side. He said they added all up  the cash money they had taken in all year, the whole family. They had  taken in  537.00 all year working from dark to dark and a little bit.  Everyday nearly so times were pretty tough.  I remember my dad talking about the Depression, how farm families had  it so much better, because they almost always had something to eat.  8  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  People in town, it was a struggle sometimes. They always raised a  garden, chicken, hogs and cattle. They had to haul water to the garden  from the creek because they didn   t have electricity, but their mother  made them haul water to the garden from the creek. They watered the  garden and raised a garden every year so they had something to eat. It  was a struggle for the people in town so farm families were a little better  in that respect, I guess you would say. But no cash money is just hard to  imagine.  When people talk about the Depression I always think of the story, there  was a guy from Reydon, Ellie Kindling used to tell (or he told me a time  or two) when they built the river bridge on Highway 33 at Strong City.  They built the bridge, I think he said they had one dozer on that and the  rest of that was done with teams. They did it in    34 or    35. It was a WPA  project. I remember him telling me he hired out him and his team, he  hired out and was making so much money, cash money, and he went and  bought another team and hired a guy to run it. They were paying for a  team and a man a dollar-and-a-half a day. He was making enough on   1.50 a day he made another team and hired a guy to run it. It just kind  of boggles your mind. You think about a  1.50 being enough to hire a  guy and buy a team of horses.  Yeah.  He told me that story a couple of times.  And then your father was in WWII?  Yes. When the war broke out he was going to college. When that  semester   well that semester was about over about when Pearl  Harbor     Where was he going to college?  I think he was going to Weatherfod when that happened. He had gone to  Panhandle State for a year, and I think he was going to Weatherford  when Pearl Harbor happened. Anyway, him and three, four, five other  guys from Cheyenne went to Fort Sill to enlist. I think G.B. Payne was  one of them, and I can   t remember who the others were. Either G.B. or  Virgil. It was one of the Payne boys went with him to Fort Sill and they  enlisted. The rest of them went, and he scored good enough on his test  that they sent him to cadet school, pilot school. They sent him home and  called him up in a few months, and they sent him to flight school. Then  he became a fighter pilot and he was in the South Pacific. He was in the  South Pacific theater, and he flew a P-38 was his combat airplane.  9  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Do you know how long he trained to learn how to fly?  I mean, of course they train for a while. It took over a year to go through  the program, but I do know he soloed in three hours and fifteen minutes,  which is pretty good. He was a pretty good pilot.  Did he tell you much about his time in the war?  Oh yeah. He would tell stories about that some. It was a pretty tough  deal. He said he got sent over there, and the Japs would come over and  bomb them and send two hundred airplanes. They would have half-a-dozen  P-38s to send up to defend themselves. Yeah, it is a pretty tough  deal.  Did he marry your mom after the war?  Yeah. She thought about getting married, and he was one of those guys  that said,    Well, I might not make it back.    A lot of his buddies didn   t.  She was from here, too?  She was from down in Grimes Country, which is south of here about ten  miles. She graduated from Berlin which is eleven or twelve miles south  of here, where she graduated from school. They dated when she was still  in high school, and what not, but they waited until, I think it was, August     45 before they got married.  When did he start delivering newspapers?     47. August of    47.  Do you want to tell us about that?  Well sure. He started delivering   he was just trying to make a little cash  money. He had a Sunday paper. Just delivered the Sunday. He delivered  it in rural areas. He was delivering with a Model A Ford. It was taking  him all day and then some. He just got to thinking about flying a little bit  and he approached E.K. Gaylord, and I can   t remember who the  circulation director was now. Used to know. I knew him. Anyway, about  flying. It was kind of a novel idea but they went for it. I forget what date  it was. Sometime in August of    47 he started off flying in a 7AC,  Aeronca Champ.  Did he own the airplane?  I am not sure he owned that airplane. He may have. I am not sure about  10  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  the Champ.  What was the newspaper?  The Daily. The Sunday Oklahoman. The Daily Oklahoman. It was their  Sunday Edition. I think he told me it took him two hours to fly the first  Sunday or something like that. Something he had been doing all day in a  Model A. He flew it for nine years, and he sold it to a guy and he flew it  for a few years, he got it back and flew it for another five years. He flew  it for fourteen years himself all together and then some other guys flew it  for several years. Then one of them got killed in an airplane crash, and  then me and my brother flew it for a year. Then Dale went back to  school and I sold it. The guy wrecked his airplane. Then me and Daddy  flew it for another nearly year and then we finally quit. That was the last  of    73. That was the last we flew it.  So would they pay for the gas?  At that time, and I guess they still do, The Daily Oklahoman or Sunday  had what they call a paid drive. If you had a route and you had to drive a  vehicle, they paid you drive money. That usually, like on our deal  particularly, it paid for, gas, oil and a little bit. It wasn   t enough to pay  for your airplane. The Sunday itself wouldn   t hardly do it. But what you  got to do, where it made money, you sold The Daily Oklahoman and it  was delivered through the postal service, and you got a commission for  selling The Daily. You got a commission for selling it, and that is where  you really made your money. I know one time when my dad was doing a  paper route he sold every single Daily Oklahoman in Roger Mills  County.  Did he go outside of Roger Mills County at all?  Yeah. Our route we delivered up a north route and turned around just  this side of Arnett up in Ellis County. Then we had a little bit that went  over into the edge of Beckham County, the south route did. Then our  west route had some that went over to the edge of Texas, over west of  Allison, Texas, nearly into Briscoe. Yeah, when we started it was just  Roger Mills County but got to flying it and it got bigger. Ended up in  parts of three counties and over in the edge of Texas.  How old were you the first time you rode along?  You didn   t ride along, cause when you hauled the paper you was full.  You didn   t have room for passengers. I don   t know when I started  flying, riding with him. He would fly on Sundays or some other days  when we had time to take people flying. He got a lot of people interested  11  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  in flying over the years. I don   t know how. I can   t remember. That is just  what we did.  Did he teach you how to fly?  He taught me some and when I learned to fly we had a lot of interest in  flying then. There was a lot of younger people flying, and I rode a lot  with a guy named Ford Atha, rode a lot with him and he worked at the  bank. He would get off work at four o   clock and I would get out of  school. Not get home for an hour or so. Show up late to do my chores  and we would go fly an hour or so at times. Daddy, he gave some good  instructions, yeah.  Can you describe the airplane? I am picturing it packed with  newspapers but these are pre-rolled newspapers?  Well, we had to roll them.  But before they went in the plane.  When Daddy started he tied them with a string. Later they got where  rubber bands were good enough. We just put heavy rubber bands on  them. They would drop them off wherever you wanted to. The Daily or  The Sunday Oklahoman had a truck that made the route Sunday  morning. When we were doing it, and it was about the same when  Daddy was doing it, you   d get the paper about five o   clock in the  morning and then you just go roll papers. When Daddy was flying he  flew it all by himself. When he quit the last time was the last time ever  one person flew it after that. There were always three or four people  flying after that. When he flew it, it took all day. In the winter time it  would be dark when he left and dark when he got in.  So would he just keep a window open?  Not when it   s cold you didn   t. (Laughs) When it   s cold you just open the  window when it   s time to throw one of them out. Between times you  shut the window and that little old heater, most everybody flew it in a J-  3 Cub. It worked better and after he tried that Aeronca for a little bit, he  bought a Cub. That is what we flew it in most of the time, about  everybody flew it in a J-3 Cub after that, because it worked well. He  bought a real good heater and if you had cracks around your doors, if  they didn   t seal real good, if it was the winter time it got cold, awful  cold. I can remember Daddy coming in and like I said, he flew the whole  deal. In the winter time, he would fly eight or nine hours. In the winter  time I remember him coming in and just being so cold you would run  hot water and he would just sit in the bathtub trying to warm him up. It  12  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  was cold. I had one old airplane one time. I had a Redder. The guy had  caulked all the doors and put sealers in it and the heater worked pretty  good in that airplane. Most Cubs if you opened the window every now  and then, it was twenty-five degrees, you never got warm. It was cold  until you got done.  So about how many customers do you think there were?  I don   t know how many he had, because when he quit I was pretty  young still when he quit the last time. When we quit, we were flying it,  we had right at four hundred, just a little under four hundred customers  on a Sunday. We delivered by air and we also had a route in town. We  always had, and he did too, a teenager or somebody that would deliver to  Reydon. They would come to town, pick up some and deliver some  along the highway in the town of Reydon. I wasn   t counting those  papers. That is just what we threw out of the airplane, and that was four  hundred.  We often think of teenage boys delivering newspapers by bicycle, and  sometimes they end up in funny places. I can only image there are some  stories about where the newspaper ended up from an airplane.  Oh, yeah. We always carried a few extra papers because just every now  and then, especially if you take days like today and the wind is blowing  forty miles an hour and you catch you a gust, you had to adjust for the  wind, but you could throw one out and think it could get there and then  about that time you hit a gust about sixty miles an hour and it just  blowed it on down the way. You might be so far away they would never  find it. You would have to turn around and drop another one.  Did you pretty much wait to see where it dropped?  Oh, yeah, you always look, because if you thought they couldn   t find it,  you would make another pass and drop another paper, because you want  everyone to get the paper.  Yeah.  But you can tell. In a Cub you don   t travel fast enough. It is a seventy-five/  eighty mile an hour airplane and you could see usually.  Well, today I was talking with the gentleman that had ridden along with  your father before, I believe. He mentioned he threw it out the window  and they turned sideways in order to see it.  Oh, he was probably just showing him a good time. (Laughs) No, you  13  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  could usually look back and see where it went.  Okay. (Laughs)  Once in a while there would a house that had trees all around it or  something like that. They would have some obstacles you would have to  look a little different but usually you could just look back out the side  window and see where it went most of the time. Yeah, it was quite a  deal, but he was really good. Daddy was really good, because he got a  lot of practice. If the wind wasn   t blowing he could put it in the washtub  nearly every time. (Laughs) He was pretty good. He had a lot of  practice. He threw three to four hundred of them every Sunday. That is a  lot of practice.  Yeah.  Especially if you do it fourteen years.  I don   t think we have said his name yet. Will you tell us?  It was Lee Roark.  So when he retired from the newspaper route what did he do?  He had kind of retired. He was just farming and ranching at that point.  Well see, no. We still had the feed store, I guess, when we quit flying the  paper route.  In Cheyenne?  Yeah .They had a feed mill for a few years here in Cheyenne. He still  had it when we quit flying the paper route, I guess before he retired from  that. He was just kind of helping me out when we quit flying it. My  brother Dale, we got it when J.N. got killed and we got the paper route.  Then Dale decided to go back to school and left me. (Laughs) I pressed  Daddy into helping me. He was just flying one route every Sunday.  Anyway, he was helping me.  In helping you do you mean several different airplanes going at the  same time?  Yeah. Like I say, after Daddy quit there was always three to four people  flying it after that. He flew one route. Yeah, we had different airplanes.  We all had an airplane and some we could borrow if we needed one. At  that time there was a lot of people flying. They would loan you an  airplane or whatever you needed, if you needed one to fly a paper route.  14  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  So what have you done since you quit delivering airplanes?  Not much.  Do you still farm?  Yeah. Do a little bit of farming and run cattle, me and my wife do. We  have a trucking business. We haul rock and gravel for people, oil field  locations and highway jobs, whatever.  Mostly in Oklahoma?  Oklahoma is our big   we haul a lot over in the edge of Texas, because  there is a lot of oil field activity. We are not but fifteen miles from the  Texas line. We do quite a bit of work over in Texas, right now anyway.  It is mainly Oklahoma. We get into Kansas and New Mexico some, but  not much.  Do you feel like Cheyenne has changed much over the years?  Everything changes. Yeah. I mean, when I was a kid every building on  Main Street was full or had a business in it of some kind. When I was a  kid, it was still mainly rural. We had a lot of dairies and a lot of farmers.  On Saturday you couldn   t hardly get up and down Main Street it was so  busy. You had a drawing on Saturday, four movie pictures on Saturday,  you had the matinee and two features and preview on Saturday at the  movie theater. Every business in town stayed open until at least six  o   clock on Saturday. Some of them stayed till eight or nine on Saturday  night. Every lot on Main Street had a business in it. Not so now. Not  very many businesses up and down Main Street.  Do people go elsewhere on Saturdays now?  They sure don   t come to Cheyenne, because there is nothing to do on  Saturday. A lot of them aren   t open on Saturday. The bank closes at  noon. No, there is not much Saturday afternoon. It is pretty dead on  Main Street.  Are there still community events throughout the year?  Sure. Sure. Every community has stuff.  What is the biggest one for Cheyenne?  I don   t know what the biggest one is but of course it is almost like every  15  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  G. Flesher  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  small rural community. Schools are kind of   a lot of stuff happens  around the school most of the year. Then we have Old Settlers    every  five years. It is just an old settlers    reunion. They have a parade and it   s  a big deal, but it is just every five years. We have a deal down in the  park every September to raise money for museums, in the park, and it   s  a little bit there. Oh, the Masons have functions. Everybody has their  stuff. There is always something going on every little bit.  What has kept you in the area?  My wife and I didn   t think we wanted to live in a big town so we tried to  figure out how to branch out of living out here. We just stayed. She was  raised in this country, too. She didn   t want to live in a big town and I  sure didn   t. We lived in Cheyenne three years and that was about more  than we could stand living in a town this big. We sure didn   t want to live  in a big city. Didn   t see anything there. Didn   t see any reason that we  would want to live there.  Except a lot more traffic. (Laughs)  Except a lot more people. A lot more everything, and most of it you  don   t need. So we hauled hay for a few years, bought a farm and then we  got in the trucking business after that. Had a store for a little bit and then  got in the trucking business and kind of scratched out a living and  stayed.  Is there anything else you want to talk about that we haven   t covered?  Antiques.  Oh, do you have a hobby with antiques? (Laughter)  I knew Gertrude would have to say something. (Laughs) Oh yeah, we  have got eight or nine antique cars. We just kind of fell into that deal and  enjoyed it. We traveled several countries around the world. Shipped our  car and traveled about twelve different countries.  Wow. What kind of cars?  Most all of those trips have been in Model A Fords. We have got other  cars, too, and we do other trips, but we got in with the club where that  was the perks of the club was the tour, Model A touring club. We have  been to Switzerland, Germany, Austria, Italy, France, Norway, Denmark  and Sweden, Australia, New Zealand. Big part of Canada and plus one  particular car we have driven in all fifty states of the United States.  16  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  How do you get these cars to Europe or across the sea?  You put them on a boat. All of those trips we   ve gone with a group or  some people and we ship them in the containers you see. You can get  three Model As in a container so shipping costs are not too bad.  Did that make you nervous the first time though? Shipping your cars  away? (Laughs)  No. I figure we are in a shipping business.  When did you first start collecting cars?  I always had an interest in it. We just got so busy. I sold everything I  had. I used to work in trading cars when I was going to college. Make a  living to pay tuition and what not so I could scratch enough money  together to make my tuition when it cost nine dollars an hour to go to  school.  Where did you go to school?  Sayre. It was community college then. Now it is a part of Weatherford.  When I got an associate degree there I thought that was enough of going  to school. I didn   t want to go anywhere else. I got my associate degree  out of Sayre and quit, didn   t go any further, but anyway, I had an interest  in old cars then. We just got so busy and I didn   t have time. I sold  everything and then several years ago, we weren   t getting much more  time, and we just decided we wanted to so we gathered up a few old cars  and had a lot of fun.  Do you travel the country to get the cars?  Every way you can imagine, nearly. I have bought them off eBay. I have  bought them over the telephone. I   ve bought them at auctions, bought  them off of people I know.  What is your most unique car or your most prized?  That depends on everybody else. Everybody has different opinions. We  collect different kinds of cars so it all depends on what you are interested  in. We   ve got several sort of rare. Not many of them.  What is your oldest car?   1898     98 model.  17  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  What kind of car is it?  It is an Erie and Sturgis. It is not much of a car. (Laughs) Pretty sorry.  (Laughs) But that is what they started with. They didn   t know what they  were doing when they started. It is just an old buckboard with an engine  on it. It is not much of a car but it does go. Not real well, but that is just  the way it was. I mean, they are pretty sorry. It was about 1903 before  they really started getting any cars that were somewhat dependable.  You store these downtown?  Yeah, most of them we got downtown. Got some of them out at the  house but most of them downtown. We got some buildings downtown.  Are you interested in having an actual museum with these cars?  Oh. We show them to people every now and then. No. Museums don   t  make any money. They are a lot of work and they don   t make any  money. We, at different times, talk to some people that had a dude ranch  about tours for Cheyenne and open it for that deal, but it never  developed. No. That is not my objective. Just enjoy them and have a  good time.  Do most of them run?  Oh yeah. Not much in buying a pile a junk. No, most of them run. I  mean, I have always got projects that don   t run that we   re working on.  No, I am not interested in having them if I can   t make them run.  Do you do many parades?  Not many. Once in a while we do but not many. We are still working  and working a lot of hours. We don   t have a lot of time, and we just try  to make one of these big trips about every other year. We just came back  from New Zealand this year. We spent three weeks in New Zealand, and  then we   ll try to make a shorter trip. Then the year we don   t have a big  trip we try to make two or three short tours.  When you are there on your trip do you drive your car around with the  group of people throughout the country? Is there like a tour schedule?  It depends sometimes. We went to Australia, New Zealand and the  Scandinavian countries, we schedule our trip where, the model A Ford is  a worldwide car and they have got clubs in almost every country in the  world. We schedule our trips to those to when they were having a  national meet. We went to their national meet so we saw Model As and  18  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  Wilson  D. Roark  we meet a lot other Model Aers from other countries. So we did  schedule those three trips around Model A meets. Like in New Zealand,  for example, we shipped into Auckland, and we spent about a week or  ten days touring the north island. The meet was in the south island and  we went down there for about a week for their rally. Then we spent  about ten days touring the south island, the rest of the island. We got to  cover all of the country while we were there.  Sounds fun.  It is fun. It is. Meet a lot of nice people. Then we go to the meets you  meet a lot of people with some same interests and like almost every  country we go to we end up going to peoples    homes and seeing how  they live, a little bit more about their country. You start off with a  common interest in a Model A and find out a lot more about their  country than if you are just a tourist going through.  If everyone would do something like this there would be world peace.  Well maybe that, but also what I think if we go to some other countries  and find out what they are doing maybe this country wouldn   t get in the  same wreck that some of the other countries are getting into, because we  are going right down the same path but people don   t see that. They don   t  study history in this country. In my opinion, they don   t study history  well enough. People just don   t know history and don   t understand the  connection between history and what happens in the future.  Well, thank you for sharing your history. I have enjoyed it.  Well good.  -------  -------  
