 Wilson  Hodges  Today is February 2, 2012. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I   m with  the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State  University Library. I   m in Beaver, Oklahoma at the Jones and Plummer  Trail Museum, and today I will be interviewing Dr. Pauline Hodges as  part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Project. Thank you for  talking with me today.  You   re welcome.  To start out, would you mind telling me when and where you were born?  I was born in Liberal, Kansas, in 1929. My timing was not too good  because I was born a month before the stock market crashed and two  years before the Dust Bowl started in our area, and my dad was a wheat  farmer.  Were you born at home?  No, in the Epworth Hospital in Liberal.  Were you the first child?  I was the first and only child. My parents were late thirties, almost forty  when I was born. I   m the only one they had.  So your father, was he farming wheat on the farm where you lived?  Yes. He came from Missouri in 1921, he and my mother, and bought  160 acres, which he thought was a lot of land compared to what they   d  had in Missouri. For ten or twelve years, they had bumper wheat crops.  Then the Dust Bowl hit.  5  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Where did they meet?  They grew up in the same community in northeast Missouri near  Moberly and knew each other all of their lives. They had lived in  Missouri four years before my great uncle, who had homesteaded here  west of a little place called Forgan, west of Beaver, and he talked my  father and mother into coming out here to live.  And what did your mother do?  She was a housewife. She was like many women of her age. She was  born in 1896 and she had an eighth grade education, which she always  regretted. Later, I decided I should have said she had eighth grade  schooling because she educated herself just as my father did. They read  everything with print on it. Tried to learn and were really pretty well  educated, but not schooled.  So was that a big part of your household growing up? Education?  Oh, yes.  From an early age.  My father always said I was born with a book in one hand and a pencil  in the other and speaking at the time, and he was probably correct.  Because they were so much older when I was born, they always treated  me as a little adult. The conversations we had at the dinner table were  about economics and about crops and about the rural condition in  Southeast Asia and things that most little girls don   t get to hear. So yes, I  think that influenced me significantly. I always knew that I had to get an  education.  Did they have many other friends that were interested in education?  Not particularly when I was little, because by the time I was three or  four years old, we were in the middle of the Dust Bowl and people were  just struggling to survive. We had one set of neighbors that talked  politics with my dad all the time and national and world conditions, but  that really wasn   t the norm, at least in our household.  So how long did you live in Liberal?  We didn   t live in Liberal. We actually lived fourteen miles west of a  little town called Forgan, which was a little railroad town established in  1912. That   s where my folks had bought property. Liberal was our place  to go buy groceries or anything else that we needed. Sort of the hub. At  6  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  that time, we lived sixteen miles from Liberal. So that   s why I was born  in Liberal. There wasn   t a hospital anywhere close at that time.  So you started to school in Forgan?  No, I actually started to school in a little village called Floris. A one  room school. We had lost our farm that year and my dad got a job  working on the WPA, paving highways 64 and 83. His work was south  of that little town of Floris. It was on the river, in the gravel pits. We  managed to rent the Baptist parsonage for five dollars a month, since the  Baptists could no longer afford a preacher. That parsonage was across  the street from the school, the one room school. It had three rooms and  running water. That was about it. You could have thrown a cat through  any cracks around the windows. It wasn   t a very good house, but we  were grateful to have one, I guess. I could walk across the road to  school.  How many other children were going to school there?  Oh, there were probably eighteen, seventeen   not very many. We didn   t  have kindergarten. It was grades one through eight. I   m sure I was an  incorrigible child because I got a spanking in first grade because my dad  had taught me how to spell and to write before I went to school. He  taught me cursive writing and of course, the first grade teacher insisted  that I do manuscript writing, which I hated. I tore the paper up and threw  it at her and told her I wasn   t going to do it anymore, upon which she  paddled me. As I remember, it didn   t hurt, but the older kids thought it  was really funny and I was embarrassed, so I do remember it. Also, I  refused to read the first grade reader, basal reader, because it was so  boring and black and white. I still have it, actually. It was published by  Laidlaw and I told my teacher I   d already read Pollyanna, which was a  thick book, and she called me a liar. She said I shouldn   t lie to her and I  went home and told my dad. The next day, I can still remember walking  across the schoolyard with the dirt blowing, and he had a long talk with  her and she put me in third grade reading. I   m sure I was difficult.  (Laughter) It was his fault because he was the one that insisted that I  learn to read and write before I went to school.  How long did you stay at that school?  Just one year, and then he was made foreman of a road building project.  The road that went from Perryton, Texas to Liberal, Kansas. We moved  to Turpin and lived in a house that was across the road from the existing  school on Highway 64. We lived there two years while he worked on the  roads. I thought that was big time because it was a bigger school. It was  a grade one through twelve school and more kids in my class. I was  7  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  pretty impressed. Didn   t give that teacher a bad time.  Do you remember much about losing the farm, initially?  I don   t know that I knew that was exactly what was happening, but I  knew that we had to move, that we couldn   t live in that house where I  had started out life anymore. I knew that we didn   t have much money,  but neither did anybody else. My friends and everybody was having a  hard time. I don   t know that I was as conscious of that as I would have  been if I   d been older. The worst thing I remember about it was the dirt  blowing. It was really bad. There were a lot of days when we lived in  Floris that we couldn   t see the schoolhouse from the house, that   s how  bad it was.  Right across the street. What would you do? Would you use damp  cloths?  Yes, and we had dust masks that we kids wore during school sometimes,  depending on how bad the dirt was. My mother or dad, one, always  walked me across that road to school if the dirt was blowing really bad.  That seems hard to imagine, now.  Where did the dust masks come from? Did you make them or were  they   ?  No, they were handed out by the county. I assume my parents came to  Beaver to get them, but I don   t know about that. Anyway, all the kids  had them and maybe the teacher handed them out, I don   t know. But I  do remember wearing them.  And it covered your nose and mouth?  Yes. As a little kid, I thought it was pretty funny. It was like Halloween  every day.  Could you speak through them fine and be heard?  Evidently we did. I don   t really remember that being a hardship. I think  we thought it was fun. I don   t expect the older kids thought that, but as a  little kid, I did.  What about keeping your home clean? Was there any help?  The thing I remember best about that, even before we lost the farm, that  my mother had a big galvanized tub that we took baths in, and she  wouldn   t fill it with water, but she   d put water in it and dip sheets in it  8  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  and wring them out and hang them over the windows to keep the dust  out of the house. The house where we lived on the farm, the farm we  lost, it was a pretty good house. Two rooms had been purchased by my  parents and then they built onto it and remodeled it. It was a pretty well  built house, but the dirt came in anyway. That didn   t stop it. In the  evenings, those sheets would be like you   d thrown mud on them. That   s  how bad it was. She did that every day. Part of the problem was that we  were surrounded by their fields. I think that the people that lived in  towns didn   t suffer that as much. Where we lived, fourteen miles west of  Forgan, was just flat, flat, flat country. There wasn   t anything there but  plowed up fields and a few farms. If you lived in town, you didn   t have  the access to those flat fields. Beaver particularly didn   t, because it has  sand hills on the north that had brush on them and some ranchland  around it, as compared to that land west of here.  You said your father had a relative that lived   ?  We had a great-uncle that lived three miles down the road. I always say  this because I think people don   t realize. The difference between my  great-uncle surviving and our surviving economically was that my great-uncle  had come out here in 1903 and homesteaded, which meant that he  didn   t have to borrow money from a bank to buy land. If you lived on it  five years and proved it up, it was his. My parents, on the other hand,  came twenty years later and borrowed money from the bank. I remember  even before we lost the farm, my dad spoke so highly of that banker.  They remained friends all of their lives because Dad always said that  Mr. Igo could have foreclosed many times before he did. He tried to  hang on to his customers as long as he could.  And was that bank in Forgan?  In Liberal. The Citizen   s State Bank. We really didn   t do much business  in Forgan. A little bit, but we were fourteen miles from Forgan. We were  almost the same number to Liberal, and Liberal had many more stores,  so that   s where we did most of our business, and my parents knew a lot  of people there. We had relatives there, and friends. So we spent more  time there than actually in Forgan. We did come to Beaver on occasion  when Dad had to do business at the courthouse or something, but that  was rather unusual.  Would you go into town on Saturday evenings?  Always on Saturday afternoon and when times got really hard, my  mother   s friend across the field, which would have been a wheat field if  the dirt hadn   t been blowing, her name was Alice Whisenant, and my  mother and Alice would take chickens or eggs to Liberal and sell them  9  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  door to door to make a little money. Then they would buy groceries with  whatever money they had. Often times, they would spend a nickel or a  dime and stick us kids in the movie house, which we liked a lot, to keep  us, I guess, out from underfoot.  Do you remember the first movie you saw?  I don   t know whether it was the first. The first one I really remember  was Hopalong Cassidy, which was my favorite. Probably because of the  white horse.  Would you get any sweets or snacks at the movie?  Depended on if we had any money. My mother really liked Cokes and  there was a little one room place there on Second Street, she obviously  knew the druggist, and I did too after I grew up and realized that when I  was a little girl, he was probably nineteen or twenty years old. We   d go  in there and she would visit and we would drink Cokes. This probably  sounds strange to you today, but it depended on whether we had a dime  or not.  Would your father go to town with you on Saturdays?  Oh, yes. Absolutely.  What would he do?  Well, he loved to visit. Obviously it   s genetic because I do too. So did  my mother. I first became interested in history because he would stand  on the streets and talk to men that I thought were really old. They  probably weren   t as old as I am now, but I thought they were ancient.  They would talk about the early days of settling the land. Some of them  were from Liberal, but some of them were from Beaver County, too.  One old man, I remember particularly, his name was Burris Wright. In  later years, Harry Chrisman, who became a western history writer, used  him as a resource. But he and my dad would stand and visit for hours on  the street or squat on the sill of a store and visit about the history of the  area. I would listen. I thought that was pretty cool.  Do you remember any particular stories?  Well, Mr. Wright used to talk about the coming of the railroad to Liberal  and the fact that Liberal was located a mile west of where it is now and  how mad the original people were when they insisted on moving  everything to the railroad depot, the new depot. They fought it for a  while, and that just sounds normal because that happens    If you try to  10  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  make changes anywhere, even today, somebody fights it. I thought that  was pretty funny. Then they would talk about various colorful characters  in the Liberal and surrounding area and any scandal that they   d heard. I  find that interesting because it wasn   t the women that I listened to for  gossip, it was always my dad and the old men. I find that hasn   t changed  a lot. (Laughter)  What happened to your original farm that you lost?  The people across the field bought it in foreclosure. The little girl that  lived there was my best friend and I don   t know, I think    In later years,  my dad and I did talk about this, but I think there was some comfort to  him that they got it rather than strangers. The reason they were able to  do that was the man who lived on that farm   s father was one of the  pioneers in the new town of Forgan, Oklahoma. He had made a lot of  money, and he had bought that farm in foreclosure in the early days of  the Depression/Dust Bowl. His son and his wife lived on it. So that  family really was able to buy our farm from the bank. The daughter, my  best friend, still owns it actually.  Oh, neat. What   s her name?  Her name today is June Kissock, June Whisenant Kissock.  What was early day Forgan like?  Well, by the time I remember Forgan, we ended up moving there when I  was almost nine years old. It was toward the end of the Dust Bowl. But I  remember going to Forgan in the Dust Bowl. There were still a lot of  buildings there. Today there aren   t very many. There are only two or  three businesses left in Forgan and a couple of hairdressers and the  essentials. There   s not much left there anymore, but at one time, that  little town had 1,900 people. I remember what it looked like as far as  buildings. Now, a lot of those businesses were closed by the time I  moved there or even when we started going there. There were a lot more  than there are now, but the Dust Bowl had just disintegrated the town  and a lot of people had moved away.  Did you know a lot of people that moved away? Do you remember them  leaving?  No, I don   t. The people that we knew the best didn   t move away, and I  really don   t remember the ones who did. Now, when we lived in Turpin,  because we lived on Highway 64, which was a national highway, we  lived right on the highway. Every day, we would see cars and trucks  headed west loaded down with whatever they had. Nearly every day,  11  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  somebody stopped at our house and asked for food. We didn   t have  much, but my dad had a job and my mother fed them something.  Sometimes it was bread and butter sandwiches, but she never failed to  feed them, ever. Because she always said,    There but for the grace of  god, go us.    Which was true. We were so fortunate to have that WPA  job.  Do you know how he came about that?  I think he was aggressive enough to go ask for a job right away. When  he saw we were going to lose the farm, he didn   t wait around because  there were a lot of people who wanted those jobs.  How long did he work for WPA?  Well, he worked for them four years. By that time, my great-uncle, who  as I said had come out in the early days, was able to buy a farm in  foreclosure north of Forgan. That was about the year that we began to  get some rain and it looked like we were going to be able to farm again.  So we became tenant farmers on that farm two miles north of Forgan.  Uncle Sam was able to buy two quarters of land. Are you familiar with  the term quarters?  Is it a quarter of 160, or 160?  If you think about a section of land, it   s a quarter of that. That   s 160  acres. So there were two 160 acre sections that he was able to buy and  we farmed. So we moved to Forgan and things got better for us, because  within a year or two, we were able to raise some crops. We never  recovered financially, really, because if you   re a tenant farmer, it   s not  all yours. But at least we lived comfortably, and I started school at  Forgan and managed to stay there long enough to graduate, for which we  were grateful. But that great-uncle was like a grandfather to me anyway.  My own grandfather had died long before I was born when my dad was  a teenager, and so we called him Uncle Sam, but he was more like a  granddad. Always thought of him as that.  What about your mother   s parents?  They stayed in Missouri. Their name was Wilson, and they became  fairly prosperous people after the Depression. Two of her brothers were  pharmacists and others were farmers, but none of them came to  Oklahoma. It was only my dad   s family.  Would you ever go visit them in Missouri?  12  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  If we had the money. My mother and I went every summer as soon as  we could if we had any money. We took the Rock Island Train from  Liberal and changed trains in Kansas City, which I thought was a big  adventure. Went to Centralia, Missouri, and were met by our family. I  thought that was wonderful, because they had creeks and trees and  horses to ride and I loved it.  Did your family have a car?  Yes, we always had a car of some kind. It wasn   t always very good. My  dad drove it to work. When we lived at Turpin, I remember he would  come home from work and tell my mother about having to stop and read  mailboxes because the dirt was blowing so bad he couldn   t see. It was  really bad those years we lived at Turpin. It was bad when we lived at  Floris, but worse when we lived at Turpin.  Do you remember any incidences of dust pneumonia?  I don   t personally. People talked about it, but none of my immediate  acquaintances had it. I know that our friends had    This June that I  mentioned, her little brother wasn   t very well and his mother would dip  sheets in the tub like my mother did for the windows, only she put them  over his crib at night or even in the day time sometimes so he wouldn   t  breathe that dust. But as far as our immediate acquaintances, no, we  didn   t have dust pneumonia.  By the end of the day, would you just be black with dust?  If you were outside you were, that   s right. As strange as it seems, once  in a while, we would get a little front come through with a little moisture  and then it looked like you had mud balls thrown at you. There was a  little moisture at the same time there was dust, and I know that sounds  strange, but I can remember that happening.  So you were nine when you moved to   ?  Forgan.  What was school like at Forgan?  Oh, I loved it. Ironically, I ended up having one of the same teachers at  Forgan that I   d had at Turpin. Fortunately, I thought she was wonderful,  and she was, she was a really good teacher. The interesting thing about  her, the rule was, the state law was that if you were a married woman,  you couldn   t have a job teaching school. She married a man from Turpin  while she was teaching there, she was from Turpin anyway, and they  13  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  were married ten years secretly. Nobody knew. I always thought that  was funny. I loved it.  How big was the school at Forgan?  Oh, we had probably    We had two grades in each room and we had  twelve, thirteen kids in each grade. So it was pretty good sized.  And would you buy your groceries in Forgan?  We did, then. Once in a while, we   d come to Beaver. My folks never  really gave up their friends in Liberal, so if we had the money, we would  go to Liberal and visit friends and buy groceries and spend some time.  We had my father   s relatives, cousins, lived in Liberal. We visited them.  What were some of your favorite topics in school?  Well, I always loved to read and write, so English, of course, was my  favorite subject. And history, I loved history. I didn   t like math much  and tried to avoid it like the plague and therefore, when I finally got to  graduate school, I paid the price for that. I   d say English and history. I  had good teachers at Forgan, too, who made school interesting. You   ll  probably be surprised to know that I graduated from Forgan High School  in 1947 and my class, my graduation class, has gotten together for a little  reunion every year since we graduated. Even before Forgan Alumni had  meetings, we got together.  How many were there?  There were fifteen in my class.  Wow, that   s neat. Do you meet around Forgan or Beaver?  It   s evolved into either my house or my former husband   s house out on  the ranch, just the two of us. Everybody comes that   s able to come. But  we   ve never missed a year. I think that   s pretty unusual. We stayed good  friends.  So was your former husband in your high school graduating class?  Yes, and then we went to college together at Panhandle A M College, it  was called then. It   s now Panhandle State University. But yes.  Did you go there right after you graduated high school?  Yes, I was always a straight A student, but I was a woman and I couldn   t  14  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  get a scholarship at any other school except Panhandle. Any other  school. As a young woman, I want you to appreciate that. I not only at  Panhandle got a job, I got a scholarship. That enabled me to go to school  because we still didn   t have any money for me to go to school. I had a  hundred dollars when I started school at Panhandle. That first year,  Albert and I were married and we both had jobs with the university,  which allowed us to survive, and then his parents helped us a great deal.  Did you live on campus?  We lived in army barracks. It was a couple of years after World War II  ended, and they had moved the barracks from Dalhart Air Force Base to  the campus as well as some from the Amarillo Air Force Base. It was  interesting living in those old barracks because you could hear  everything through the walls. We shared a bathroom with the couple  next door. But it was okay. We weren   t there much because we were  both working and in classes.  What did you study?  Well, I started out thinking that I would go into broadcast journalism.  That was a brand new field, and Barbara Walters and I are the same age,  so that was the era when women thought maybe they could do that. I  neglected to think about the fact that I   d married into a ranch family and  there were no television stations, there wasn   t even television yet. No  radio stations in our area yet. We put one on campus that year, but that  was a whole new phenomena. I had a fantastic speech and debate teacher  and he had the audacity to put a woman on his debate team. That was  just unheard of. As it turned out, one of my debate partners became the  Lieutenant Governor of Oklahoma and later State Treasurer, and one of  them became the president of Liberty National Bank in Oklahoma City,  and another one became a lawyer, so we had a lot of talent there. I   m not  sure I was, but at least    (Laughs) That changed my life. The first thing  he said to me, this speech professor, was,    My dear, do you always  expect to sound like a country hick?    I didn   t know that I had, and from  then on I worked very hard to get a Midwestern accent like the new  broadcasters had.  Do you feel like you succeeded?  Yes, I do. That way, at least. However, I   ve lived back in the Oklahoma  Panhandle long enough to adopt my native West Texas twang, which is  our part of Oklahoma.  Did your debate team travel very far?  15  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Well, yes, we did for those days, we did. We went to a lot of debate  tournaments and college tournaments, and we won. I think that was  probably the most important class, those classes, that I ever took. I  always did do public speaking. I was so lucky at Forgan. I had a high  school English teacher who dragged four or five of us to speech  tournaments, even then, to Panhandle A M. It enabled me to get up and  speak in front of people without having stage fright. The only place I  still have stage fright is if I go to the alumni meeting at Forgan and my  colleagues are there. I   m not scared, but I care what they think. I   ve  spoken to five thousand English teachers at one time and I didn   t have  stage fright at all, because I wasn   t ever going to see them again.  (Laughs) I think that makes a difference.  Were there a lot of veterans on campus?  Yes, in practically every class I took, at least half of the students were  veterans. I think back to that time and I thought some of them were  really old. Compared to me, fresh out of high school, they were old in  experience. I remember the man who sat next to me in one of my  English classes had gray hair and he was twenty-nine, and I just thought  he was ancient. I was eighteen. (Laughs)  What was the male to female ratio at that time? Were there many women  on campus?  Yes, there were. I would say it was fairly evenly balanced. We were the  first generation of women that were determined to get an education and  have a career. Ironically, some of the older women in my class had  worked in munitions factories in World War II, or we had a bomber base  at Liberal and they went to work then for an aircraft company that was  building planes. So they   d already had some work experience. That  wasn   t too popular when the war was over and they wanted the same  jobs men had. But nevertheless, at least it gave them some incentive to  do some things that they might not have had otherwise.  Were you or your family involved in the war effort?  No. Well, no more than anybody else. My dad insisted that I write letters  to the soldiers from our community. I was always a good letter writer.  So he felt that was important. He did, too. The men from the air base at  Liberal would come to the churches in Beaver and Forgan and we would  have dinners for them or have them into our homes. My parents always  made sure that they were involved in that. I think that was really  important. I don   t know I thought as much about it at the time as a  teenager as I do now as an adult. I think it made a difference. One young  man that my parents took an interest in wrote to us for years afterward.  16  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  So when did you graduate college with your bachelor   s?  Well, my husband graduated a year before I did and so I quit at the end  of    Well, I had almost enough hours to graduate, but I hadn   t graduated  yet. I changed majors two or three times, so I had a lot of extra hours,  but I didn   t have the required ones yet. We moved out to the ranch and  for the first six years that we lived there, well no, about five years, I  always say I raised kids, cows and the rancher. (Laughter) Which really  isn   t true, but I loved it out there. I probably would never have done  anything else except that in the early    50s we had a drought, and things  were not going very well, and somebody needed to get a job. The Forgan  school had hired me as a substitute teacher off and on those years. The  superintendent fired people in the spring three different times and I   d  finished out the year, which is an interesting experience to have if the  teacher has been fired under bad conditions, and they were. Anyway, the  superintendent said,    Well, I don   t think we would fire you. Why don   t  you go back to Panhandle in the summertime, and we   ll just hire you as  a full-time teacher.    We needed the money, so I did. I found my calling.  I would never have been a teacher otherwise. That was not in my life  plan at all, and I fell in love with it.  What did you teach in the beginning?  I was the English teacher for grades seven through twelve, and I taught  speech and debate. I had a fantastic debate team, and I still see my  debaters around. They   ve all become   they were all men   and  successful men. I would have put girls on my team except they didn   t  want to do that. All of them turned out to be very successful  businessmen.  Had the Forgan school system changed much from the time you were  going to school there to when you started teaching?  It changed quite a bit. For one thing, the curriculum had expanded.  Particularly during my early high school years, the war was on. We were  pretty limited in the teachers we had because so many men had gone off  to fight. We had a number of retired women who came back to teach.  That wasn   t all bad. I think about my high school history teacher and I  realized that she probably didn   t have a degree, and she spoke absolutely  atrocious English, but she was a fantastic history teacher. She made  history come alive. I look back and think she even mispronounced some  of the major names, and I didn   t care because I loved it. So it was  different. The time I was a junior and senior in high school, we had  sports again because a lot of the sports teams had fallen by the wayside.  For instance, we didn   t have a football team anymore because all the  17  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  boys had gone off to war. So sports became more important. I wasn   t  very good at it, but I always went out for basketball so I could go on the  trips with the rest of the kids.  Did they have women   s sports also?  Oh, yeah. They had had women   s sports in the 1920s, but that, too, had  gone by the way during the war. And during the 1930s, times were so  hard and there wasn   t any money for teams to travel or to buy uniforms.  I think that   s something that we   ve neglected to talk about is we were on  such an austere budget in those schools. One thing that did happen at the  Forgan school when I was in about the fifth grade, I think, fourth or fifth  grade, the superintendent then put in the school lunch program. In order  to pay for my lunches, I worked in the lunch room. One of my jobs was  to dig peanut butter out of gallon jars and to put it into bowls. To this  day, I can   t stand peanut butter. The smell of it just    (Laughter) But it  paid for my lunch. That was a really important program, because we had  a lot of kids that would have gone hungry otherwise.  How many years did you teach at Forgan?  I taught ten years. During that time, I managed to take my seniors to  Chicago on the Rock Island train, which ran out of Liberal. I thought  that was an important thing because my kids hadn   t been very many  places and this is the 1950s. I look back and think, I probably wouldn   t  do that today, but times have changed. At that time, my kids hadn   t been  many places. Maybe Liberal. When we got off the train at La Salle  Street Station in Chicago, I couldn   t have lost a kid if I   d have tried. It  was a good experience for all of us. I   m so glad we did that. I loved it. I  absolutely loved teaching. But my husband and I were having some  difficulty and I had laid out of teaching for a year or two. Then Liberal  Kansas Schools called and wanted me to teach there. I did. That was a  life changer, again, because I was given a group of kids that were called,     at-risk.    That   s the first time that term had been officially labeled.  In the    50s?  This was in the    60s. Late    60s. What I discovered about my kids is that  a lot of them were black and they   d been neglected. That was right in the  middle of the Civil Rights Movement and Liberal was never segregated  like the south, but the prejudice was still there. I had kids that had     This was at the same time that Lyndon Johnson was pushing through  special ed ucation  and Title I programs for kids. We hadn   t had that yet,  and these kids just hadn   t been taught. When I say it was a life-changing  experience, I really believe that because it awakened my eyes to what  can happen to kids that are lost in the system. I hadn   t had that happen in  18  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Forgan because we were such a little school and we sort of took care of  kids, whether we knew how or not, we tried. Liberal was a big school.  Fortunately, I was able to maintain a friendship with some of those  students still to this day and most of them turned out pretty well.  But it made me be interested in looking at learning disabilities and  dyslexia and reading problems, and also what we were doing to kids  with prejudice. I   m so glad I did that. I went from there to Colorado, and  was so fortunate to get a job at a high school just south of Denver. I  hadn   t become a reading specialist yet, but I   d already studied a lot to  become one. That high school hired me to become the reading specialist  and start a new program. They required every kid in high school to take  reading. Speed reading was one of my specialties. We had a program  that became nationally known, and I wrote a couple of textbooks to use  in my own classroom, since there weren   t any on the market.  What was the program called?  Well, we had six classes, but it was called a Comprehensive Reading  Program. We required every kid in high school to take reading classes.  We had classes in speed reading and critical reading and advanced  critical reading and developmental reading, and then we had a Title I  remedial program, too, by then, because we had federal money by that  time. Colorado State University heard about it and also heard that I had a  rural background. They were the National Center for Rural Education  and recruited me. I wasn   t really sure about that, whether I wanted to do  it or not, but by then, I had finished a master   s degree in reading and was  working on a doctorate. Not really because I wanted a doctorate, but I  was wanting to know more. I had a wonderful friend on the faculty at the  University of Colorado and she said,    Well, if you   re going to take these  classes, let   s pursue a degree.    So I did.  What school did you get that from?  University of Colorado in Boulder.  And your master   s?  My PhD, my master   s there, too. I took a lot of classes    University of  Colorado had campuses in Denver and Colorado Springs. They had  people on each of those campuses that had special areas of expertise in  reading instruction and linguistics. So I shopped around, I took a third of  my classes in Colorado Springs, a third in Boulder and a third at the  Denver campus. I   m so glad I did that because I got all those good  teachers. Did my master   s at CU, and it says CU. Doesn   t say she did it  everywhere. I did my PhD work at the University of Colorado in  19  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Boulder in curriculum instruction. Was at Colorado State University for  nine years, almost ten years.  Were you teaching there?  I was a professor, but I was also a consultant. They sent me all over the  world, literally, to do consulting, particularly in rural education. I guess  they were confused because they also sent me to Detroit and Chicago  and New York and places like that. But because we were the National  Office for Rural Ed, that   s why they recruited me. I could talk rural and  find a school and not insult them with such comments as,    Oh, it   s so far  out here.    (Laughter)  What are some things you were consulting on?  Curriculum mostly. How to improve their curriculum, how to improve  their instruction for students that were struggling, whether it was  because of economic situations or because they had dyslexia or whatever  they had. Because I worked with such diverse groups, I tried to tailor it.  For instance, I worked on the Navajo reservation in northwest New  Mexico, which is very different from working with inner-city Detroit  kids, which are not rural, of course, but nevertheless some of the same  problems. I worked in West Virginia and in North Carolina and in New  Mexico and in my towns around in Colorado and every state except  Maine. They sent me overseas a couple of times, and while I was there, I  also started working for the big textbook publishers. They sent me  various places to work with schools, including Guam and Hawaii and  really    hardship    cases.  When you were consulting, how long would you typically stay in a  location?  Usually a week and then I   d go back. Over a year or two or three, go  back many times. When I went to Guam, the big textbook publisher sent  me there, that week that I was in Guam, the Pope came and I was  working with a Catholic school. That was a big adventure. President  Reagan had decided to rescue Imelda and Marcos from the Philippines,  and he flew them into the air base where the school was where I was  supposed to be working. So we had to evacuate the students and go to  another school. I was staying at a Hilton Hotel and they discovered an  undetonated bomb from World War II just outside the hotel in the  harbor. So we evacuated that. So it was quite exciting. (Laughter)  Quite an adventure.  Of course, they sent me to Guam because it   s rural. You don   t think  20  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  about Guam being rural, but talk about rural, it is. But all that happened  that week in Guam.  Wow. When was that?  That was in    86.  That   s neat.  Then I had a period of what I call my period of temporary insanity in  that I had been asked to (I and a group of others) audit the curriculum for  the largest school district in Colorado. We spent several months doing  that and as a result of that, I stood up before one hundred newspaper and  TV people and said,    All is not well here in Camelot after all.    They  were twenty-five years behind the times in what they were doing. As a  consequence of that, they fired the language arts coordinator, and they  started recruiting me to come fix it. So you have to be careful with what  you say. I took a leave of absence from my university and did that, and if  you want to get people mad at you, just come in and try to change  things. But it worked out all right.  During that time, I remarried. Married an administrator in the school  system, a former English teacher turned principal. He was the principal  of an alternative high school, and I became really interested in that, of  course, from my own background. I   m not sorry at all I did that. I  learned as much as my teachers did, probably. At the end of the fifth  year, my husband died and I was mad at the world, and I had finished  my project. My daughter-in-law here in Beaver County thought I should  move back here. My mother was here then. So I did. I took early  retirement, didn   t mean to work anymore. Was back here almost seven  months before the Forgan school dragged me out of hiding and put me  back to work. I loved it. My Colorado friends thought I   d lost my mind.  I said,    Oh, it   s such a deal. I   m teaching in my home high school, the  principal was once my student when he was fourteen and I was twenty.     I had the highest degree and I was the oldest one on the faculty. So I had  it made. (Laughter)  And you were living in Beaver?  Yes, I was living in Beaver. That   s an interesting story because Beaver  and Forgan have always been mortal enemies, because Forgan got the  railroad and Beaver didn   t, to start with. So they   ve been mad at each  other ever since. But they tolerated my living in Beaver. By going to the  Forgan ballgames and yelling for Forgan, I managed to survive. I did  that for five years. Then I said,    Okay, I   m done. I   m really retired.     Well, I didn   t do anything then for    I shouldn   t say that, I was active in  21  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  the National Rural Education Association, so I was doing something, but  I wasn   t being paid. That lasted, let   s see, three years and then the  principal, my former student, was desperate, so I went back and taught  three more years at Forgan. Said this time I   m really done. In the  meantime, I was writing for Prentice Hall Textbook Company, anyway,  so I was busy. They would send me places to put in the new books.  Finally, in 2003, Panhandle State University, where I   d gone to school,  was desperate for somebody to come fill in for a professor who was ill. I  meant to do it for a year and I did it for five. You do realize what I   ve  been telling you. The last twenty years, I   ve just gone to work for people  that were so desperate that they   d take anybody. I   m not sure that   s quite  true, but it was great fun to go back to my home school and then my  home university, college.  What did you teach there?  Well, I taught freshman English, freshman comp and then the Education  Department moved me over there, and I became really active in teacher  education and finally ended up head of the department.  And when did you retire from there?  Well, I became violently ill with a really bad case of shingles and finally  just had to quit. That was in    07.  What year did you move back to Beaver?  In the fall of 1989.  So what has it been like coming back to Beaver?  I have loved it. I have never regretted that for a day. Now, I go back to  Colorado frequently, because I have dear friends all up and down that  front range and people that I worked with, and my departed husband   s  family, some of them are there, but I   ve never regretted coming back.  The first fall I was here, a man who was really active in the museum  here recruited me to become active again. He and I had been friends all  of our lives. He was a rancher, too, and we   d gone to Panhandle State  together. So I got involved and before I had ever left Beaver County, I  had put together the first Beaver County History book. Then my former  Hodges mother-in-law had taken the leftover material, and she   d done  the next volume. So it was time to do volume III. I   d been here a couple  years and I did volume III of the Beaver County History book. I   ve just  been really active since then.  22  Wilson  Hodges  One reason I   m so interested in that, our history in the Panhandle is  unique. I think we   re lost out here, because sometimes I think Oklahoma  doesn   t know we   re here except for our oil and gas money. But it   s a  forgotten area. This area belonged to Spain, France, Mexico, the  Republic of Texas before we were even a part of Oklahoma Territory.  So we have a colorful history. For seventy years after the Republic of  Texas spun us off and didn   t want us anymore, we didn   t belong to any  state or nation. For seventy years we had no law and order at all. So we  have some really colorful stories. One reason for Texas to come into the  Union as a  slave  state, they couldn   t have property north of the thirty-six,  thirtieth parallel. Well, that   s seventeen miles south of where we   re  sitting at the moment. Then, five years later, Kansas wanted to become a   free  state. So they used the Compromise of 1850, which cut them off at  the thirty-seventh parallel.  That left thirty-four miles in here that didn   t belong to anybody. From  the hundredth meridian clear out to New Mexico territory, nobody  owned it. I just find it fascinating to look at what   s evolved since then.  The coming of homesteaders, we had ranchers before, but homesteaders  and the coming of the railroads and how that changed the area, and the  development of gas and oil. Particularly natural gas, we sit on one of the  largest natural gas fields in the world. A lot of people don   t even know  that. That was the saving grace for us out here. To watch what   s  happened to us    We have a pretty highly educated population to be so  isolated. Surprisingly to a lot of people, we have some pretty wealthy  people in the Panhandle.  So has it been your experience that there are a lot of people in Beaver  that are interested in the history out here?  Maybe I   m disappointed in that they   re not as interested as I think they  should be. When I came back to teach at Forgan, one of the parts of my  curriculum, even though I was the English/Speech teacher, was to make  sure they learned the history of the area. I worked in tandem with the  history teacher next door, who was also a coach. He was busy and I  talked him into doing research projects with me so that the kids got  double credit. They got history credit and English credit. We researched  the history of the area. They had to write it up for me, the English  teacher, and he read it for content. Well, I did too, but I read it for the  commas and misspelled words. It turned out to be a really interesting  project.  I devised the idea of assigning my students to write about someone in  the area who had changed the community or the history of the area.  They had to go out and interview people and write those up. I made  them do a reception for the people they wrote about, for the families of  23  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  the people they wrote about, trying to teach them some social graces,  and they had to make the punch and serve the punch and introduce their  people and talk about them and learn how to be gracious and charming  and so on. That turned out to be a really good project.  Sounds like it.  The kids liked it. We even took a field trip to the local cemeteries. The  first time I asked the principal for transportation to do that, this is the  same principal, mind you, he just looked at me like,    What is going on  with her?    But I assigned the kids certain tasks in the cemetery. They  had to find the oldest grave.    When was it? Who was it?    They had to  research the people who were buried there in the very beginning. They  had to find soldiers from, were there any Civil War veterans there? Well,  yeah, there are. Were there any World War I, World War II, Vietnam?  I   m surprised to find my kids didn   t even know about Vietnam. So we  came back and did research on each of those wars. Something about the  person buried there and they had to search out somebody that could tell  them. It was a really good research project.  Sounds like it.  And the history teacher was working with me on that.  Was that Forgan Cemetery or did you go to several?  We went to Forgan Cemetery, we went to the Floris Cemetery, we made  a trip to the Beaver Cemetery. I thought it was a good project for them. I  know I had some parents who weren   t very happy with me at first.  Somehow they thought that was just ghoulish. But it did two or three  things. One, it taught my kids how to behave in a cemetery. And one  thing that shocked me when I had been gone all those years, twenty-five  years and come back, that my kids were rude, they didn   t have any  social graces. So the first thing I did was devise five rules that were  punishable by death if you broke them. One was,    Thou shall not say     shut up    to anybody, anytime, anywhere.    I was just shocked that they  were doing that. Two or three months after I   d put that rule in, we had a  new kid transfer in from Beaver. He said,    Shut up,    and one of my boys  said,    Ah  Shhh  She   ll kill you. You don   t say that in here.    So I knew  I   d won the battle. Part of it was how to be respectful and also to have  respect for those men who had died for their country. I have a nephew  from the Hodges    relation buried out here in the Beaver Cemetery who  died in Vietnam. My kids didn   t even know about Vietnam. They   d  never heard of Hamburger Hill where Mike died. So I made them do  research.  24  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  I   m sure some of those people will stay in this area and because of this  project, I   m sure their interest has sparked, hopefully, some of them.  Well, and have a respect for our history, yes. So many of those Forgan  kids were descendents of those early day pioneers. For instance, I had a  set of twin boys when I first came back, twin boys, whose great-grandfather  had been a mail carrier from Meade down to Beaver when  he carried it on horseback. They had no idea. I said this man was so  important. He was. He was considered a scholar. They had no idea. They  lived in pretty dire circumstances, themselves, but it made a big  difference when they found that out how important that man was.  That   s neat.  We had a veteran who lived across the street from the school and I had  the kids go, not all of them, but I gave them teams of people. He wrote  me a letter and thanked me for having those boys come and interview  him. Because they needed to know. I also told them the wild stories of  early day Beaver County and entertained them, but I thought they  needed to know that, too.  One of the funny things that happened, I had state curriculum I had to  follow, so I   m trying to teach my students about the 1920s and The  Great Gatsby and bootlegging, and one of the girls said,    Did we have  any bootleggers in Forgan?    I said,    Yes, we had five.    She said,    Well,  who were they?    I said,    I can   t tell you because you were all related to  them.    And that was true. (Laughter) They thought that was pretty  funny. I think those were the things that make stories come alive for  kids. Otherwise, it   s just boring history in a textbook.  We   d do walking tours of the town, and I would show them what  businesses there had been because in that little town. At one time, the  entire mile of the town was covered with businesses all up and down that  road. They had no idea that there were hotels and three banks and  grocery stores, plural, and you know, not a clue.  I   m sure they went home and told their parents all they   d learned.  Yes, and I had two boys who had been in special ed, who really  shouldn   t have been, probably, but were. They came down and  volunteered in the museum here for two years when they were still in  high school. It was really good for them. Our curator at that time had  graduated from Forgan, so they thought that was pretty special. She did,  too.  Well, has this museum expanded quite a bit in the recent years?  25  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Well, the museum was built in the years that I lived in Colorado, and  there were five women instrumental in getting a museum built. You  know that old adage that if you want something done, get the women to  do it, and they did. During that time, about ten years after it was built     No, about seven or eight years after it was built, they added the second  big room on. This past year, we were able to add another room thanks to  the generosity of the widow of a prominent doctor here in town, Dr.  Calhoun, a meeting room, in which we   re sitting, actually. We were able  to complete a shed that had been started years ago to house the old  machinery that we have.  Yes, it   s grown significantly through the years. It hasn   t been easy, of  course, because if money is tight, museums are not what you give it to.  (Laughs) About twenty-one years ago, one of the grandsons of a  prominent rancher had a one room schoolhouse moved from the ranch  where it sat to the museum grounds, and we   ve been able to do one room  schoolhouse days for fourth graders, since then. That   s a lot of fun. The  fourth grades from the various schools in the county come and some of  us dress up like teachers from a long time ago. The librarians in the  schools are fantastic in that they do the homework and fill the kids in on  what they   re going to see and do so they   re not just coming in cold  turkey. They know what it   s about. We teach from the McGuffey  Reader, and we have ciphering matches and spelling bees. Our current  managers teach them how to play jacks and marbles, which is a lost  game. Some of them don   t know what those are. Don   t know what jacks  are at all.  What is the one room school called?  Well, it was on the Barby Ranch. I don   t know, we   ve given it another  name. (Laughs) It had three different names before we moved it, but it  belonged on the Barby Ranch. But that   s been a good enterprise for us, I  think. Good PR. It   s gotten some kids interested. We even had one little  boy who was correcting one of the managers on what she was telling  him. (Laughter) I think he was right. We   re hoping to recruit him to  work here.  Yeah   So it   s been good. We have a dunce   s chair for them. The interesting  thing is that there is a great competition on who is going to get to sit  there.  (Laughs) Is there a dunce hat?  26  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. Yes. We   ve opened it up to women, now, so that little  girls can get to sit there too, if they want to. We had one little girl who  was dying to sit there, and I thought she should have equal rights, so we  let her do that. I think that   s been good.  Earlier, you took us on a driving tour of town. Would you explain about  the main street and how that changed directions?  The original town was at what is now the very, very north edge of town,  which is about a mile from north to south. A little over a mile. It started  out as a building, there were actually two buildings. One was a trading  post, more or less, for the freight trail that came through here, run by  men named Jones and Plummer. It had a place where they could eat, it  sold liquor of course, and it had a seventy-five foot corral in the back for  the horses, to take care of them. It was a stopping place. From that,  businesses were built up there between what is now Old Main Street,  which runs east and west, and the river. In those days, there was water in  the river. Every once in a while, upstream they   d have a big rainstorm  and the town would flood. So they decided that east and west wasn   t a  good idea, but the town runs uphill from the north, so they started  building up the hill.  Created the first block, which became Douglas Avenue, and which is  now a highway, as well as the real main street through town, although  we   ve kept the old main street name on that original street. But in that  first block, there was a hotel, a saloon of course. You have to have the  essentials. There was a livery stable and feed yard. That was pretty much  it. That was the town. And then as they built up the hill, they began  putting in more businesses. There were two men from Englewood,  Kansas, named Tracy, a father-son team who came and established what  we   d call a general store. Then they put in a hardware store. Then they  created a bank, which is still here today. In fact, when you were driving  down that street today, you probably noticed it   s under renovation and  they   re expanding it. That was the first bank.  What was it called?  It   s called the Bank of Beaver City. It was called Beaver City, then. As  time went on, a courthouse was built in that second block. There was a  barbershop and a grocery store and a general store. All of the buildings  were made out of lumber, and a fire started in the back of the barbershop  and burned the entire block, including the courthouse. So they then  moved a block, at the next corner, a block west and built a courthouse  that was stone and later bricked over. That   s the courthouse today. The  courthouse burned twice. The courthouse burned in the new location  once, too.  27  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wow, and now they   re renovating this one, also.  Well, this one was not handicap accessible. It was built in the beginning  of the past century and we didn   t think that was important. It   s going to  be really nice when that   s finished, but it   s taken a year to get it done.  The poor people that work there are getting very impatient.  Yeah, I bet. What was the name of the church that we drove by?  The First Presbyterian Church, and that was the first church in  Oklahoma Territory. It was built before Oklahoma Territory. Three  years before, it was built in 1887, Oklahoma Territory didn   t exist until  1890. We were tacked on to Oklahoma Territory. We were first called  Cimarron Territory because there was a group of men here who formed  a government here called Cimarron Territory. They were in Washington  petitioning for territorial status. Officially, Congress decided to create  Oklahoma Territory, and they tacked us on   not by our permission, of  course, but tacked us on as an afterthought. I think people are still mad  about that because they wanted to be their own entity. Through the  years, when times were hard or people were mad at the politicians, they  have talked about seceding and forming a state. When I tell people that,  they just laugh, I said,    Well, we would be bigger than Rhode Island or  Connecticut and as big as Massachusetts. So probably, it would work.     Yes, it took me less time to drive across Massachusetts to the Hartford,  Connecticut Airport from Walpole, New Hampshire, than it takes me to  drive across the Oklahoma Panhandle. So I thought it probably would  work.  Also on our driving tour, we saw two houses that were designed by  Bruce Goff?  Yes.  Would you tell us a little bit about those, when they were built?  Goff was a student of Frank Lloyd Wright, the famous architect, and his  designs certainly reflect that. In the early 1960s, a woman who was a  prominent rancher had become widowed and she moved to town. She  was a fine artist herself and she was interested in architecture and  Wright, so she got Goff to come out and design a house for her. It was  sort of the talk of   not sort of   it was the talk of, not just the town, but  the county at the time, because Goff   s designs were so unusual  compared to the traditional houses of Beaver County. Then, a year later,  her friend down the street used Goff to build her a new house. It was  even more avant-garde and quite the talk. But those houses are still in  28  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  use today and are landmarks. Historic landmarks, actually.  I wonder how many people come to town just to see those houses.  I doubt if there are a great many, but if anybody finds out they   re here,  they always want to go see them. The people who own the second house,  the one that looks somewhat like silos, are willing to take you through  and let you look at it. The other house has changed ownership three or  four times in the last ten, twelve years and they   re not quite as amenable  to showing off, but they   re still very interesting houses and they   re very  reflective of the Frank Lloyd Wright era. Our fair pavilion, which sits  here on the fairgrounds where the museum is, was also a design of that  era, and it definitely reflects the Frank Lloyd Wright movement. It   s  typical of 1960, when it was built. It has some of the problems that all  the Wright houses had, but it   s a conversation piece and unique, so it   s  good for us to have it here near the museum, because it is history, too.  Well, speaking of landmarks, I know there were a number of WPA  projects in Beaver. Can you talk about some of those?  Two of the most important ones, of course, is the building that   s now a  detention center. It was built as an American Legion Hall by the WPA  group. In fact, my father helped build it. It says Baer, which was a big  ranch family, so it was named for them in 1936. It   s built out of stone.  At first, the American Legion housed their offices in the lower level and  public dances were held upstairs. During World War II, the American  Legion invited the airmen from Liberal to be their guests. So a lot of  them came every week. The Beaver American Legion managed  transportation for them to get here and entertained them and even some  people put them up in their houses overnight and got them back to  Liberal the next day, which I thought was really good.  Then, the other building that   s prominent is an abandoned gym here on  Douglas Avenue and there   s a group trying to renovate and restore that  building. It was used as a gymnasium for the public school for years  because they didn   t have a gym. In the early 1980s, the school built a  new field house up by the schoolhouse, and more or less abandoned this  building. It had a tavern in it at one time and some other things, but it   s  in very bad shape. But there is a group trying to get the money together  and get some grants to restore it. Hopefully that will happen and make it  a public meeting place.  That would be wonderful.  We have a group of citizens working on that.  29  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  And then there were a number of roads paved in the area.  At the beginning of 1930, there was not a paved highway through this  area other than Highway 54, which went from Chicago to Los Angeles  and it goes through Liberal, Kansas. It diagonally goes through Hooker,  Oklahoma, and Guymon and Texhoma, but no place else  in the  Panhandle . So as part of the WPA, Highway 64 and 83 were paved.  Now, there were others in the other two counties, but in Beaver County,  those were the two that were paved. Then, the beginnings of a road,  which is Highway 412 or Highway 3, were built, they weren   t paved  during that time, but the grading and the beginnings of that were built.  Because until Highway 3 was built, you had to go to Highway 64 to  Enid and then south to Oklahoma City. It was a lot farther, a lot more  inconvenient, so that was a real blessing. The roads my father worked on  were those two major highways. So that was the first time we had paved  roads in Beaver County.  Are there any other WPA projects that you can think of?  Well, the original gym at the Forgan school was built by WPA. Forgan  had had a wooden gym before, so when they got the brick gym, they  thought they were really flying high. As a girl, I even got to play  basketball in there. We thought it was pretty upscale, but then in the     70s, they were able to build another gym, but they kept the old one. It   s  a historic landmark for one thing, and they still use it for PE classes and  things. There were some other projects, too, that were similar. Turpin  has a building that was built by WPA, but the WPA was a lifesaver for  people like my father, because it provided jobs.  You mentioned the American Legion Building had a dance hall, were  there any other dance halls in town?  Not officially. There were, out in the country, what they were called     barn dances.    Those were quite popular. No, not officially.  Did you go to dances?  Oh, my parents never missed a dance. I learned to dance when I was  eight or nine years old. I   ve always been a dancer because I learned to  dance with my father   s friends and they were really, you know, they  were old enough to be my parents and they were wonderful dancers. My  parents danced when they came to Oklahoma and they never quit. My  mother would have danced at ninety-three if she had anybody to dance  with. I   m just like her. Through the years, when I lived in Denver, I even  managed to learn the Hispanic dances and Greek dances and other ethnic  dances. I   ve been fortunate.  30  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Did you play any musical instruments?  Oh, no. I don   t have any musical ability at all and you know, a lot of  people of my generation didn   t, because we had no music program in  school because of the Dust Bowl. We had no money for a music teacher.  We couldn   t have afforded piano lessons, much less a piano at our  house. So I never had the opportunity. My best friend, June, her parents  were able to afford a piano and some piano lessons and I was so jealous  of that. So envious, and I thought that was so wonderful that she got to  take piano lessons, so I made sure my own sons had piano lessons. Not  that they ever pursued it, but when they got into the band at the Forgan  school, they were able to play. When I was a little girl, we didn   t have a  music program or a band or anything. My wonderful Hodges    mother-in-law  was the music director of our church in Forgan and she used to say,     Just stand up and please don   t sing,    because I can   t carry a tune or  read a note of music. (Laughter)  Well, were the dances usually live violin music or   ?  Yes, local. Local people. Guitar. What we would later call country-western.  I guess fiddle, not violin.  Yes. And before we lost our farm, our neighbors a mile away had a great  big barn with a loft and they had dances every Saturday night. My  parents always went. All the neighbors went, everybody went.  It was the thing to do.  Oh, yes. That was the only entertainment there was. Then, later on, again  before we lost the farm, I remember going to Liberal and there was a  two-story building there that was built by WPA work, and there was a  grocery store in the bottom and they had dances upstairs. I can  remember going with my folks. They had big long benches like church  pews and we kids, if we got tired, we   d go to sleep. (Laughter)  Everybody went to the dances.  Were dominoes or cards big?  Oh, everybody played cards, mostly Pitch. My parents did and all the  neighbors, and even when I was a young married woman rancher, we  played cards all the time. A lot of the people we played with were old  enough to be our parents, but we didn   t care because it was a card game.  The other interesting thing about Beaver County we haven   t talked about  31  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  is in those early days when I still lived west of Forgan, we lived on the  edge of the big German Mennonite community that   s the west third of  Beaver County. I feel so fortunate to have lived there because it  introduced me to a different culture that I would never have known  about. The Mennonite church was a mile and a half from our house and I  can remember in both World   well I can   t remember the first World  War, but my mother told me   I remember the Second World War that  there was a movement to try to keep them from speaking German in  their own church or at home.  We had an old German fellow that lived a half a mile down the road  from us, but he wasn   t Mennonite. He had escaped from Germany in  World War I. He was a deserter from the German Army. We were at his  house and he and my mother would just visit because she loved to hear  about Germany. He said,    Mein Gott, Dora. If I wanted to be a German,  I would have stayed in Germany.    But I   ve always remembered that.  (Laughter) It   s true. Our Mennonite neighbors were fabulous. They  came in the early 1900s and homesteaded. So they didn   t lose their  farms. They were able to survive. My sons    step-mother is from one of  those families. They had originated in the Netherlands and into Germany  and then to the Volga River  region in Russia , trying to have religious  freedom. Then finally to Kansas and to western Beaver County. So I  think we   re really fortunate, the descendants of most of those people still  live there. We have another community southwest of Beaver that   s also  that same group who came.  What are the names of some of those communities?  Well, Balko is one and then just over the line in Texas County, the little  town, what   s left of it, is still there, Adams, there was a Mennonite  community. Interestingly enough, over in Texas County and in Morton  County, Kansas, which is just across the line, there is a new group of  Mennonites, when I say new, but within the last ten years, who  immigrated from Germany to Mexico to the Panhandle.  Wow.  Again, for religious freedom. They   ve been a real asset, too.  So are there several Mennonite churches out there?  There aren   t a lot, but we have two in Beaver County. One near the  Balko community and one in the country between Forgan and Turpin,  where it originated. It was there long before the town of Turpin existed.  It   s out in the middle of a field. But they have a pretty large  congregation.  32  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  Hodges  Are there any other things about the area that we should talk about or  about you?  Oh, gosh, we could talk for sixteen days and I wouldn   t tell it all. I think  the most outstanding resource we have in Beaver County are the people.  They are self-reliant, they   re friendly, they   re helpful    All the things  they had to be to survive those early years here because even before we  had a Dust Bowl, times were hard. In the first place, from an agriculture  point of view, this land should never have been plowed up. We don   t get  enough rainfall. If we get twelve to nineteen inches of rainfall a year,  we   re lucky. My parents were examples of people who came out here  and tried to farm like they did in Missouri and plowed up the land. It  was really hard. My parents didn   t have it as hard as my great-uncle   s  family because by the time my parents came, they had a car and some  other things that were modern. It wasn   t easy. You had to be tough.  At one time, we had quite a few people. We had people on almost every  section of land in this county. Now, if you find one on every six  sections, a family, you   re fortunate. We have had the incoming of  Seaboard Farms, a pig industry, which brought some people. We   ve had  immigrants from Mexico and Guatemala and some other countries that  have come in to work on the farms and in the oil fields. But the people  whose descendents have stayed here were tough. Had to be. I admire  them for that.  So what do you see as the future of Beaver County? Do you think a lot of  those descendants will stay?  No, I don   t. Because there   s not enough work here. Frankly, if we didn   t  have the natural gas business in this county, we would be probably half  as big as we are now. I think some of the little towns, and Forgan may  be one of them, who will eventually disappear. Probably not in my  lifetime, but eventually. Even in the twenty years since I   ve lived back  here, that town has really declined as far as businesses. And Beaver has,  too. We have people struggling to keep that from happening, but  economically, times have changed. I think we have to accept that and  say,    How can we keep this a viable area by making those changes that  are necessary?    If we keep on doing the same old thing we   ve always  been doing, that old saying,    We   ve always done it this way,    just won   t  work anymore. I don   t know that it ever worked anyway, but I think we  have to be resilient.  I love this country and the people in it, and I like the small town  atmosphere where you know everybody and everybody knows you and  people are friendly and helpful. I   ve lived in Denver. I   ve worked all  33  Wilson  Hodges  Wilson  over the world. I loved Colorado, but I   m so glad I came home. Thomas  Wolfe said,    You can   t go home again,    but I think you can.  Well, thank you so much for visiting with me.  Oh, my pleasure.  I   ve really enjoyed it.  -------  -------  
