 Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Tuesday, May 13,  2014, and I   m interviewing the President of the University of Oklahoma,  David Boren, and First Lady Molly Boren at the Boyd House in  Norman. President Boren, among other offices, you   ve been governor of  Oklahoma, served in the US Senate, and for the past fourteen years,  you   ve been President of OU  University of Oklahoma .  Actually twenty years.  Twenty years  Thank you for that correction  (Laughter) Molly, you  have a law degree, you   ve served as a Special District Judge, directed a  number of businesses and the Arts Institute at Quartz Mountain for a  period, while serving as First Lady at the Oklahoma capital and here at  OU . Today, I   d like to talk to both of you as supporters and collectors of  Oklahoma Native art. Thank you for taking the time to interview with me  today.  Thank you.  Let   s start with you, David. Most Oklahomans know that your father was  a congressman. Your mother taught public school, and you spent a  portion of your public school in Seminole, Oklahoma.  Yes, I spent the first ten years.  Not as many people know about your art background, however. I  wondered what kinds of artwork you might have had in the home  growing up.  Well, from childhood I was exposed to art in the home and in my  community. Mother particularly liked still life, usually flowers, and so  our home was filled with artwork. Also, she loved glass, and she had a  5  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  glass swan that I remember on the dining table which we are still  privileged to own. I had cousins who were artists. James Boren, who  was the first director of the Cowboy Hall of Fame, was my first cousin.  Jodie Boren, his brother, another first cousin, is an artist. When we had  family reunions, we sometimes had art shows along with it later on in  life.  One of the greatest influences on me growing up as a child in Seminole  was the mural painted by Acee Blue Eagle in our post office. It was  painted as a WPA project. My father knew him very well, and I loved to  go to the Post Office with him because I loved to see the Acee Blue  Eagle. I suppose that was the beginning of my love and appreciation for  Native American art, which is something that Molly and I have shared  throughout our married life and lived with, much to our joy.  What about you, Molly? You grew up in Ada, I believe.  No, I actually grew up in Stratford.  Okay. Can you tell me a bit about what your folks did for a living and  what kinds of art you had in your home?  Well, my father was a farmer-rancher, and my mother was a teacher. My  grandfather was the local doctor. He and my grandmother were two of  the original settlers of Stratford, as a matter of fact. It was a very small  town, a farming community, and it was this small-town Oklahoma life in  the 1950s.  Did you have any art in your home that you remember consciously  perceiving as artwork?  No, Julie, I really was not exposed to art in the true sense of art until I  was in college. It was 1963. I was an intern in Washington, DC, that  summer. I was in college at the time. I walked into the National Gallery  of Art in Washington, DC, and that was my first real exposure to art. I  was a convert immediately and have loved and sought to be exposed to  art ever since.  Sometimes collectors themselves have been interested in drawing or  painting. Was that your experience in grade school, David, at all or not?  No, not really. I   ve never   unfortunately, I didn   t inherit the family  gene if there is one for art. My first cousins inherited that. I don   t think  so. I did take art. I did take art in school, and I learned to draw such  things as oranges and how to shade them. I felt very fortunate because  today so many of our students are deprived of the opportunity of  6  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  learning how to draw or learning how to paint or learning music. I think  that that   s a terrible mistake because it enriches your life, and even if I  failed as a painter myself or in my drawing, it made me appreciate how  much talent it took.  How about you, Molly? Were there any art classes offered where you     No, very small town. Someone asked me about art. Do I paint, or do I do  anything, or do I play an instrument. I say,    No, but artists of all kinds,  musical or painters, need an audience, and they need a market. I try to  provide that.    (Laughs)  Well put. Molly, you have Chickasaw ancestry.  No, I   m a card-carrying member of the Choctaw tribe.  Choctaw tribe, okay. So what kinds of exposure did you have to Choctaw  culture growing up?  Well, my grandfather, although my Choctaw ancestry came from my  grandmother, my grandfather was very, very interested in Indians and  Indian history and the history of the tribes in Oklahoma, so he taught us  a great deal about that through stories. Then every summer he took all of  his grandchildren   every summer we went to Anadarko to the Indian  Exposition every summer, so my interest in Indian history, Indian  culture really came from my grandfather who was non-Indian but was  very, very interested in all things Indian.  Would that have been the first example of Native art that you saw  growing up?  Yes.  At the Anadarko Exposition.  That   s right.  David, you attended Yale University for your undergraduate degree. Did  you take any art appreciation classes there?  No, I   m sorry to say that I didn   t, and that   s one of the things that I  corrected when our daughter went to Yale. I said,    We   ll pay the tuition,  but you have to take some classes in art history.    She had the  opportunity to take the great Vincent Scully, who used to write the  introductory page for Architectural Digest, probably one of the greatest  historians of both art and architecture in contemporary America. She  7  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  made up for it by taking her classes. But I would say, going back to what  Molly said, I was introduced to Native American culture very early,  even though my grandmother was the one in our family, like her  grandparents, that wanted us to learn about it, and she knew all about it.  Then the other thing was that growing up in Seminole County, which  was the Seminole Nation, even though I was a little bit Cherokee, never  on the rolls, but the family history and going back into looking at our  ancestors in our family, it   s very clear there was Native American  heritage there, and we think it was Cherokee. The Seminoles used to  hold outdoor brush arbors. They would hold stickball games. We were  very close to Mekusukey Mission, and as children we were taken to  Mekusukey for tribal meetings, athletic contests, food, sofkee, all sorts  of things early on. Chief Chili Fish and others in the Seminole nation  used to, they would hold encampments and spiritual meetings sometimes  for two or three days at a time on our farm. I went often as a child with  my father to attend the tribal meetings.  What a great background. Betty Price noted, David, that when you  asked her to help plan your inauguration, you wanted the arts to be a  part of it. I   m wondering why it was so important for you to include the  arts in your inauguration.  Well, I think the arts, they reach the soul of our culture and our heritage  as people, so I asked Betty, who did such an amazing job for so many  years, bringing art appreciation to the people of our state, our legislators,  our public officials. The first art in the capitol building was really  brought there by Betty Price. When I was to be inaugurated as governor,  I wanted it to be as much as anything else a celebration of the arts. It was  a celebration of the visual arts, of painting. It was a celebration of music.  It was a celebration of drama, of all kinds. Some of it was classical.  Some of it was my cousin, Hoyt Axton, who helped write such songs as     Never Been To Spain    and    Joy to the World,    and a few of those  songs, and my aunt who wrote    Heartbreak Hotel.    Arlo Guthrie was a  part of it. There were all sorts of different performances, dance, music,  folk singing, and painting, so really the entire day of the inauguration  was a celebration of the arts because I think the arts speak to us in our  humanity and our deepest values. I think Oklahoma has such reason to  be proud of great artists from our state and great art produced in our  state.  Molly, I know you came to the governor   s mansion sort of towards the  end of     That   s right.  8  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren     David   s term, but I   m wondering how much Native art was in the  governor   s mansion when you got there, and if you had the opportunity  to add to that or not.  Yes, there was a lot of American   it was almost exclusively the work of  Oklahoma Indian artists. After I moved to Washington, we included  pieces of Oklahoma Indian art. Initially, that   s all we collected, was the  work of the Oklahoma Indians, so it was represented in our home in  Washington, DC, as well as our home in Seminole.  What was the first piece of Native art that you purchased together after  you were married?  Mmm, can you remember? That   s such a hard question.  We   re talking thirty-seven years. (Laughter) Let   s see.  I could tell you one of the first major pieces of art we purchased together  was a Mirac Creepingbear entitled Arapaho     From Doris.     from Doris Littrell in Oklahoma City. We also purchased some of the  work of the Kiowa Five. Of course, Jerome Tiger, also, and  Benjamin   Harjo and Merlin Little Thunder, and oh my goodness,  Gary   Montgomery, and I can   t begin to say   . Dennis Belindo and Woogie  Watchetaker. I can   t   .  Larry, Larry Hood.  Larry Hood. I can   t begin to remember all of the various artists.  Virginia Stroud.  Virginia Stroud, definitely Virginia Stroud. We have, I think, three  Virginia Strouds at our home out on our farm that we live with and love  every day, and one of her benches. Her work is also in the Cancer Center  that we, Molly especially, helped with developing   . The eagle feather  she gave us will become the symbol, or the feather she gave us, for the  Cancer Center to go over the front door, the Stephenson Cancer Center  in Oklahoma City in the OU Health Sciences Center. It will become the  symbol of the Cancer Center. We felt having a symbol that really brings  in the spirit     Doc Tate  Nevaquaya  was another.  9  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren     of our native people. Doc Tate   s another.  In fact, when you and I married, he already was collecting Doc Tate.  That   s right. Doc Tate was among the very, very first.  He   d played the flute, even. He played the flute for events sometimes at  the governor   s mansion.   Monroe  Tsatoke and  Stephen  Mopope. Oh my goodness, the great  one we have out at the farm that we see, it   s up high in our bedroom as  we look. Who was it said he thought that was the greatest Native  American artist of that period of time?  That   s who Allan Houser always said     Allan Houser.     was Blackbear Bosin.  Blackbear Bosin.  We have a Blackbear Bosin.  We have also, of course, Allan Houser.  David, as governor, one of the things you did was allocate seed money  for the Arts Institute at Quartz Mountain in 1976. What kind of impact  did Quartz Mountain have, do you think, for Native artists?  Oh, I think it   s had a huge impact, and we   ve had Native artists, also, for  the Oklahoma Foundation for Excellence. Every year, the poster is done  by a Native American artist.  How did that come about?  That was my idea. Again, it was capturing the spirit of Oklahoma. The  Arts Institute, we were at the very end of the year, and they were trying  to get it started. It was first started around near Tsalagi near Tahlequah,  Camp Egan, later moved to, of course, Quartz Mountain. I remember I  had five thousand dollars left at the end of the year in a severe weather  fund. It was the last day of the fiscal year, and so we used that five  thousand dollars, hoping there would not be another storm that night.  (Laughter) We didn   t see any predicted. That started Arts Institute.  Then, of course, Molly has been so involved at the Arts Institute. She   s  been chair of the board of the Arts Institute. She helped get out and raise  10  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  the endowment, private endowment for the Institute. Of course, Mary  Frates was the leader of the Arts Institute during this period. Then  Molly, after Mary retired, stepped in for several months as, actually, the  president and CEO, the active leader of the Arts Institute, but most of  her work was on the board and as chairman of the board.  I have to say Mary Frates was wonderful about having Indian artists,  both Oklahoma Indian artists as well as   for instance, Fritz Scholder  came, working with the Oklahoma Arts Institute students on painting.  Indian artists have been represented very well at the Arts  Institute  and  continue to be, as well as the poster every year for the Foundation for  Excellence. In fact, Emily Stratton, who is the director, could  probably   I   m sure they have one of every poster, and she could  probably walk you   . Merlin has been one one time.  Yes, yeah.  You could call Emily Stratton at their headquarters, and she could give  you a list. If you wanted, you could go see it. She would show you the  posters for every single year from the beginning.  And at the Arts Institute every year, they have a Celebration of the Spirit  with the Kiowa Black Leggings Society. Isn   t it usually Kiowa? They   ve  participated before.  Perhaps, when Mary was there.  When Mary Frates was there. They lead our commencement at OU.  Were you saying something else about the Arts Institute? Sorry.  I was trying to think how many years. Julie, the first one was in 1987, so  there   ll be that many. If you start with counting 1987 through 2014     Twenty-seven years.     that   s how many. No, it   d be twenty-eight because you would count     87, so it   s twenty-eight years of posters.  Of images.  I   m told that this year the artist they chose for this year is not from  Oklahoma, but I think nearly all of the others have been Oklahomans.  And it   s given art scholarships that also have gone to Oklahomans.  That   s wonderful. Another place where you both exercise tremendous  11  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  influence in terms of increasing the Native presence is on campus at the  University of Oklahoma. So once you became president, David, why was  adding to that Native art important to you?  Well, I think what started it all is that there had been an exhibit of Allan  Houser   s work, of course, native Oklahoman. It had ended just as I was  coming in as president, Molly was coming as First Lady. May We Have  Peace which is at the end of the North Oval (it   s sort of become a  symbol of the university) was there. The students were so sad that the  exhibition was ending, that his works were leaving, that they had a  fundraising drive.  They went out and talked to Allan, how much would it cost. He, of  course, cut the cost way back, just the cost of actually casting that piece,  which is also at the vice president   s home in Washington and was at the  National Native American Museum on the mall, Smithsonian. They  wore t-shirts, and they passed buckets at football games. It was the  students    love of Allan Houser. Of course, now Molly has done most of  the leadership of transforming the campus and endowing the gardens,  bringing works of sculpture and fountains. There are others on campus.  There   s another one of the Homeward Bound statue Allan Houser did  that a couple originally from Maud, Oklahoma, lived in Dallas, gave to  the university. It   s also out on the campus. There   s an Enoch Kelly  Haney.  R. C. Gorman.  There   s an R. C. Gorman sculpture. Let me think. Didn   t Kelly   s brother  have one?  Yes, Bill Haney   s     Bill Haney     There   s a sculpture by Bill Haney on the campus. In Headington Hall,  which is a new residence for our freshmen, in the rotunda is the Kelly  Haney model of the smaller version of the Kelly Haney that   s on top of  the state capitol building. You cannot walk around this campus and  escape Native American art.  Yes, and we had one of the faculty members who was head of the  dermatology department gave his collection of Indian paintings, and  they   re hanging in the library. Students are exposed to American Indian  art wherever they go, not just inside the museum. They   re going to  encounter it in the Student Union   we gave a large piece of Archie  12  D. Boren  M. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Blackowl   s     Archie Blackowl.     is hanging in the Student Union. American Indian art, students on this  campus are exposed to it everywhere they go, every day.  That   s great. The expansion of the Fred Jones Museum was part of the  reason for that, David, also to have more room for Native art holdings?  Oh, absolutely. The  Eugene  Adkins collection, I received part of that  collection, and also the  James  Bialac collection, both of whom  collected incredible works, Native American works and pottery as well  as paintings, artifacts      Richard and Adeline  Fleischaker, too.     and the Fleischaker, collection, they also had quite a collection. So 90  percent of the collections at the OU Art Museum have come in the last  twenty years, and we   ve added two new wings onto the museum to  accommodate the growing collections.  I   d like to switch to a more personal focus now about the role Native art  plays in your home and your personal life, separate and apart from your  institutional obligations. Whoever wants to answer, just jump in as you  feel you want to answer. I was wondering how your tastes in art might  have changed, Native art, might   ve changed over the years.  Well, I don   t know that our taste in art has changed so much. We love  the traditional and the Kiowa Five, of course, (had an opportunity here  under the great Oscar Jacobson to paint, to be students, and their works  were taken around the world) all the way through our very contemporary  painters who are working today or who have worked recently. We   re  here at our home and just across from a T. C. Cannon that we recently  were able to acquire for our art museum that   s right behind us, of his  grandmother. He did such remarkable things and blazed new ground, to  Fritz to Merlin Little Thunder   s work because you might say it   s almost  in a different style that doesn   t necessarily always say it   s Native  American. Sometimes it does. It   s traditional landscape painting in many  ways.  We like it all. I think it   s, you know, it   s the appreciation that deepens,  and living with it I think just reminds us about some of the things that all  of us, whatever our background, can take away from Native American  culture. What I always say to our students is one of the things we can  learn from Native Americans is that art was not something to be put  13  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  away in a museum, separate and apart from life. It was like air and  water. You had to have it. There was beauty in the pottery that was used  every day, beauty in the paintings on the tipis. Native Americans taught  us not to segment art and to say,    Oh, here   s art. It   s something extra.     No. It   s part of the air we breathe and the water we drink, and I think  that that appreciation is something we all take away from Native  American culture. You want to add anything to that?  Yes. (Laughter) I explained to Julie that initially we confined our  collecting to only Oklahoma Indian artists, American Indian artists, and  later that changed. We expanded beyond painting to other art forms:  pottery, weavings, baskets, bead work     Sculpture.     sculpture, and also, you know, Native culture, material culture. In that  sense, I think that   s one way in which our taste broadened. We became  more inclusive and less exclusive.  Focused on more media. How important is it for you to meet the maker  of a piece of artwork at some point?  How important, did you say? Oh, I think it   s always wonderful,  especially if you   ve been seeing the work and maybe collecting it to  finally meet the artist because the art, you buy a piece of art because it  speaks to you. You know that it has something of the spirit of the person  who painted it or weaved it or whatever. To meet the artist is always so  interesting. You actually then have a chance to have a conversation  about the piece of art you bought, and did it represent what you thought  it did. I think it   s enriching. The work of art then means even more to  you because now you have a frame of reference you didn   t have before.  Is there a point at which you sort of felt like you were actually building a  collection, or did that not really enter into anything?  Well, I don   t think we either one ever thought   we were just buying  things we like. Only later in retrospect we were,    Oh, we   ve got a  collection,    because we never sought to put together a collection. We  were just buying things we liked.  Exactly right.  How do the pieces live in your home? I mean, do you know right away  where you   re going to put them, or do they sort of stay in one place until  you   ve figured that out? Do you move them around?  14  D. Boren  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  We usually are   I have to say this. She always says,    Now, just be sure  it   s the right place.    I   m always anxious when we bring a work of art  home to hang it or to place it if it   s a piece of pottery or sculpture or  something else. It   s by mutual agreement. We don   t really have too  many arguments, but occasionally we can have a difference of opinion  as to where a work of art should hang. In the end, I have to say Molly  has the best judgment, and I   m always pleased in the end as to where  something is. Once it   s there, I really don   t like to see it change very  much. I like to know it   s going to stay where it is.  Although because we continue to buy, even though we promise  ourselves that   s the last piece of art we   re buying, so then we are, by  necessity, we have to rearrange in order to accommodate whatever new  piece we   ve just bought.  What advice would you give to another Native art collector who is just  starting to acquire?  My advice would be find an honest dealer who is very knowledgeable  who will teach you.  That   s where I would say we learned so much from Doris Littrell  because to Doris Littrell, trading in American Indian art was not a  business. It was a calling. She loved the art; she loved the artists. Again,  she shared the feeling that it is so central to our heritage as Oklahomans  and Americans. She wanted to see these artists who were coming on, she  wanted to see them flourish. She taught us so much about historic Native  American art, where it came from, who some of the first artists were,  and then she taught us a lot about the contemporary artists and gave us a  chance to meet them. She, more than, I think, any other person in  Oklahoma, really helped teach all the people of Oklahoma that came in  contact with her about Native American art, and she, I think, did more  than anyone else to further the careers of contemporary Native American  artists, including the young ones just coming up. They were like part of  her family.  You know, one other bit of advice I would give to a new collector is go  to museums. Look and look and look. Train your eye; educate your eye.  Yeah, I think that learning, (Molly   s said this very often) appreciating art  and understanding art and selecting art and becoming, if you want to call  it, having a critical eye, is a matter of exposure. That   s one of the  reasons we feel so strongly about all of our sculptures should not just be  in the art museum. All of the things we have here that are works of art  should be out where students come to live with them. It becomes part of  their life. In fact, they can   t imagine life without it so that it   s not only  15  Little Thunder  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  are they going to be great supporters of museums and great supporters of  artists, but they   re going to want art in their homes. They   re going to  want to live with art in their offices and in their surroundings and in the  parks and their home communities. I think that   s a very important part of  what we try to teach, you might say: learning by osmosis.  Okay.  And who   s   who did the pot? We just had the show.  Christine McHorse.  Christine McHorse, yeah.  What changes have you noticed as collectors in the Native art scene,  maybe just between the    90s and 2000s.  I think some of it at times, as Native issues have become in a way civil  rights issues, and we know all too well and sadly in our own history in  Oklahoma, that our Native peoples were not always treated fairly. I used  to examine land titles, and I would see situations back in history where a  Native American in justice should have continued to own the land, but  the land was somehow taken away through an unfair transaction. I think  that in many ways, contemporary art, especially in the latter part of the  last century and the first part of this century, began to be sometimes  protest art. That   s very understandable because I think in many ways  Native people have not always been given the opportunities they deserve  or the opportunity to preserve their own heritage, and I think that that   s  very important.  Also, Native art in some ways has followed other contemporary art in  becoming more abstract, where it was very figurative in some ways  early on or with very set designs. I think in many ways every period of  art reflects the history of the times and the culture of the times. I don   t  think just because art happens to come from Native peoples, it comes  from human beings, and human beings are always reflecting the times in  which they live. It has evolved, definitely.  What do you think could be done to better promote our state   s Native  artists and their work?  I think advertising it. We have such incredible collections, for example,  that we really need to bring   people from across this country, across  this world, want to see Native art. In fact, those that come from overseas,  sometimes I would say it   s at the top of their list. They need to know  about the Gilcrease  Musuem . They need to know about the Native  16  M. Boren  D. Boren  collections and the Philbrook  Museum of Art . They need to know  about the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum. They need  to know about the museum in Lawton, the museums, the collections in  other parts of our state.  I think too often we don   t understand ourselves what incredible treasures  we have, and we do not let people from outside our state know that this  should be an arts destination. Oklahoma should be an arts destination,  especially for those people who want to learn about Native arts. I   m  sorry to say the new Smithsonian museum is more about other things.  It   s more about digital histories and film. It   s not enough about the  actual material culture, the actual beauty of beadwork and leatherwork  and painting and sculpture and pottery and the rest of it, things from the  Hyde collection. They   re not out. In Oklahoma, they can come to our  great museums and see it out. If they stop off in New Mexico, there are  obviously great collections there. There   s some great collections in  Arizona, but don   t stop. Keep coming east. Keep coming to Oklahoma  because actually you   re going to see a greater treasure trove of Native  arts here than anywhere, than any other state in the Union. I don   t know,  Molly, you may have thoughts on that, too.  Yes. I mean, how do we better promote it? If we can get people here     I   ll give you an example. There   s an annual lecture at our art museum,  and a noted art historian comes in every year, is brought in to speak. The  very first speaker was an authority on French Impressionism. He holds  the McDermott Chair at the University of Texas at Dallas. He   s  internationally known as a great expert on French Impressionism, and he  came. Before he lectured, the director of the museum took him on a tour.  He had never been exposed to American Indian art before, and he went  into a gallery. He literally was moved to tears.  It was his favorite thing in the whole museum, not our collection of  French Impressionists, not anything   . He absolutely fell in love with it.  He thought it was the most wonderful thing he had ever seen. I mean, he  literally was moved to tears walking through it. Here   s someone who   s a  great art historian, has a great eye, is an authority on his subject, French  Impression, and yet this was not someone who disdained,    Oh this is not  Europe,    but who immediately recognized the beauty and was very,  very moved by it. It was his favorite thing in the museum. It   s not just  the idea that very    sophisticated    people about European art would be  turned off. Not so. Quite the contrary.  I   d love to see a show like the old Philbrook show resurrected in  Oklahoma so that we provide that same kind of a juried show where we  provide that same kind of encouragement, particularly to the very  youngest artists, least experienced artists that are coming on. I hope that  17  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  M. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  M. Boren  will happen because unfortunately it   s just like the loss of Doris Littrell.  She   s retired. How many people are there like Doris to come on?  They   re irreplaceable, and when those great dealers who are also  educators and they   re also the people that provide a market   . The  young artists need a market if they   re going to survive and be artists.  They have to feed their families and still do the art. I would love to see  that happen one of these days. We work closely here with Jacobson  House and with others trying to support that idea. Perhaps one of these  days we   ll be able to restore that juried show in our state.  It was very important to a lot of artists    careers.  Right.  Well, is there anything you   d like to add, anything that we haven   t talked  about?  I can   t   can you, Molly, think of anything else you   d like to add?  You mean about     And we   ll take a look at the individual art pieces.     about Doris or about American Indian art in general?  About Native art in Oklahoma.  Well, better than any archive or any library or any manuscript, to me,  Native art and Native art as it   s developed down through time really  captures the spirit of Oklahoma, the essential spirit of Oklahoma. It  could be Native peoples, it might be people who are not Native, but they  have absorbed from our Native people, from the rich fabric that our  Native people have brought to us and our society. They   ve absorbed so  much of the spirit, probably without even knowing it. I think Native art  really is the living history book of Oklahoma, and it captures it, captures  our spirit better than anything else. Of course, I think the beauty of it is  deeply satisfying. In so many ways, it   s just the essential core of the  people we are and what we contribute to the rest of the country.  The very name of our state,    Home of the Red Man,    in Choctaw. I  mean, this is who we are. This is who Oklahoma is. These are our roots.  This is our heritage. What we find is when we bring people from other  places, they love it. We just need to get them here. They always respond  in the way you would hope they would. People have become collectors  of American Indian art. We   ve had guests who   ve come from back East,  who ultimately   like the Notos. He was the CEO of Exxon, not  18  D. Boren  M. Boren  D. Boren  Little Thunder  D. Boren  Little Thunder  M. Boren  Little Thunder  Exxon     Exxon-Mobil.      of Mobil Oil Company, and they ended up being some of Doris    best  customers.  Exposure, and people come to love it from everywhere. I think, again,  the Europeans are some of those most taken with Native art.  Well, we   re going to pause and then take a look at a few of your  artworks here.  Okay.  Molly, would you like to tell us about this piece?  Yes, David got a call from Windsor Betts  Art Brokerage House  gallery  in Santa Fe. This is a brokerage firm that only takes paintings or any  kind of artwork on consignment and sells it for the owner. Because we  had bought a T. C. Cannon woodblock print a number of years ago from  them, they had us in their files, and so obviously they were calling  anyone who had ever bought a T. C. Cannon from them. They called and  said this very large T. C. Cannon had just come into their gallery from  an estate, and they were calling to see if by chance we might be  interested. David said,    Put it on hold. Send me a picture, dimensions,  and price,    which they did. He called back and said,    Sold.    It arrived  last week. David and I had bought this, and we   ve already given it to the  art museum already. We   re giving it in honor of Byron Price because in  1990, Byron Price, when he was director of the Cowboy Hall of Fame,  had this huge T. C. Cannon show, which was actually our introduction to  T. C. Cannon. It was probably the best and greatest and largest T. C.  Cannon show ever. Because he introduced, we   re giving it in his honor.  What we learned from Windsor Betts was this was the very last painting  T. C. Cannon ever painted. They found it on his easel in his studio after  he died in that accident outside Santa Fe. This is his grandmother, and he  must have painted it with a lot of love. I assume it   s been in someone   s  collection all these years. That was 1978, and he was only thirty-two  when he died. We   re assuming it was in some collector   s collection until  that person died, and now they   re selling things from his or her estate.  We   re so glad, and the gallery folks   it   d be coming back to Oklahoma.  We thought it was appropriate, too. Everyone will get to live with this T.  C. Cannon because it will be in the Fred Jones Jr. Museum of Art.  That   s wonderful. So how about this particular piece, Molly?  19  M. Boren  Little Thunder  Boren  Little Thunder  Yes, this is a watercolor by Merlin Little Thunder that David and I saw  in Doris    gallery. In fact, we have three Merlin Little Thunders in our  personal collection, all of which we bought from Doris. We love this  one. We loved it. It   s a very small painting, but we just love it. It   s  entitled My Father   s Song. We   d assumed it might, indeed, be of his  father or at least inspired by his father, but we love the painting. It spoke  to us, and it still does. We live with it and love it, and we think Merlin is  one of the great living American Indian artists, not just in Oklahoma but  anywhere. This is a painting that we have lived with a long time and  love very much.  Molly, you want to talk to us about this weaving?  Yes. This is a Navajo weaving David and I found in Santa Fe.  Unfortunately the dealer, who was from California, could not tell us a  great deal about it. We knew it was old, and we knew it was special  because we collect weavings. We knew this was most unusual and a  superb example of the weaver   s art. We love the colors; we love the  composition. It was old, very old, and we bought it. It reminded us of an  abstract painting almost. We thought it   s a rare and very important  weaving, we thought, so we bought it. We have given it to the Fred  Jones Jr. Museum of Art, but we get to live with it here in Boyd House  in the meantime.  It   s gorgeous. Well, thank you so much for your time today, Molly.  -------  -------   
