 Wilson and I am with the Oklahoma State  University Library. Today is September 4, 2009 and we   re at the  Muskogee Public Library in Muskogee, Oklahoma interviewing Vernell  Redo. This interview is being conducted as part of the Muskogee African  American Heritage Oral History Project, part of the Spotlighting  Oklahoma Series. Thank you for joining us today. Let   s start out with  having you tell me a little bit about growing up, about where you were  born.  I was born in Boynton, Oklahoma, which is here in Muskogee County. I  moved to Muskogee when I was four years old. After that I stayed a  brief time in Okmulgee with my grandmother until I was old enough to  start school here in 1945.  How did your family initially come to Boynton?  Well, they were sharecroppers. They migrated here from Louisiana and  had sharecropped in the little places around and we wound up in  Boynton, Oklahoma.  Why did you move to Muskogee?  For better work opportunities. My father started working on the Fort  Gibson Dam out here near Fort Gibson. That was one option that we  had, to move to Muskogee.  Where did you attend elementary school?  At Dunbar, on Altamont  Street  here in Muskogee.  And then you attended Manual Training High School?  5  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Well, there was a junior high named Saddler Junior High. I attended  junior high there and then on to Manual High School. Graduated there in  1958.  What did you do after you graduated?  Went to college on a football scholarship to Langston University.  And did you get a degree at Langston?  Got a degree at Langston in Biology and Science. I came to Muskogee  and was immediately hired into the Muskogee Public Schools.  As a teacher?  As a teacher, which is a rarity. Very few first-year teachers were hired at  Manual. I understand that I was only one of two that held that privilege.  What subjects did you teach?  Math and science and even a course in physics.  Were you involved with the football program when you returned?  No. I finally wound up a coach of a baseball team, which I had never  picked up a baseball bat in my life. I was always a little afraid of that  hard ball. It worked out.  Tell me a little bit about the house you lived in as a child in Muskogee  and about your neighborhood.  Well the first house that I lived in was a pretty nice home. Let me brief  you on the first home that we rented. It was an experience. There were  six of us, my older two sisters and my older brother. We rented a house  up on Vine, which very few people knew about Vine Street in  Muskogee, it   s just a one-block street. And in this house that we rented,  we had a bedroom and access to the kitchen, the six of us. So while I  was being farmed out to my grandmother   s house till I became school-aged,  I didn   t know what a privilege I had. I really cried all the way over  there. But that was one of the few times in my life that I had a chance to  become an only child, when I lived with my grandmother in Okmulgee  that year. Fascinating.  What did you do in Okmulgee while you lived with her? Did she live on  a farm?  6  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  No, she lived in town at Osage and Kennedy. I remember the house, it  still stands. We had a nice time. She had a husband named Mr. Beckner  and you believe it or not, my grandmother must   ve been a very silent  person. I remember running some errands with her, very little  conversation. In fact, I can   t remember any type of dialogue that I had  with her. But I remember quite a bit with Mr. Beckner. So that   s the way  it was and I was quite happy to come back to Muskogee to start school at  the end of the school year.  What was your neighborhood like in Muskogee?  Well I lived right in front of, I think it was, 801 Altamont and the house  was just recently torn down. I tried to buy it from the girl that fell heir to  it, but it was right there in front of Manual Training High School, the  high school from which I graduated. We stayed there only about a year  then I moved to North Main. Mom and Dad bought that home and we  lived and occupied that home up until the time of my father   s death.  Then she sold it to a local merchant (I won   t call the name because  they   re still in business here).  What are some businesses you remember frequenting in Muskogee as a  child?  First of all, Taylor   s Grocery, which was up around the hill. And then  the next one I remember would be Compassi   s, my mother worked at  Wright Way Laundry, and it was down the street on Altamont. My  mother and father traded there and bought most of their groceries there  while we were on Altamont here in Muskogee. And when we moved to  North Main, Bill Miller became our grocer. That was one block off  Third Street and every business in that area was black. We had a black  grocer in there and there was Mr. Patton. Further down the street was  Bradley   s Grocery. That was where I spent most of my childhood, right  there on 807 North Main.  Do you remember any specific leaders in the black community in  Muskogee?  Yes, at that time, certainly, was my minister at Antioch Baptist Church,  Reverend D.C. Cooksey. There was Jake Simmons, there was Dr.  Wallace, there was also Dr. Chandler. And there were just a number   it  is maybe a little far back for me to recall, but I think there may have  been as many as eight to ten doctors here in town and maybe fifteen or  sixteen black attorneys at the time. So the town was abounding with lots  of leadership at the time, as I recall. And back during that time, all adults  were your leaders because they all had permission to discipline you in  whatever the situation might be. I appreciate all that.  7  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Who are some teachers you remember from Manual Training High  School?  Well I would be remiss if I omit my grade school teacher. I started with  Miss Maddox and later she married and became Davis. I stayed with her  for four years, from second through sixth. That is probably where I  acquired, I would say, maybe eighty to ninety percent of the things that I  understand. The most critical parts of my education were done there  with Miss Willa Mae Davis.  And then after that were there any other big influences?  Oh yes, oh yes. Then onto the junior high, there was Miss Mayberry and  Miss Wallick. These were the two disciplinarians of the entire school  system at that time. Miss Mayberry taught math and Miss Wallick taught  English. And after you would get past those two, then you may get a  stamp on the back to go on to the high school. But a lot of students were  cut off right there in the seventh grade because they couldn   t perform on  a level to be granted permission to go into the high school.  So would they repeat seventh grade?  They   d repeat and some of them would drop out and go on and start  working other places. I remember quite a few of them that didn   t make it  past the junior high level.  When did you start playing football?  I went out for football my ninth grade year. It would   ve been 1954, fall  of    54.  What position did you play?  Started playing at defensive end. And as the years went by, I wound up  playing middle guard and running fullback on the team, which I  captained my senior year. Co-captained my junior year and was captain  of the team my senior year.  Were you involved in any other student organizations in high school?  Yes, the National and State Honor Society and other honorary deals. I  also acquired a barbering certificate and that came in handy while I  attended college. I also was the campus barber.  How did you get a scholarship to Langston? Did they recruit you?  8  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Football. No, my high school coach recommended me. You know, at  that time Muskogee was a hot bed for football players and I think all it  would take us was just a letter or a recommendation from your high  school coach and they would accept you into the program. Over the  years there had been outstanding football players that came from  Muskogee at Langston, a number of All-Americans.  Who was your high school football coach?  W.W. Cox. We affectionately called him Uncle Walt. George  Washington was the assistant coach who, in my mind, was probably my  hero as so far as a teacher and was a famous athlete that made All-  American, I understand, all four years at Langston.  What did he teach?  Math. He was an ultimate gentleman.  How has Muskogee changed over the years?  Dramatically. Dramatically. For my purposes, and I say the most  dramatic change that affected my life maybe both adversely and in a  positive way was the coming of the mall. That disrupted the black  community as I knew it and literally destroyed downtown Muskogee. I  always had a real romance with downtown Muskogee. I just loved to  come to town to do some window shopping. Didn   t have a lot of money  but we would get to window shop. I used to get joy out of peering  through windows and seeing families eating at the tables and stuff like  this.  A lot of guys that I knew worked downtown as table waiters, in the  hotels and in various ways. We just loved downtown and there was  everything going on down there that we wanted. And plus too, growing  up, there was very few things that I had to leave the black community  for because there were all types of businessmen, all types of stores and  just about all you ever needed you could find from somewhere up and  down Third Street through Second, all the way down to Kalamazoo here  in Muskogee. Those were some very memorable days in my lifetime.  When did the mall come?  I would say around 1970   I   m not sure, maybe somewhere between    75  and    79. They bought up a lot of the properties in there. And that   s why I  say it had a windfall because I had been advised to buy as many  properties in there as I could, and we did, from another realtor who was  next door to me. We bought several properties from him. Then the mall  9  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  came through and bought them at a nice profit, let   s put it that way.  But it still took away what you knew.  Yes, it took away. A whole lot of my recreational areas were in  downtown, see. Oh, the liveliest part of the black arena was along  Second Street. We had dancehalls, a movie theatre, pool halls, grocers,  the YMCA was down there. It was just a great place for a young man to  grow up in Muskogee. Just like everywhere else, you had a lot of bosses  down there because any grown person that would catch you down there  at the wrong time of the day, or particularly if you were a football  player, they   d make you go home, wouldn   t admit you into their  businesses.  Did you raise your children in Muskogee?  Yes. I bought a home, after I graduated college, here from one of my  teachers. Ms. Gideons was a realtor. Both my children were born in that  house and we stayed there until they graduated high school.  Do you feel like growing up in Muskogee for them was a lot different  than for you?  Not really. A lot of parallels. Maybe a little, my daughter and son, they  were part of the integrated system here in Muskogee. They were  involved in that. I would say that would be the only difference. Maybe a  lot of exposure to some things, a lot of different things. Maybe some of  them positive and some of them very negative, too. So goes life.  Do you still attend church regularly?  I   m still a member but I   m not in regular attendance. I was baptized at  Antioch Church in 1945 and try to be as spiritual as the next man, but  I   m not as involved in organized religion.  What kinds of local gatherings and events do you remember from your  childhood?  Football games. Football games and all the activities at the high school.  If I recall correctly, there was something that was going on at our high  school every night. If someone was not practicing they had a Tri-Hi-Y or  different clubs that met there. Sometimes we had a junior college going  on at the high school. Of course, the basketball games and just general  dances and everything. I would say ninety percent of my social activities  took place in and around the high school I attended.  10  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Have you been back to many high school reunions?  Oh yes, we had one all-school reunion. One of the great joys that I had, I  was chosen as the emcee of the mammoth reunion. At that we had over  six hundred Manualites to attend. When I say Manualite, those are the  students that graduated from Manual before integration. And I was  fortunate enough to be the emcee. One of the things that I had great joy  with, there was a guy that came up from Boswell, Oklahoma. Now this  would get into some of the history of Manual, and I don   t want to  deviate too much. But you know, a number of communities did not have  more than eighth grade schools so we had people from as far away as  east Texas and different places that came here to go to Manual Training.  He was from Boswell, Oklahoma down there near Idabel and Hugo,  somewhere down there. The interesting thing, he came up a day before  just to make sure the reunion was going on. He had his program from his  graduating class, he had his grades, he had his certificate, he had  everything that we   d get at graduating high school. And the fascinating  thing that I noticed, their guest speaker was Melvin B. Tolson.  Really?  Melvin B. Tolson is the one that has moved on and is out of The Great  Debaters. He was debate coach at Wiley College. And I also had Melvin  B. Tolson for English Literature at Langston.  Really?  Yes, that   s what   s fascinating.  What do you remember about him?  Oh, I remember that students would hang out on the stairwell below his  class because he was so loquacious. It was just a joy to be in his class,  you know, trying to figure out what he was talking about. (Laughter)  Yes. He had a lot to talk about, we learned a lot. I would rather call that  a good philosophy class rather than an English composition class  because he told us so many things. He had so many experiences to share,  so that in itself was an education.  Do you remember it being a pretty tough class?  Oh yes, oh yes. Yeah, it was tough. And we had our casualties, too.  (Laughter) That   s the way it goes.  What world or national events had an effect on you throughout your  life? Or played a significant role?  11  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Well I guess the one that significantly, it was World War II. I guess the  ending of the war and I say the war more or less frightened me more  than it did anything so far as education. Then somewhere along the line I  developed a fascination with Adolf Hitler. I would spend a lot of time  and energy still reading and anything that   s referencing him I always try  to read as much as I can.  How old were you during the war?  During the war I wasn   t more than six, seven years old.  Do you remember people you know going to fight?  Yes. I had some uncles that left for the war before I moved to Muskogee  when I was around four years old. But I remember when they left the  farm. They lived with my dad. My grandfather died somewhere back in  1935 and my dad, at a very early age, fell host to three or four of his  brothers and two or three of his younger sisters. We all lived in this  house together with Grandmother. And it was just a joy in my life to  have all those adults around. I remember gradually they left and left.  Most of them left going to California. That was prior to us moving here  to Muskogee. This past summer we had a reunion and some of those  siblings or those uncles of mine that had left, they met with us in  Phoenix, Arizona. And it was a nice, great family reunion.  So most of the ones that went to California, did they stay out there?  Yes. None of them have moved back.  Were there any other national events that played a significant role in  your life?  Oh, certainly the assassination of Kennedy, Martin Luther King,  Malcolm X. Seemingly there was a period going on in America if a  person took a stand he was almost writing his own death ticket. To dare  to be different and speak a little different, speak a little directly to the  point and to the issues, even suggesting change, those seemingly were  things that got them in trouble and they lost their life. Certainly both the  Kennedy boys     deaths  were very traumatic to me. So those were the  issues that I thought. And another thing that I found not too disturbing  because I was out of school I guess, maybe still out on the integration of  the schools and the integration of the society as a whole. I guess all the  jury   s not completely in on that.  How do you feel about it?  12  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Well, there are the pros and cons. You see, as I had inferred before, all  adults in my community were my mentors and they had authority and  domain in our community, at school and anywhere else that you were. If  you were an adult, you were in charge. And you were taught that in your  homes before you left,    If you   re going over here, to see so and so and  so and so you need to know the rules. If you act out over there, Mrs. So  and So can chastise you just as well as I can.    We grew up in a  community like that. You know the old saying the community raised a  child. Well I felt that I was in an environment that operated exactly like  that. That   s the way it was.  Things have changed so dramatically. Now, two songs that I think of  very much is one,    It   s Your Thing (do what you wanna do)   . Got it.  And the other one is James Brown   s    I   m Black and I   m Proud.       I think  that song did, for a number of people in race and among people of color,  as much as a lot of the marches and other things did. It gave them that  identity that they were a person even if they were of color. So that   s my  philosophy on that. But I think it had a dramatic effect on this along with  the Vietnam War and the advent of the flower children on the west  coast. See, I imagine I was grown and out of school before I knew what  a marijuana cigarette was. And they were out there, they were having  sit-ins and love-ins and all this kind of stuff. There was just so many,  this was not a part of my growing up at all. So America has changed.  And I think all in all it   s for very positive things in itself. I   m not overly  happy about some of the leadership we   ve had. Naturally I   m more than  proud of Obama and his rise to the presidency because it had to be a  great challenge for him to accept the idea of picking up that role. But it   s  all okay.  Were you involved in many political or social organizations?  Not too many. And maybe I   ll kind of reiterate something I   m saying,  there are a couple of arguments I don   t think that anybody will ever win  and that   s on religion and politics. So I don   t get involved. But I  supported one guy and asked him to support my university and when the  vote went down, he was nowhere there. So I just don   t trust them too  much.  What about in the community? Have you been involved in community  organizations?  Yes. And you know, I have my fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi, and we had  a men   s group here in Muskogee. It   s no longer in effect but it was  organized for that purpose, we wanted to get a little bit more of an  understanding of our local police department and that leads to another  area: I have problems with the statistics of our prison population, a big  13  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  problem with that. How we can be maybe one-tenth of the population  out here and maybe fifty to sixty percent of the people locked up?  Something just doesn   t jive out right there. But I know it   s all about the  money, too. So if you   re poor in America, you   re in a bad position.  So did your organization learn anything phenomenal?  Not phenomenal, but I think we got on a basis where we could talk to  policeman and talk to people in high places and met with them as well as  through the efforts of the NAACP. I worked hand in hand with Dr.  Andre Jones with the NAACP, which has made monumental progress in  this community not only for blacks but all people. And so just try to  teach the idea that everything should be on a fair and equal basis.  Do you think dialogue, the open dialogue has helped?  Oh yes. Oh yes. Definitely. I think that that   s something we don   t spend  enough time doing. Where people come together, something like town  hall meetings and yes, getting together and getting to know each other.  Like this conversation I   m having with you. It   ll have some long-range  effects one way or the other. I hope they   re positive, you know. But  when we never talk to each other, there   s always that barrier. I don   t  know her, she doesn   t know me.  Breaking down the barriers.  Breaking down the barriers. Very well put.  What is it about Muskogee that has kept you here?  I just love Muskogee. Like I say, I   m a Muskogee County boy to the  bone. It   s not that I haven   t ventured out; I love travel. But I always like  to come home. It   s hard for me to understand people that have lived in  Muskogee and go away and never come back. It   s just difficult for me to  understand.  Is your wife from Muskogee?  The county, yes. She   s from a little community called Oktaha, but  known as New Hope. It   s halfway between Oktaha and Warner I guess  somewhere down   we have a farm down near Oktaha.  Do you raise animals on your farm?  There are some there. I have a brother-in-law that farms the place. Some  horses and things around. Basically, I see the number one principle of  14  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  the farm is to get together the youth. We bring them together at least  once or twice a year.  Your family members?  Yes. Sometimes we   ve had as many as two or three hundred down there  at a time, yes. So that in itself is a joy.  Are your children still living here?  My daughter lives here and I have five grandchildren. All the  grandchildren live here, and my older son lives in Wichita.  What in your life has brought or given you the greatest satisfaction?  That   s a difficult question. I guess the marriage to my wife. That has  been the most fruitful relationship I   ve had in my life, the relationship  I   ve had with my wife since I guess about 1955. Next year we   ll  celebrate our fiftieth wedding anniversary.  Congratulations.  Wonderful.  Do you have any secrets for such a long and happy marriage? So many  people these days are not making it that long.  Yeah,  divorce  not very fruitful at all. Divorce destroys people, I think,  in so many ways. That   s an area that I don   t support and I hate to have  people go through that experience. We endured a separation at one time,  but that was all my fault. I couldn   t point the finger at anyone else but  myself. So that way it makes it a lot easier.  So do you have any tips for people or advice?  You need tips? Yeah, work hard and learn how to pay yourself. My  mom taught me that. Two things she said to me that still make a lot of  sense today,    Take care of the pennies and the dollars will take care of  themselves.    And then the other one was,    Pay your bills on time so you  can get anything in the world that you want.    Good advice even today.  And you   re self-employed. What do you do?  I invest in real estate.  Around Muskogee?  15  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Around Muskogee. The only other property I   ve invested out of  Muskogee, in fact out of America, was down in Rocky Point, Mexico.  That was an investment that I thought would turn real quickly but with  the downturn in the economy, we   re kind of just holding on to it. I have  a partnership with three other guys. It works out about like a timeshare  so I have about thirteen weeks down there. It   s Rocky Point, which is  Puerto Penasco, which is called the Eastern Baja.  On the peninsula?  Yes. Right in the arm. (Laughter) That   s where it is.  Is there anything else you would like to talk about? Muskogee or  growing up here or anything that we haven   t covered you   d like to  share?  Well, I thought I   d kind of touch on that. I felt that I had a great  advantage over a lot of communities because of the quality of the  teachers that I had here. I was stimulated to become a teacher as a result  of that. And some of these, they were just giants in the educational field.  That was one of the great joys or great benefits that I had growing up  here in Muskogee. And like I say, we had people from as far away as  east Texas come to Muskogee to go to Manual Training.  The other thing that I look back on now is that the generations of today  have not stepped to the plate like their forefathers. I see that going on, on  both sides of the track, in the black community as well as in the white  community. The second and third generation has not stepped to the  plate. We had some real giants here in the economic boom of Muskogee  but some of the businesses that are passing on to the second and third  generation are non-existent now; very few were. I guess it happens like  it   s supposed to happen though.  When students would come from Texas and other places to attend  Manual Training, where would they stay? Would their families come?  Some of them stayed in homes with people here in Muskogee. I had  cousins, the Beckners, they had a big two-story house and they housed  students while they attended schools. Some of them would stay with  other people while they would attend the high school. I think there was  another big house that was right down Altamont where students stayed  while they attended Manual.  A little history on that school, it was tailored after Tuskegee Institute and  it started off as being Manual Hand Training School. But there were  some people in Muskogee that were very influential and had lots of  16  money. And that is one thing that I miss here. Our influential people  seemingly, like I say, have died off and the families have deteriorated  and they   re no longer in existence. A young man a grade or two behind  me has written a book about Manual Training and he talks about that  era.  You know, when the money here was divided between the Indians and  blacks who had to be called into doing the Dawes Commission, there  was great wealth abounding here in Muskogee and in Oklahoma, in this  eastern part of Oklahoma. And I don   t know if that had to do anything  with attracting the quality of teachers that we had, but a number of them  were well-educated during that period. When they started off, they just  made Manual Hand Training. But some of these influential people came  in and said,    Why not put in Latin? Let   s put in a little French. Let   s put  in a little algebra and the higher math, a little quantitative analysis and  chemistry and all this kind of stuff.    Because a lot of them came here  looking for husbands and wives because there were people here that had  lots of money, particularly after the state was first settled and during the  time that the Dawes Commission was distributing the money to the  Native Americans. A large vicinity of the Native Americans were black  people and so they also had a lot of money here in Muskogee. There  were a lot of rich people, no doubt about it.  There was one person that was declared probably the most wealthy oil  guy, named Luther Manuel. He was reputed to own all of downtown  Muskogee at the time. One of his favorite deals that he would like to do  when he   d get ready to go see a baseball game in either St. Louis or  Kansas City to go see the old black leagues play. That was before Jackie  Robinson and the integration of baseball. He would rent the train and  they   d go to these various cities and as the rumor goes, they would have  a parade when he arrived in a town. He was that wealthy. (Laughter)  Yes. And he   s just one of many around here.  One of our long-time coaches at Langston said he came to Oklahoma to  marry an oil queen. It didn   t quite work out; he got married but it was  not to an oil queen. So this was a great era. This state has an amazing  history. You name it, from oil tycoons to the millionaires to the outlaws  to the you name it, we   ve had it all. Drama, drama, drama, all the way  through in this country.  I keep seeing things on the history of Oklahoma. I know the history of  all the outlaws and stuff, how they operated here in the Territory. What I  did learn in that sequence is that you   d leave one territory, you were  safe, you know. All these different Indian territories, the law wouldn   t  pursue you across lines until Judge Parker came along. That brought in  one of our great Muskogeeans, Bass Reeves, who was a guy that lived  17  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  Redo  Wilson  with the Indians, that talked all the languages and was reputed. He could  track you down by his nose and round up a bunch of guys, take them  over to Judge Parker and they   d hang them on the spot. Everybody  knows the story about Judge Parker. So it   s just a fascinating state to be  in. And I still think we are young and there a lot of things on the horizon  yet for Oklahoma. I think we are still in the intermediate stage.  What do you think we can do to help it along?  Well, we have to continue the educational process. And you know what,  and this really stunned me being an educator, I have a cousin that wound  up in corporate business and he went into one of the Ivy League schools  and is educated. He made a statement and I didn   t like it, being a  teacher. He said,    Corporate America didn   t ever intend to educate all  people.    He said,    They just wanted to educate enough to help them run  corporate America.    Sometimes I see with the funding that goes on in  the school, as long as we are willing to spend more to incarcerate a body  rather than to educate him, I think we are doing the wrong thing. That   s  my political slant. (Laughter)  I agree.  That   s about as far as I   d like to go with that. I just don   t see that but you  know, here   s what I   ve come to know as an investor and kind of  watching things: everything is about the money. It   s hard to say that, but  that   s America for you. That   s what a capitalistic society is about, profits  and losses. Yes. It   s been a joy talking to you.  Yes, you too. I have one final question. What is one thing you most want  people to remember about you?  That I was as fair as the next man. That   d be the one thing I   d want them  to remember.  Great. Well thank you very much.  -------  -------  
