JD: Hello, this is Jennifer Donnally, and I am interviewing Elaine Barney. Today  is June 21, 2007. I am in Elaine's home. Today is the third in this series of interviews  with Elaine, who is the director of the Women's Health Counseling Center at the Orange  County Women's Center. My first question is when did you first hear the term  feminism? [Laughter] We should take a note that there is some difficulty in the recording  equipment. We lost ten minutes of the first part of our interview. So this is the second  time she has heard this question today. [Laughter]  EB: Right.  JD: And we're good.  EB: All right. Good.  JD: It's back. So back again, when did you first hear the term feminism?  EB: I can't be precise about it. I do know it wasn't when I was in nursing school  or a public health nurse. Maybe I was hearing more about Women's Lib, which was a  term I never liked. [Laughter] I think it just was a gradual kind of seeping in to my  consciousness at that point.  JD: Which was in the early [19]70s?  2  EB: Yeah, early [19]70s. What sort of fired me up about being a feminist was a  time when- - do you want me to go in to how I got it all wrong? [Laughter] Because I  don't want to present myself as [if] I knew this exactly because I was like, "No, it wasn't.  It didn't happen there."  JD: Well, why don't we talk about when you first told me the story and then how  you went back and corrected [it]. As we often know, we don't always remember things  exactly correctly, like two versions of the same story.  EB: Right.  JD: But it's just as fascinating to think how you remembered it as to actually  what was.  EB: Well, when I mentioned it to Bill, he said, "Well, yeah, that's how memory  goes," but who knows? Maybe there were two magazines that did it at the same time."  So I'll do a quickie on that. My memory of being more fully aware of the feminist  movement and all that went with that was not as a women's libber would have been in  the early [19]70s. My memory of it when I called you on the phone, because I couldn't  think in the last tape of when, when was that defining moment or what helped me there?  Then it suddenly hit me that it was Ms. Magazine. Obviously, it was Ms. Magazine. I  talked with Bill and he agreed. We said I was reading the magazine section of the Sunday  Times and there was a preview issue of what would then become Ms. Magazine. I was  like, "Oh, this is great". It really clicked for me; everything that they were talking about  in the preview magazine was great. I signed up for a subscription, and I've never let it  drop. I'm still going today with it. But then I dug out the issue that I had saved from that  moment and I got it totally wrong, or as Bill likes to put it, maybe there are two versions  3  of it. But it was in [the] December 20, 1971, issue of the New York magazine. [New  York Times Magazine] You can't miss it, because it says it's a preview of a magazine  for women. Underneath it, it has Ms., and the cover of it is not what I described initially.  JD: What did you describe initially?  EB: Oh, I described it as a Superwoman, and she's dressed up in the red and the  white, out to do justice for women. Well, no. The original one that I'm looking at right  now shows that it's indeed the Ms. Magazine. There's an article in there by Jane O'Reilly  on the Housewife's Moment of Truth and underneath that is not Wonderwoman. It's a  woman, who in her own way [is] a wonder woman, [in a skirt ] with many arms trying to  hold everything together, including housekeeping, a feather duster, a typewriter, a clock,  and obviously holding up everything. I love it. It's still great. But it wasn't quite what I  remembered it as. Interestingly, I'd kept that because I wanted to pass it on to Sina and  also to be able to show it to Jeremy and friends. I knew that I was going to be  interviewed again today, so I went through all my memorabilia and found that I had  saved the original. I had brought [it] to a book signing at a local book store in 1993. I  waited in line because Gloria Steinem was at this book signing. She had written a very  personal book that was being published. I went with a friend of mine, Jane Ryan, who is  in her mid-to-late 80s. She always laughs, and I laugh, because she calls me her feminist  mother. We would go to various meetings and we'd learn from one another. She tagged  me with that which I refute, but anyway, we both learned together. I waited very- -I was  going to say patiently, but patiently in line because I wanted to show Gloria Steinem that  I still had the original copy of this. It took a while, but I eventually made my way up to  her. I showed her this article, this magazine and her mouth dropped. She said, "I can't  4  believe you saved this." She was stunned and she was leafing through it and then asked  if I wanted her to sign it. I said, "Yes, I would like you to sign this." She did. She wrote  in the middle of the magazine: "To Elaine, Twenty-one years later!" with a big  exclamation point. Then she dated it 1993. It just was an incredible moment for me, but  it was also nice to see her surprise and her pleasure that it meant so much to me and to  other women. So that was my moment. I'm very glad I kept it. It will go to Sina and  over to Jeremy, whomever. Yeah, it was very important because Ms. Magazine really  was the way in which I learned more about my history as a woman. I became politicized.  I had my eyes open to so many different areas that Ms. Magazine has covered [through  the years]. She certainly talked about [the] equal rights movement. The staff w[as] just  incredible. They were willing to take stands. They were willing to be controversial.  They tackled issues of gay and lesbian rights, of poverty, of Third World women, of what  was called "wife beating" but now is domestic violence, discrimination against women,  discrimination against people of different color, discrimination about gay and lesbian  people, abortion rights, women's health, it just goes on and on. Stunning stories that  were written, short stories, articles that were there, poetry that was so moving I would  just be moved to tears with it. It just was something that resonated with me and with the  people I would loan out the issue under- -but under the threat of dire consequences if they  lost any of them. When it would come, I would just sit down and read it right straight  through. Then I'd hand it on to Bill, and as my daughter got older, I'd hand it on to her  and to Jeremy. It was just a wonderful education for me and a real awakening as to what  our history really had been like rather than what we were taught in school. I'm very  grateful for all of that. I just think it's an amazing effort on the part of all these women  5  who were part of that. Of course there were different political in-fighting in terms of  different feminist groups being critical of one another or of Ms. Magazine, but that's all  fine. That helps me to think about and learn about viewing political ideas from a  different perspective.  The one photograph that I recall, that I can still see, and it was in black and white,  was an article in Ms. Magazine. It was an article exposing the whole need for abortion  rights. It was of a woman who had gone who knows where. I don't remember all the  details of it, but she went to a neighborhood woman and/or tried to- -  JD: Self-induce?  EB: Self-induce. She bled to death, and it shows her as she was found face-down  in some black area. I don't remember exactly where it was, but she had died from it. It  still moves me to terrible sadness because I know that she wasn't the first and she is not  the last who will try to do something because that felt like the only way out. She had a  daughter. I remember that because in one of the later issues of Ms. Magazine, her  daughter wrote about growing up without her mother, knowing full well what happened  because of the picture. It shocked all of us to see because it was the reality, and showed  how desperate women can be at times when they feel they have no other choice. It makes  me angry today because of the political climate, certainly in parts of North Carolina, but  all over that still are firmly against women's rights to choose. Some of the  fundamentalist groups who say that they promote life and then we also have a president  who is causing thousands of people to die or to be injured, not only here, but all over the  world. With all of that, which is just the tip of the iceberg, I [laughter] wanted to call you  6  again and say, "Wait a minute. I remember what happened," because I really wanted to  pay homage to what these women did and still are doing.  JD: Going back to abortion for a moment, I'm curious, because you were in  nursing school, when did you first become aware of abortion, since it has been spoken of  as a century of silence on it? When did you first become aware that abortions were  something women sought out?  EB: I think on one of the other tapes we did mention what I- -  JD: Your mother?  EB: What I heard about my mother.  JD: but you- -  EB: My older sister told me about that, years after she had died. She passed  away in 1968. When I was visiting her at some point, she had started asking me what I  was doing with the women's movement or I was telling her about NOW [National  Organization for Women] and about the magazine. She said that she had taken a friend of  her daughter's, who was in high school, to an abortion clinic in Texas, and would do it  again. It was either then, or shortly thereafter, that she told me about my mother's  situation.  JD: So this was your sister who helped someone seek- -  EB: Yes.  JD: an illegal abortion?  EB: Yeah, it was one of her daughter's friends in high school. And how  important it was that it was a clinic that was staffed by women, and that this person had  not chosen to tell her parents. I don't know whether she did eventually, or now that she's  7  older she did. But there's always this sense of shame for so many women, not always,  but just trying to do the best they can under whatever circumstances to make the decision  that they need to make and can live with. I think when my sister told me about bringing  the friend of her daughter there, that might have been in the late, late [19]60s. It just  continues. All that's happened with Operation Rescue still deeply angers me and saddens  me because it has had such an impact on the right of women to choose what they are  going to do and to feel that they have control over what's happening to them. It's just a  pale vision of what it had been when the Supreme Court in [19]73, was like finally,  finally, women will have the right to choose and be in control of their bodies. But it  hasn't turned out that way at all.  JD: So it was through your sister that you really started becoming aware of  abortion. Is this your oldest sister? Because you're the youngest of- -  EB: Five.  JD: Five. Four sisters.  EB: Yeah. She's in her eighties now.  JD: Is this the conservative sister as well?  EB: Yes, it is. It is; the one who voted for [President] Bush. [Laughter] Yeah,  we don't talk about that any more.  JD: I was curious because you had obviously been reading articles in medicine  and had been aware of it, but her personal story has really helped you to connect- -  EB: Yeah.  JD: and get more involved [in] the reproductive rights aspect of the second  feminist movement.  8  EB: Well, what I recall when she told me about my mother's experience was that  she went all by herself. There weren't any friends to go or family members, and then  came back and that was it. But it was difficult for her and I don't know how many  children she'd had by then, but it also had been rough because my father, if I mentioned,  had a way about him that at times he would become angry at work. He was a mail carrier,  and frequently he'd be moved somewhere else. So, she was trying to survive on very  little money. We lived in a brownstone walk-up. My aunt lived above us and another  aunt lived next to us and then my family. It was a small little place for five people. She  wound up during the Depression, because my father was out of work again, to be the  janitor for the building. Every day [she] would be on her hands and knees scrubbing all  the steps. All the marbles- -they were marble steps. And doing the best she could. I  think when she then found out that she was pregnant, for her, it was just she couldn't do.  They didn't have money and they had mouths to feed. I think that was one of the things  that drove her to this. I don't think she was ever able to really forgive herself because of  her religious up-bringing as [a] Catholic, which makes me sad because she was a  wonderful person. It certainly instilled in me then that this really shouldn't be happening  to any woman. Women need the right to make their decision for themselves regardless of  a spouse or pressure from friends or relatives, family, or religion. It's really her body and  it's her right to choose. I feel that very deeply.  JD: Why do you think that your mother chose not to tell someone? It sounds like  it was only told to your older sister or told very selectively to people. Do you think it was  a sense of shame?  9  EB: I think it was. I think she knew that she needed to continue working as a  janitor and help to raise the children, and, if my father was going to loose another job  [laughter], to be a provider at that time. I think too, being raised Catholic was hard. I'm  fairly certain she went to confession, but it was rare. I can think of her only once [but]  there may have been other moments when she did go to communion [confession?]. My  sense is that each time she did go, it was a male priest who probably was not very  empathic, and would make her feel really guilty for what she had done, rather than  understanding the circumstances under which she felt driven to do that. When my sister  told me that, I remember just later talking with Bill and crying for my mother because she  was a good woman. When I saw that photograph, it just brought some of that back; that  could have been my mother. It has been someone's mother and countless women who  have died because of an illegal abortion or trying to do it on their own -- knitting needles,  jumping. I've heard of people trying to jump from [the] first story of their house in their  belief that maybe that would bring on a miscarriage. It's a terrible thing that women go  through and are still going through.  Planned Parenthood has been a great step forward with all that, and [has] been for  years and years. Yet, even then, when they had Operation Rescue all these women, as  well as lots and lots of men, all coming out talking about how evil it was. We had a  friend from college who is a doctor and he lives in New York State. He was a nice guy,  friendly. He was married- -well, right now he's been married many, many, many times.  He marries them because the women become pregnant, so he has seven or eight children  now. But he brought his father, who was in a wheelchair and could not speak because he  had had a stroke, to one of these Operation Rescue places. It was just appalling to me  10  that he would do that as a way of publicizing their whole Operation Rescue. I can't bring  myself to speak to him at this point. I haven't seen him in years, but we hear about him  through some friends. It's like, "But, he's a doctor. What is he doing condoning people  bombing abortion clinics and killing people?" That all goes with Operation Rescue and  it's still happening on some level. It's happening now- -we were talking just a little while  ago about NARAL [National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League] doing a  survey in North Carolina to just see how many women have access to the Morning After  pill. I knew the answer was going to be, "Not many are going to have access," but I was  appalled it was well over fifty percent, sixty percent. Women don't have access to that  because the pharmacist just states that it goes against his values? So these women have  to try to go somewhere else. Some of the ones that really angered me -- I believe the  charge for the Morning After pill is twenty dollars for the prescription, but there are some  who charge $500 to fill that, which is unconscionable. That's in North Carolina. It's just  a sorry state of affairs because that woman doesn't have the right to choose and she  doesn't have the right to even get the prescription filled. What do poor women do; lowincome  women? What about minority women? They don't have access to that unless  you are in a state that has clinics. Sorry I didn't mean to go off on a stand, but it just- -  JD: Let's talk more about how things were and how they evolved since the  beginning of the second feminist movement, but going back into the [19]70s and [19]80s.  In our last interview, we started talking about the Equal Rights Amendment struggle in  North Carolina.  EB: Um. [Laughter]  JD: continuing- -  11  EB: Which is still going on.  JD: My first question is how did you get involved? It's pretty obvious that you  probably did get involved. How did that issue start first being publicized within the  Orange County Women's Center, or was it through NOW that you really became aware  of the issue? Which organization or how did you become aware of the issue?  EB: Well, certainly NOW was a big part because I became aware of the need for  clinics and also with women's rights issues when we were living in Pennsylvania. There  was a NOW chapter at ( ). I was able to go a couple of national conferences and just  learned a whole lot about lots of things [laughter]. Really, but certainly the need for  women's right to choose was always at the top of the ladder in terms of the importance of  women's right to choose and passing [the] ERA [Equal Rights Amendment]. It boggles  my mind that we still don't have it. It really surprised me because New York State passed  it. I don't remember when they passed it, but then we moved to North Carolina it was,  "No, there isn't any here." So I think that people in NOW and just various ones all were  riled up about it. There was a time limit and it had to pass. With all states was that?  JD: No- -  EB: or just- -  JD: It was either two-thirds or three-fourths.  EB: That's it.  JD: I think it was three-fourths of the states. [3/4 of states have to ratify  Constitutional Amendments]  EB: Yeah, because it was sort of a count-down as other states joined in.  12  JD: The issue was the South. They knew the Southern block would be the  toughest, just as it was for suffrage. Just to clarify were you part of NOW- -the NOW in  Chapel Hill?  EB: Kind of. I kind of was. I would go with Jane Ryan to some of the NOW  meetings, but Miriam K. Slifkin certainly was a woman who got the crisis center started  and funding for. Also, I think she worked on the funding for [the] Coalition for Battered  Women and was supportive of [the] Women's Health Counseling Service. It just seemed  like there were these women's groups and some of them didn't even have names that we  knew of, but women would talk about this during the meetings. Then there was the  march in Washington -- more than one march in Washington, I think. A lot of us went up  for that. So I think it just gained momentum, especially in this area of North Carolina.  We were lobbying for passage of it in North Carolina. When I marched in Raleigh, it  was a pretty large turn-out. But, as I had described in the earlier taping, it never got  passed and it still hasn't been passed. Of course I blame all the politicians, the male  politicians and this Jimmy Green who forged this Gentleman's Agreement. Those who  wanted to speak weren't allowed to speak, those who wanted to vote on behalf of passing  the ERA weren't allowed to talk, and the rest just sat on their hands. People were yelling  "let them vote". We're talking about their representatives, "Let them vote," and "Let us  talk about it". There's Jimmy Green, short little guy, just banging the mallet on the desk,  saying, "If this keeps up, we're going to have you all led out." By the cops probably, who  knows? But it was- -it was "Why? Why? Why?" The next day it came out that it was  this Gentleman's Agreement, that ( ) seven or eight men that had carried it and it never  got passed.  13  JD: [Laughter]  EB: I get a tension headache, because it was the epitome of stealth and sexism.  We are characterized as men-haters and just on and on. No one I guess had the political  clout at this point to raise it again. The only thing that gave me a little- -this is mean  spirited of me, but years later Jimmy Green was indicted and charged, I think, with this  crime of setting fire to his own storehouses in order to get the insurance money. I think  he served some time, although I'm not certain. But I thought, "Yeah." [Laughter] I still  just- -so angry, because it wasn't any of his business to decide anything about women's  rights. Obviously, he was very threatened and- -  JD: Do you remember any grassroots opposition or organized opposition to the  ERA in North Carolina?  EB: I think sometimes on these marches people would appear. They were mostly  men, but there were also some women too, I think, who felt- -I can't say I spoke with  them at length, but I think for some they were defending their husband's wishes. I'm sure  many of them came because they were- -who is the woman? I can't remember her name  now.  JD: Phyllis Schlafly?  EB: Phyllis, yeah, Schlafly. She became a really terrible conservative, meanspirited  woman. I think she's also a woman who wrote a book. In there, was the way to  please your husband was to wrap your [laughter] - -wrap yourself in plastic wrap and  then great him at the door naked wrapped in this Saran Wrap. That was the way to please  him. I howled- -I was appalled, but then I howled. It was just- -god awful situation.  Saran Wrap? [Laughter] That was how to please your husband. Well, I'm not going  14  there. I don't know. We had a lot of laughs [at] one of the NOW meetings in Chapel  Hill. It was just appalling. But women did come out because they were mostly  homemakers and there was a lot of propaganda that made them feel that they couldn't  support that. [They] felt dominated by their husband[s]. If he wanted to go and say, "No,  blah, blah, blah," then it was her job as the good woman, the good housewife, to go with  him and support him in opposing it. I don't have numbers or anything, but I think that  that's probably the same thing.  JD: Okay, moving up to general wrapping-up questions- -  EB: Yeah.  JD: since the ERA, what do you see- -this is like a long string of questions- -  EB: [laughter]  JD: it's interesting how- -  EB: Okay.  JD: I should have set it up this way, some of the greatest failures of the women's  health movement.  EB: (pause) I thought you were going to say of the women's movement.  JD: You can do both if you wish.  EB: Well, I think that the failure lies within all of us perhaps in some degree. In  terms of women's health movement and especially abortion rights, I think people get  burned out and then after a while it's, "I can't do this any more," or, "I support it, but  how many times are we going to Raleigh and how many times do you do to D.C.?"  although the D.C. is wonderful. You can see miles and miles of women and men and  children. It was just fantastic. Sina and I were on a high for a long time after that.  15  Jeremy was in California, so he wasn't there. But I think that it needs to be a steady ongoing  movement for woman's right to choose. It's been politicized in a way. Sometimes  I think people just get tired of trying to correct the record of lies and half-truths. I think  when the shootings occurred of the doctor and the burning of the abortion clinics, it  aroused more support. Then things didn't go anywhere in terms of what was happening  with the perpetrators. I think on the national level people do not believe in woman's right  to choose, and have now packed the Supreme Court. People who, possibly because of  their religious beliefs as well as their political views, are very, very conservative. I think,  are just- -I think they don't know what else to do. If the Supreme Court now is voting  down the late trimester abortion, which is rare and is one thing we did learn about in  nursing school. I don't know, but it was done rarely, and it was usually to save the  woman's life. As abortion access was cut off, women didn't know what to do and weren't  aware that they were pregnant until it was well past the time when they could go to the  clinic. So that became demonized and it still has that kind of aura about it. It doesn't  look at, again, the lives of women who are forced now to carry to term and what happens  to those children, or what happens to the mother, or what happens to the families. Now  the Supreme Court has ruled it's ( ). So [President] Bush, I think, has supported that and  he certainly is behind that. Just as each president comes in you have the right to pack  certain representatives and lobby support, but now you don't do that. You can't do it as  easily with a Supreme Court because they have life-long terms. And that's what Bush  has been able to do. I don't know what's going on right now. That was another pull for  the right of abortion rights and a woman's right to choose. It was Hatch in Utah. Now the  fundamentalist movement is taking over all of these issues. We are loosing ground. [A  16  lot of] the people who are so active just burned out. And that's been going on how many  years- -  JD: Thirty-four.  EB: Thirty-four, yeah.  JD: Okay. Well, switch out of the ERA failure to what you think the greatest  successes are.  EB: I think I've been talking about them on the tape For me personally and for  other women and men, the success has been to, on many levels, overcome the  methodology that was there about the women's movement and feminism and parenting.  There are great men out there who are just wonderful fathers and very supportive of  abortion rights, and really, really get it, and will speak out for not only abortion rights,  but women's rights and against sexism and racism, poverty. There're so many issues. I  think that there's a greater awareness on behalf of people who are open to new  perceptions of women, of parenting, of poverty, of social injustice. All of that continues  to blossom. It becomes politicized. That can be a good thing, but then, if we have antiissues  about women's rights and feminism or aspects of it, then this cycle goes on and on  again. I think it's always going to be there on some level. But, it does seem that the  women whom I've had the fortune to meet or work with, or clients I saw when I was at  student health, their awareness is much more advanced than what I was when I was in  college. I think that speaks to the dedication of education. And sometimes because the  university- -not any university, but- -well, yeah, most universities had a change once  some of those laws were passed and that enabled women to fully come into there own  and have a sense of self. Much more than when I graduated from college. So I think  17  that's a major ( ). Also, speaking out on behalf of women in Third World countries and  opposing this war and mounting rallies is a part of the women's movement that has just  continued on. And once you find out about that, to me, there's no turning back. It just  makes too much good sense.  JD: Is there anything you would like to add at this point and time?  EB: No, ( ).  JD: Well, I'd like to thank you not only for your time today, but your time over  the past three interviews. It's been wonderful to interview you and hear all your stories.  EB: [Laughter] And I promise not to call you again say[ing], "I've thought of  something else". But it really was important to get ( ). I appreciate your willingness to  oblige my request.  JD: It was my pleasure and with that we will end the interview.  EB: Thank you so much.
  