Anne Blankenship: When did you come out? Did you come out to your family  early on?  Wanda Floyd: They still don't know.  AB: They don't? [laughter] Then never mind.  WF: I never officially came out to my family. When I left for college, I came to  school and &#8212;you know like most kids at college, wow, I'm away from home&#8212;I didn't  go crazy or anything like that, but I figure it was a place where I began to explore some  things. And I did meet a female and we sort of kind of came out, in a sense, together.  We were involved in a church and when we told her friend at the church, her friend just  went off on us. It was a bad scene and I think if her friend had not reacted the way she  did, she would probably be in church today. I think because of the way she responded,  she has not walked through a church door since.  AB: That's tough. You'd think knowing you might&#8212;  FLOYD 2  WF: Yeah, it was real, real tough. So my parents found out through the TV. I  happened to be on TV for something, it was connected to the MCC church when I was in  Raleigh, and somebody called my mom and told my mom she saw me on TV. And she  called my brother and he caught it as well. So after that he kind of caught on, but I think  the tell-tale sign was when my partner died, my first partner died and that kind of did it.  They figured...but we never sat down and had an official, "Mom and Dad, guess what."  Nah, they knew. They figured out real early on, I'm sure.  AB: That's probably pretty common. When did you decide that you thought you  had pastoral leanings? Was it a call or any distinct experience that brought you to the  church?  WF: Well I grew up in the church and stopped going for a while and then realized  I wanted to get back into the church. I had heard about MCC and so I wrote the guy who  was head of the gay/lesbian group at State. And he wrote back and said their group was  predominately male, but there's a church in Raleigh and the pastor was female, so I might  go check it out. I went there the Pride weekend of '87. Pride was here in Durham. I just  felt like 'wow' this was pretty cool and I had the same sense of peace there that I had  growing up back home. I always felt I would be somewhere in the church because it was  the one place I felt sanctuary. Growing up wasn't a bad life; we had a mom and dad  which was very unheard of on my street. I think only one or two of the families had a  mom and dad in the household. Everybody else being raised by a single mom or the  grandmother. I was fortunate to have a "nuclear family" so to speak. Coming back, the  whole issue of becoming clergy wasn't something that I went after. God sort of kind of  came after me. I went three rounds with God and lost all three and gave up after about  FLOYD 3  the third time. I was like "fine." I remember saying, "Fine. Whatever; I'm tired; I'm  tired; I'm tired of running. Whatever you want me to do, I'll do." That was it. That was  summer of '95.  AB: And from there you went into the seminary training?  WF: Yep, I started going to the training...  14  AB: I read briefly about starting Imani and how that came to be.  WF: I think the pastor and I had come to a point&#8212;and course now, hindsight is  20/20, there were things going on with him that I didn't know about until much later&#8212;  but we had come to a point in which I began to want more as far as a little bit more  responsibility and a little bit more hands on&#8212;  AB: And you were an assistant pastor at this point?  WF: Yes, basically. I sensed a change was about to happen, but I didn't know  where the change was going to come, so I went to a conference. No, I went to Texas first  in October and was approached by then the head of the small group ministry, which was  what I did at St. John's. I was there for three years. They asked would you like my job.  I said, "Excuse me?" They said, "Well, I'm going back to the secular world. I can't deal  with this. I'm from IBM. I can't deal with this, too much. I'm going back." It was  familiar to me. They were looking for someone to take the position. I'd done a good job  at St. John's and they thought to offer me the job. I said, "Well, let me think about it."  So I came back home and the guy of the whole place called me and I said, "Send me  some information, what you require and so and so forth." And in the meantime, I went to  FLOYD 4  a conference in Charlotte, a district conference for our denomination and was at a  gathering. While at the gathering, the way my partner describes it, I sort of kind of went  into this trance and started crying. She was standing there trying to talk to me and I  wasn't hearing a thing she was saying.  AB: Among everyone?  WF: Amongst everyone. It was at a dance, at a party. And we were just jamming  and everything and she was watching, standing beside me and she said I just blanked out.  And was out for, not long she said, about maybe a minute or two. And all of a sudden the  conversation&#8212;I guess not knowing that was going on&#8212;and really, it had to be God; it  couldn't have been anyone else, not where I was anyway. Basically said, something to  the effect of, I need you to go back and do something in Durham. Work wasn't done in  this area. And the people I was looking at-there was all kinds, there were seventy-five,  hundred people in front of me-and basically said something to the effect of, "You know,  these are my children and I love them but they're so desensitized to my love, they never  hear it if they go to church because all this stuff that the Religious Right and everybody  else throws out." And so I came back and called the guy in Texas. My partner was  happy because she thought she was going back home to Texas. And I told my pastor and  the guy in Texas called me and said&#8212;because I hadn't gotten the information from him--  and he said, "Well, I got it together; I just forgot to mail it." I said, "Well." And she has  not mentioned Texas since. She hasn't said a thing else, nothing else about Texas. So  that's how it really started. The church was very good; gave us seed money to start and a  couple folks came. I didn't ask anybody to come with me and I told folks, "If you come,  you come on your own." The only person who didn't have a choice in coming was my  FLOYD 5  partner. And those who did come&#8212;I don't want you to come because of being upset or  anything like that&#8212;that wasn't what this is about.  AB: No, it wasn't a split in any way.  WF: No, it was not a split. I said, if you come, I want you to be able to back into  that church for any reason at any point in time and be okay. I think about eleven people  came. That was it.  21:15  WF: ...There are a few pockets that are open and affirming, but I think that the  draw is that when people come in, regardless of how they look, no one stares at them.  AB: They're guaranteed security.  WF: Right. I'm sure the Sunday that you were there, you saw somebody in the  back with a suit and tie on. Well if she goes to church somewhere else, they're going to  say, "Yes, sir." Well, she's not a sir. That's just how she feels comfortable dressing. So  I think that's the biggest piece is that piece of it more than anything else that I can see in  looking at other churches around.  AB: Do you think-you were talking about people who have gone back and forth  from UCC and MCC because of those similarities--do you think more, maybe it's just the  same, people are drawn from more conservative churches or maybe more fundamentalist,  charismatic movements that have less of a place, less of an accepted place within their  own denomination? Do you think it's more from those groups than a UCC or some other  that does have&#8212;  WF: Oh, yes, more from those groups. Definitely.  AB: That makes sense.  FLOYD 6  WF: Yeah, I have a lot of recovering Catholics, Baptists, Pentecostals. I mean, I  think that if I had to pick one denomination that had the most challenging part of letting  go of that old baggage of being Christian and gay is the Pentecostal, charismatic  movement. They are the hardest ones. And we've had a few who have come in and  couldn't do it and went back out. I couldn't do that; I can't go somewhere and fake it.  Because you can't fool God. It's so wrapped up in the "you're going to hell; you're  going to hell."  AB: If you can't get over it, it might be too much. Perhaps a moderate  denomination...they'd have a place.  WF: Right. I had a person who actually did say he could not come because he  could not accept the fact that God loved him for who he was. I think I said, "Are you  serious?" He said, "I can't. I just cannot get to that."  AB: That's amazing; that's awful. That does make sense though.  WF: Oh it makes a lot of sense.  AB: If you can't accept that yourself you're certainly not going to be comfortable  at a MCC service which is embracing that very difference. That makes a lot of sense.  Are there any other differences? Liturgically, I know communion is a little different.  WF: Yes, we have communion every Sunday while other churches have it every  once in a while, once a quarter. And again that's mainly because of the affirming peace  of it. In that so many people have been turned away from the communion table. We  actually have a member, Angel, who is out doing his Soul Force equality rights ride who  was told by the pastor who baptized, at the time her, now he&#8212;that he was no longer  welcome at the church because of his tattoos, his piercings and the fact that he was gay.  FLOYD 7  So the pastor basically put him out of the church. If he hadn't found Julie Weathers who  actually went to school with his mom, I don't think he would be here today. What I mean  by that: I think he would have killed himself because he was tormented at school. We  had to go to school on his behalf and talk to the teachers and the counselors. They didn't  get it.  AB: How old was he when all this happened?  WF: At the time, fifteen. Fifteen, fifteen. They didn't get it so his mom took him  out of school and got him into the Walt Whitman School down in Texas, which is where  he graduated from. Now he's at school somewhere down in Louisburg. But Imani  literally saved his life. If he didn't have somewhere to go, to be who he was and get  through the process of transing from&#8212;and for his mom to have someone to support her  as well&#8212;from female to male, he would have done himself in.  AB: The parental support obviously has to play a huge role there too.  WF: Yeah, she really needed that. And also to know that her son now has a place  to go that he's loved at. And I think that made the biggest difference for her. When I  look at him and see just what has happened in his life because of finding the MCC,  finding us, but finding the MCC church is staggering...he wouldn't be here. There's no  way. He would not be here today.  30:21  WF: There are only three churches within our denomination that sort of kind of  look like us. I mean by that in that we have a higher number of black folks that come.  FLOYD 8  The other one is in Philadelphia and there's another one in the south side of Atlanta,  Georgia. But every other church is all pretty much white.  AB: I actually read that. It was in a text-a book called Men Like That. A  collection by John Howard, I want to say. It's a collection, mostly about men and gay  life in the South. He had one excerpt about an MCC church in, I think, Mississippi that  was lily, lily white. I was just thinking, in Mississippi, that's a problem.  WF: Yeah, yeah, and it is. It's in Jackson and it is very white.  AB: Still? The text was from '86 or something so I thought, who knows if this is  accurate still.  WF: It probably still is for the most part. And unless you are intentional about it,  about doing anything, the demographics would not change. We became very intentional  about youth and recognizing that a lot of our parents had kids that were growing up. And  so we make sure we have something for the youth every Sunday now. We used to have  youth moments, but they got kind of crazy after a while, started testing my nerves and I  said, "We ain't doing this no more. Ya'll are crazy."  AB: So much for that.  WF: Yeah, so much for that. That went away real quick fast in a hurry. But we  have teachers who work with the kids, so the parents can bring the kids to church. It was  something we said we need to do this because it's a need that we have within our  congregation. If folks can be intentionally minded within Imani about reaching out to  folks then folks will come, but you have to show you care. You can't just say ya'll come.  AB: Of course, that makes sense.  WF: No, it doesn't work that way.  FLOYD 9  AB: It occurs to me, that the MCC denomination seems like one of the most  opportune places to break that racial divide on the huge emphasis on inclusivity. If  you're going to include one group, it seems you might as well include the rest of them.  But it seems to have a way to go.  WF: You have to break that people of color tradition. It's not safe for a black  man in the South. It's not safe for a black gay man anywhere really, but definitely in the  South. It just doesn't happen. And when you talk about being black in the South then  that destroys the family. And within the black culture, the family is everything. It's  supposed to be and if you have a son who's gay that means that your family name will  not go on. At least that's the way they think of it. Of course that's not true, but that's  still so much of the norm now which is why you don't see a lot of men period. There's  not a high number black men in MCCs anywhere. When we go to conferences there's  not a very high concentration of black men. Black women, yeah, but black men, no.  There's really not.  AB: That's interesting that it's more accepted for lesbians than gay men.  WF: Well, you know, we're women. We're second class citizens anyway.  AB: That's what I was going to say. Women just do what they want anyway.  WF: Right, right. So what if we're the ones who give birth to the babies. The  men can't carry their namesake without us, but that's besides the point. But then, just  like now, we're not deemed important, so we can do whatever we want.  AB: Why not do completely whatever you want. That's an interesting idea to  make that a liberating statement in itself.  FLOYD 10  WF: It's interesting, but so I think that's why so many black gay men are so  particularly challenged with coming out. To parents and being seen in a place that is  openly gay. As a matter of fact, I've had guys who've said they'd love to come to  church, they love me as pastor, but they can't take a chance of being seen at an MCC  church. And that's still, that's now. So that's very real.  AB: That's so rough. Do you think it's any different in northern states? I think, it  seems to be across the board.  WF: I think it's everywhere; it's across the board. If you are a black gay man  you have to be very secure in who you are and have a very good support system. And  most of the ones that I know that are very secure and are out, really out, are those that, in  a sense, can pass.  AB: Which is a different&#8212;  WF: Yeah, totally different ballgame. But those who are very effeminate guys,  gay guys have a very hard time, so they almost have to overly prove that they're not gay  like getting somebody pregnant or something else. But lesbians do that too. They also  try to get pregnant and have kids so people don't think they're lesbians.  AB: Well, that's proof, right? [laughter]  WF: Yeah, you don't stop being a lesbian just because you have a baby.