 Catherine Nicholson: They [her parents], they certainly supported me when I was  you know, going out and marching and all was happening.  Greta Deerson: And how did your involvement in the Civil Rights movement  start? And was that your first sort of involvement in an activist cause?  CN: Mhm. It was-  GD: And how did that start?  CN: Well, It was, I felt always that i t - I was uneasy about class and color and  about segregation. I was very uneasy about it all the time, and I think everyone was, but  they tried to put it out, you know, not talk about it. But I felt that there was this  uneasiness all the time and therefore when we'd begin to march and do things like that  uh, it was a great relief, just a great relief. It was interesting when I went to Northwestern  in Chicago and was in Chicago a lot and there were a lot of African Americans there and  of course the Midwest, you know, they thought they were great because they didn't have  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 2  segregation. Very interesting though, that we do not, you know, we do not segregate, but  there was no mixture of it going on.  And we, I know, in the theatre group, we went to Chicago, we were in Evanston,  which is a suburb. We went into Chicago because there was going to be a great big  meeting there or something and there was one young black fellow, and he, I didn't know  him, but he was there. And oh, everybody was talking talking and completely ignoring  him.  What I discovered when I went North as I did that yes there was no segregation,  but there was no communication, people ignored it and kept blaming, said "oh you're  from the south, oh ew, you all are bad because you hate you know." And I was talking  about this to my friend who was in Chicago and she was smiling and laughing at me  because she said "That's absolutely true, that we completely ignored the other race. We  didn't put them down, we just ignored 'em." And she was aware of that too.  So I remember at that meeting when all of the people were talking away and he  was sitting there and they all went into the meeting and left him there, and I took hold of  his hand and took him in. And I said, "rrrr." But you know, I was learning the differences  in the way the Midwest and uh, looked upon themselves as okay because they didn't have  segregation, and there was never slavery you know, and um, so...  GD: Do you remember a moment when you decided you wanted to get involved  to change things in the Civil Rights movement?  CN: Gosh, can I remember? I had it from the beginning. Let's see, where was I?  When I was in Chapel Hill...  GD: Getting your masters?  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 3  CN: Getting my masters, yeah, I believe that's the time, that it was beginning, am  I write about that? See if I had my list of, maybe you better turn that off and let  me.. .[long pause] So if I was born in '22, and when I went to...  GD: You would have graduated college around '30 right? 1930?  CN: 1922...No...  GD: Oh 1940,40...  CN: I graduated from the University in 41 I believe, no at Flora Macdonald in 41  or something so I woulda gone to Chapel Hill around '43 I guess.. .uh.. .3 or 4, something  like that and uh, that's about when I was there. Um, I remember there was, it was during  Second World War, that's right that's when I was there. And on the campus, there was  the French Naval, you probably know this if you know the history ofUNC. They had  French Navy boys there and um they were mostly separate. Um, I can't recall people  actively working against segregation during the Second World War. There may have  been, but I think it was after that, that it started to happen. Hm. I'm sorry, I...  GD: And what was your involvement in Civil Rights?  CN: Well, I wasn't a leader or anything. What we did was we decided to march  on Washington, and I just went with that group that was marching and that's about all I  can remember. And um, let's see.. .that's about it. Um.. .the, as I said, I was discovering  that the Midwest and the North were um, not, never segregated but they may as well have  been in so many ways. Let's see...  GD: Do you remember what it felt like being on that march? Did you feel like you  were a part of something big?  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 4  CN: Oh yeah, yeah definitely, it did. And to hear, later, to hear Martin Luther  King he was just a great hero and stuff like that. But, um, yeah, it felt like you were  accomplishing something.  GD: And at what point did you start to see yourself as an activist? Did your  identity start to become involved in that?  CN: Well, I don't think I was ever a great activist. Um, It's just that 'cause I don't  remember leading any groups um, yeah, I had, I didn't realize you were going to ask me  about things like that so much or I would have looked back and tried to find....  30:53-40:17  GD: When you started to identify as a lesbian so...  CN: Well yeah, I think I was identifying as a lesbian before I would acknowledge  it to myself because who was important to me most was always a girl and usually that girl  was older because, we might be in the same class, and then when I went to Flora  Macdonald it was all girls and I did a lot of dreaming in my head about things. And uh, of  course, I knew that to say that I was, to acknowledge to myself that I was a lesbian would  mean that I was out, no would could, you know.. .There is always a girl in girls colleges  who pursued girls and didn't give a damn and I wasn't one of those. But, what I found  out was at Flora Macdonald was that girls were really hugging and kissing each other and  all that after dark and not identifying, you know.  GD: SO this activity and behavior was going on behind closed doors?  CN: Yes.  GD: But people weren't coming out and saying, "I'm a lesbian"  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 5  CN: No, no. And then if there was a girl that was sort of boyish looking and  acting, then she was, you wouldn't go near her, because you'd get identified you see,  yeah, you wouldn't go near-  GD: And then you'd get the stigma-  CN: Yeah, yeah, you'd get the stigma, I ran across a, I should find it and give it to  you to read, a diary that I made at Flora Macdonald, I found it and uh, it was all about  girls and friends and also it, we were also wanting to have influence and therefore to be  elected president of this group. And they didn't have sororities but they did have  something similar to that, at some of the colleges they had girl's sororities and a lot of  stuff went on with those too but I wasn't in one of those. No, but no, but, I was madly in  love with a you know, one girl, her name was Mary Hall, and she was a musician and  that's something that I couldn't do, and she was also very popular and I was very popular.  We were both elected, you know heads of things and stuff like that and we would sneak  into each other's rooms and we would, we would practically have sex together but we  didn't acknowledge it. And I think this is the first time I've been talking to someone like  you about it.  GD: Did you talk about it with her even?  CN: Mmnmm [no]  GD: It just wasn't spoken about?  CN: Mmnmm [no] It wasn't. But it, the, we, the, feeling for each other was there.  And, it was all over the school and I think that's true of practically all the women's  colleges. Did you ever go to women's colleges?  GD: No.  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 6  CN: You missed something.  GD: [Laughs.]  CN: [laughs] Because I taught at them and I could recognize, you know I could  tell, when I was teaching at Randolph Macon.  GD: Do you remember feeling shame associated with that?  CN: Yes of course, I do.  GD: And what was it later that made you think that it would be okay to come out  and to admit to yourself that you had these feelings and to just be open about it?  CN: Ooh. That's a very good question. I'm gonna have to, I'm gonna have  to.. .when did that? Okay say it again.  GD: At what point did you decide that it would be okay if you were a lesbian?  That you could admit it to yourself, that you could admit it to people around you, that you  didn't have to feel ashamed.  CN: Okay, alright, um.. .That's amazing because my mind is blank on that. When  did that happen? It had to have happened at some point.  GD: You mentioned before that you think you started to really identify at  Northwestern and there were a lot of other gay people around-  CN: uh- huh-  GD: You know, being exposed to people who were openly gay...  CN: Well, now, they were't openly gay-  GD: Okay-  CN: Okay, it wasn't quite that. When I went to Northwestern, I, the first  roommate I had, I think I was living in a single apartment, kind of, and then uh, I got in  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 7  with this, with this woman, um, Barbara was her first name and I cannot remember her  last name and I should be able to because she is now dead and her daughter has is,  [pause], very I'm very close to her daughter, in that picture, that's Catherine, she's named  for me and that's her brother and that's Barbara in the picture behind-  GD: This one?  CN: Yeah.  GD: She's beautiful.  CN: She was pregnant with David, when I met her and we became, she had an  apartment and she had gotten pregnant and her husband, the guy, that wasn't her  husband, but the guy that, oh she did marry him but he went his way and she went hers.  But, he did not want to go his way.  GD: She left him?  CN: She just, yeah, she would not have anything to do with him and she was  pregnant with the child you see in the background, that one?  GD: That's him?  CN: Uh- huh that's right.  GD: Okay.  CN: And that's Catherine, later she was, she finally, so that's when it began to  happen and that's when we had sex definitely. And it turned out that she had, she came,  from Colorado and she had she was younger than I was, she had had girlfriends and  boyfriends and whatever, but at the same time she was afraid of being, "Do you think, am  I, you know, am I really gay?" You know that kind of thing, but she had no use for the  guy and she really wanted to have a baby. And she was, helped her do that and that's all  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 8  she wanted [laughter] she wanted to get that baby. So she had David, and I was, so we  became a couple with this baby when she got out of the hospital and she had been to, I  think the baby was born in Denver, she went back to her home for that but then she came  back to Chicago and there, you know we were looking after David. So, the two of us  [laughter] other people must have realized that there was something going on with us but  we didn't care that much, it didn't bother us that much. So, that was, yeah, my first action  of becoming...  104:48-113: 12  GD: And what did it feel like doing Sinister Wisdom? This was one of the first  things of its kind, did you feel like you were doing something really revolutionary and  exciting?  CN: Definitely.  GD: And what was that experience like, you know starting it?  CN: Well-  GD: Where did the inspiration come from to start it first of all?  CN: Um-  GD: Whose idea was it?  CN: I think it was my idea, because I'm trying to think why it was my idea. I  know that we both kept journals, we both wrote, and I was always writing and she was  always writing. And, the thing was that why not, find lesbians who want to write and give  them a place to send it to. There were other women's stuff, there was here in Durham The  Feminary as you probably know about, and Mab [Segrest] had, we knew her, we knew  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 9  the other people that were doing this all over the country. It was, we accepted other  people, we didn't compete and carry on [laughter] as people tend to do in other cases.  GD: How did people react to this? Like were people very enthusiastic when they  sent their things in is what I'm trying to ask? How was it received by other lesbians  around the country?  CN: I don't know, we'll see what it says here. No this isn't the one, where's the  other one? It's got a blue cover too. Did you steal it from me?  GD: [laughter].  CN: You better not have, [laughter].  GD: I know, after your day today...  CN: Oh, here it is.  GD: You got it?  CN: Mhm, let's see this picture is a picture of the two of us by the way, that's  Catherine and Harriet-  GD: Oh-  CN: And it was done by, Tee Corinne.  GD: Was that the first cover?  CN: No. It was the cover on, let's see, it tells you in here which is.  GD: Here, front cover art, Sinister Wisdom, Tee Corinne-  CN: Tee Corinne-  GD: 1977.  CN: Yeah, and Tee Corinne, it was interesting to get this because there are so  many people who have died. Elizabeth Freeman here in Durham, when I came to Durham  Interview number U-0220 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Catherine Nicholson 10  after Sinister Wisdom I was in a co-op with her, we lived in an apartment house in  Durham. Only co-op apartment house in this state of North Carolina.  GD: With only lesbians in it?  CN: Oh, no, no.  GD: Only women in it?  CN: Yeah-  GD: Only women-  CN: It was women but they weren't all lesbians.  GD: And how did you see the intersection between your feminist philosophy that  you obviously believed in so strongly and your lesbian identity?  CN: [long pause] What would you say if someone asked you that?  GD: [laughs] Did it seem to fit together for you?  CN: Yeah.  GD: Did it make it easier to be a feminist or...  CN: Well, obviously, we were rejecting men, in a way. And we were, we knew  that women could do anything that men could do and more and so that was it. When I  taught in Charlotte, anyway.. .Let's see [flipping through a copy of Sinister Wisdom],  what was I looking for in here? Anything? I met such wonderful women when I was  involved here. It was, Sinister Wisdom all over the country and I would like to see some  of them again. I wish I could go drive around-  GD: [laughs]