 Nicete Moodie: My name is Nicete Moodie. I am here at the home of Karen Lynn  Parker. Today's date is February 18, 2007. And the time is approximately five after five  p.m. Ok Ms. Parker if you could just state the basic information: name, date, family, and  so on.  Karen Parker: My name is Karen Lynn Parker. I usually go by Karen L. Parker,  because when my folks were mad at me they would go "Karen Lynn Parker, come on  down here." So that's why I usually don't go by my middle name. I was born in Salisbury  North Carolina. My father Fred Douglass Parker and my mother, Clarice Holt Parker,  were also from the area, and they were both teachers. And I spent a faire amount of time  in Rowan County with my grandparents on my father's side. They were Fred Harrison  Parker and Mattie Clement Parker. They had, I guess it would be a small farm in Spencer,  which is kind of a suburb of Salisbury as such. And, we moved to Winston when I was  about seven-no- about five. So I started in Winston Public schools around that time.  We left Winston; mom got a job in, a teaching job in High Point so we lived over there  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  2  for about three years and then my parents build a house and we moved back to Winston  from my sophomore year in high school on. Let see; my grandparents on the other side  were John Calvin Holt and Odessa Manuel Holt. She died before I was born so I never  met her. Nice picture of her up there.And--. [Pause]. That's a general back ground. I am  63 years old right now. I was born December 21, 1943. In general, my general  background of the last few years: I left North Carolina after I got out of school my first  job was in Grand Rapid Michigan  NM: -Oh wow!  KP: and I was a copy editor reporter for the Grand Rapids Press; then I moved to  Rochester, New York and I was a copy editor there. On my interview there I met the man  who would later become my husband and the father of my son, I met him on the plane.  NM:~Ohwow! [laughing]  KP: Peter Kuttner and he persuaded me to come out to California and marry him. I was  married to him for about ten years. We have a son, his name is Jonah Evan Kuttner and  he is now at UNC-TV and he lives in Raleigh. After that I was home for about ten years  with the young child and I went back to work for newspapers again in 1978 and that was  with the Los Angles Times, and I was there for about fifteen years. I got tired of L.A.  When I first moved there, it was a very- rather pleasant place; I absolutely preferred it to  New York.  NM: Los Angles?  KP: Yeah  NM: What year did you move to LA  KP: '67-1967.  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  3  NM: Oh in '67  KP: And, it was more laid back, easy going, people were a lot friendlier. By the time I  left, crime was a big concern, traffic was horrendous. And even though I went to work on  off hours-I had to be at 2:30-traffic jams were more the rule than the exception.  Creeping along the freeways at 20 miles an hour was normal. And then it finally got to  the point where it would get gridlocks, where an intersection would get blocked no body  would move for hours.  NM: Now before you got to UNC, was there any controversy, was your parents steer you  in that directions, were they supporting you because they were very few African  Americans at the campus, very African American women; I believe you were the first to  graduate undergrad at UNC so how did they feel about that and how did you feel about  that?  KP: Well, Oh! how that came about was right around the time John Kennedy came into  office, John F. Kennedy, and that was about the time that the Greensboro sit ins started,  the Greensboro four. And the whole segregation things was kind of breaking loose, and  lot of people were thinking more about its time to stop this segregation stuff and the  schools in the South were at least being challenged to admit black students. You can't  say 'you can't go to the University of North Carolina because you're black.' The  contention at the time was or the popular sentiment was that we did not have the  intelligence to go to a university.  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  4  NM: That is what they said towards African Americans?  KP: Yes, and then plus in the segregated tenor of the day, most black students wanted to  go to historically black colleges or universities because there was a sense of belonging.  Because one thing about being one of the handful of blacks on a predominantly white  campus is socially you can be very isolated. A lot of people just don't like that. My  parents, being both teachers, realized this was happening. And our high school got the  best students and encouraged all of us to go into predominantly white schools; the ones of  us who they knew would probably be admitted because..  NM: Academic record  KP: Academic yes. And we could pas the SAT and all that stuff. So I was apart of that  and my parents actually encouraged it because they believed I would get a superior  education in the predominately white schools.  NM: As opposed to predominately black schools?  KP: Yes. And I think at the time that was absolutely true.  KP: Every now and then somebody would dis you (on campus of Women College) and of  course we all expected that, that was the times we were in. And I think, I remember what  bothered me was we were picketing segregated restaurants in Greensboro right be the  campus and they were a couple of girls who I thought were my friends who crossed  picket lines in front of me and that upset me. But a lot of the white students were right  there in the picket lines with us. [Pause] Matter of fact it was more of them than there  were of us. Demonstrations were sort of breaking out all over the South and we had some  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  5  big ones with A&amp;T and Bennett and kids came from Greensboro College and Guilford  College and Women's college (UNC-G). We had huge Civil Rights marches in that time.  And we all had to be careful about the Klan because they would come and threaten to do  bodily harm to people.  NM: Now when you were in school, receiving the scholarship, becoming editor, did you  know in your mind, did you know you were embarking on the path that is going to be  talked about for years to come, like I am the first to do this, did you come with that  mentality or did you just do it and not realizing it.  KP: I had no idea that I was the first African American woman undergrad to stay.  NM: Oh, you did not know that at the time?  KP: Not at the time. Somewhere between halfway through the of the semester I figured  it out, but I did not know that then.  NM: Interesting.  KP: One thing I was determined to do, and that really, really meant a lot to me, I was  determined to prove that we were not ignorant. Not only am I as smart as you, I am  smarter than most of you. I think I graduated in the- about the upper ten percent of the  graduating class of '65 and if I hadn't partied a lot I could have been the upper eight.  NM: [Laugh] We will get in the social scene in a second bit, but in your class were you  the only African American?  KP: There were six of us.  NM: Six other blacks in your class?  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  6  KP: Me and five guys, one of whom was my cousin, Larry Poe from East Spencer. Who  is a retired Admiral, retired CIA; still works up in Washington; done some pretty  fantabulous things. He was the rear Admiral in charge of all of Naval intelligence for the  whole country; he was the military attache in Paris. Not bad for a poor boy from East  Spencer.  NM: Did you know your cousin was at UNC when you got there?  KP: Yeah. He transferred from Livingstone College.  NM: He transferred as a junior?  KP: Oh ok, so he came in the same time you did as well  KP: He was always borrowing money from me and then I could not find him. That was  the big joke. He would borrow twenty dollars. Twenty dollars!!!! He would borrow $20  from me on the basis that I was his relative, and I would lend it to him and then I could  not find him for weeks.  NM: I guess having him there, did that make it any easier; someone you knew you could  talk to at least or have lunch with or...  KP: No, because I did not see him most of the time. At the time there were the people on  the main campus and I think they called it the South campus and there were a couple of  new dorms- Ehringhaus was one of them and they were brand new. And he was over in  Ehringhaus and that was considered to be far away from the main campus, where I was  and I did have no reason to go over there unless I was looking for him and he stayed  away from the main campus instead of going to class. And the size of that campus; It was  easy for him to avoid me. The only phones were like a phone on each hall, and somebody  would answer the phone, "Larry Poe here?" and if he didn't want to be there he did not  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  7  have to. He could easily avoid me if he wanted to but he eventually paid back all the  money. I still tease him about that.  NM: Tell me a little more about the social aspects on campus. You said you partied a lot,  so how was that?  KP: Well, the male to female ratio was 12-1. And I would joke and say any woman who  did not have a date did not want one. And of course there were white students who did  not bother them at all that I was black; especially the northerners.  NM: Were there a lot of northerners on campus?  KP: There were a few. And I went out with white guys. The black guy, except one of  them was my cousin and one of them I hated. I would not have gone out with him if he  was the last man on earth. I am looking forward to seeing him this fall. He was a male  chauvinist sexist pig and somebody said he still is.  NM: Oh wow, that is very interesting.  KP: Yeah I am looking forward to running into him. I will not say his name. That left the  senior class. The junior class, there was a couple guys in junior class. And I was just so  arrogant as a senior that these guys, the juniors and sophomores, how dare they ask me  out. The mere sophomores, what kind of nerve is that? I don't go out with them. But I did  go out with one guy. We are still friends until this day. We never were going to get  serious about or anything but one guy was in the ROTC and he needed a date for  something. I went out with some of them, they were white guys. And I partied with-the  Civil Rights Movement got a lot of whites and blacks together who probably would not  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  8  have been otherwise. And that group was very very integrated. It was Blacks from town,  it was Blacks from campus; whites from campus and some of the other school around the  area. So that was a very integrated scene. And I got use to running with that crowd. We  were sort of called Beatniks. We were before the Hippies, we were just after the Beatnik  culture of the fifties and the term Hippy had not been coined yet and we were right in  between there and no one know what to call us. But I kind of ran in the anti establishment  thing. I stopped wearing the campus uniform which was -  NM: Campus uniform?  KP: Yeah, Weijun loafers, Villager blouses, wrap around skirts was the typical outfit, I  called it the uniform. The boys wore gant shirts, khaki slacks and weejun loafers. There  were certain things that people wore.  NM: So you were more depressed from being away from home?  KP: No, I liked being away from home because they had a leash on me at home; I had  freedom down there. I was depressed, I could not figure out my place in the world; on the  planet; I wanted to make changes; I wanted to do things; I wanted to prove points and  what I ended up going to campus shrink about was, I was adopting a new social order, the  one on campus, and giving up the one I came from. And what the psychiatrist ended up  telling me was I don't have to throw away every thing I learn from my parents and I don't  have to adopt everything you see here on campus, you can have a blend of the two, pick  and choose. So it was culture, it was morals; it was behaviors, a lot of stuff. And they had  quite a hold on me, a guilt trip hold on me and I really had to break loose to become my  own person.  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  NM: Really, so your depression was not really triggered as far as the racial tension or...  KP: Oh that was part of it; it was a whole lot of stuff going on.  NM:OK  KP: But I just could not find my place in the whole thing. Where ami? I can't be apart of  the campus here, I can't be a part of the campus there. Where am I? Who am I? What I  am I suppose to be doing. I don't have a home; I don't fit in anywhere that was bothering  me. Now, the white friends that I met, and the girls in the dorm, four of them are friends  until this day. I would trust them with my life and they would trust their life with me.  They are that exceptional human beings.  KP: We were having a party, it was the people from the Civil Rights Movement and we  were having a part, it was the fall of '64 and we were at some house right out side of  town, out in the country, that part of town is now in town an there were a lot of people  from the Civil Rights Movement. And a bunch of us went out in the back yard and some  people were in the house and all of a sudden we heard 'Ping' 'Ping' And somebody said,  there shooting at us get down.  NM: They were shots?  KP: Rifle shots and the bullets were ricochet off of the trees in the back yard. And the  Klan shot out all of the windows in the house. Nobody got hurt because they all hit the  floor, all the people in the house; in the back I remember somebody yelling 'Get Down'  and we all had a couple of beers and we are going 'what happened!!!!' and all of sudden  we realized hey they are shooting at us. This is serious stuff. And what my finds did, and  this was so touching. It was me and another black person I can't remember who it was.  Interview number U-0212 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  10  They put us on the floor of a car and they all piled in on top of us so the Klan would not  see us. Aint that nice? They were going to protect us because they figure the Klan was  going to go after us first if they were going to do that.  NM: How many African Americans were at the party, do you remember, roughly was it a  lot  KP: I don't know, more than four or five. We were hanging outside; it was a warm night  in September.  NM: And they must have saw white and blacks mingling...  KP: They say people arriving and it was an integrated party and that's why they shot it up  NM: Wow!  KP: So it's kind of funny now. Not many people have the privilege of getting shot up by  the Klan [laughing]