She rna Gluck: So today ;That we'll start with is your going to Huntingdon in 1914 on your graduation from high school. What were your actual plans prior to your high school graduation in terms of college, your. future, and your reason for choosing Huntingdon? Stone: Well, it was typical of southern families in roy day ti-at the girls were to be equipped as much as possible with all the arts and prepared for connnunity service. So we studied the classics, the sciences, literature and the arts in high school. We had private teachers of art and music and expression, as I have said. It was just assumed we would go to college. We debated between Randolph-Macon in Virginia and Huntingdon in Alabama.. The :family thought we should go to a Methodist college. In those days, in 1914, we were just beginning to ride automobiles. I think we had carriages and buggies and horses:and, of course, trains. But at any rate, the decision was made, because we had had a cousin go to Virginia and she seldom saw her classmates, that if we went to Montgomery we would be nearer to visit and keep up with our friends. Actually, we didn't because, you know, we outgrew these interests fairly rapidly and expanded. But that was, I think, one of the determining :ractors. We didn't go to Mother's alma mater, which might have been one option because by that time Wesleyan College in Macon, Georgia, had slipped a little in its prestige. We felt--our parents felt--I guess, that maybe Montgomery was the better choice. It was then called Womans College of Alabama. but it was named for Lady Huntingdon, benefactress of the Wesleys, later in order to distinguish it from a state college. But it\mimportant to &#8226; 2 talk. about the title of the school. The assumption was' that we would go to a liberal arts college. A sort of finishing type school in one way, but not in others. In contrast to the strictly finishing college type, our college did not put emphasis upon coming out in society or manners and that kind of training. S. G.: There was no question of your going to a coeducational &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; ? Stone: Oh no. It was always a girls' college. And our brothers, who were younger than we, went to Auburn, which in time became coeducational. Well, actually, I think I told you M:Jther was a coed at Auburn back in the 1880's. But there were just a few coeds when Frank was in college. By the time 11'IY brother Jack, who was ten years younger than 11'IY older sister and eight years younger than I, entered, there were quite a few coeds~ But distinctly a men's school. So that was just taken for granted. S. G.: There was never any thought of going to a northern school? Stone: No, not at this time, any further north than Virginia. But we did go to the middle South, as we called it, for those conferences. You know, Blue Ridge Conferences and so on; YWCA conferences held by the national YWCA. The headquarters were in New York, but there were regional secretaries and they got up the conferences. About six or eight southeastern states sent representatives to Blue Ridge, North Carolina while I was a st'ldent. There were also regional conferences on student government. h..Q.: What were the activities at the school, then? Stone: At the school.? Oh, a great variety of things. It had a rel.a.tively small student body. That was another thing. Women in a woman's college had a very much greater opportunity for leadership. My sister was elected president of her cless as soon as she came there and hel.d other presidencies and board memberships. She preceded me and they expected me also to be a 3 leader. One of the big events of the year was the a.nnua,J. debate between the two literary societies, which had very partisan support. Oh, you could hardly speak to the opposite side for months, you know. And the faculty took sides. We were Currer Bells (pen name of Charlotte Bronte). Bliss was president of Currer Bell. I didn't become president of that. I did have other offices and became president of the student body in my senior year. But I was chosen as a debater my freshman year. A rather unusual thing to do. I don't believe I had theatre arts my first year. My Father had said, ''you know enough about that and you don't kn(n a thing about cooking. Why not take home economics?" And both the teacher and I struggled through my first semester. I believe it was a whole year and m:y Father said, "I won't punish you any more. You just aren't going to be a great cook. You do what you want to." I had a very prissy home ec teacher who wore these starched white uniforms and spoke with great precision. ''you will insert the spoon into the bowl and preCipitate this and that." And we had to learn all these fancy stitches. Fortunately, the home ec teacher was a Currer Bell. When I was elected to the debating team with juniors and seniors in the other posts-two on each side--this woman came to m:y sister and said, "Miss Stone, the least you can do for your little sister who is going to win the debate is to rip out so she can put in again." Those fancy sti tche s, you know. S. G.: --very much to make you a southern lady. Stone: Yes. To a considerable extent. I wouldn't say that we ever had the feeling in our home or the expectation among our relatives of, you know, coming out and being presented. This sort of thing prevailed in the Upper South more or in Deep South cities such as Montgomery and Mobile. I lived in a small town. Though the college was in Montgomery it was fairly &#8226; 4 isolated from the city except for those benevolent Methodists who would come out and give parties for us or something of the kind. ~.: What was the student body? Stone: About 250, so it was quite smaJ.l. It had about 600 when I was back there to teach. So to be eLected a leader in that small a college, you see, was no great business. I COulWl 't have carried that much weight in a big university very likely. S. G.: Did the debates ever deal with political issues or social issues of the time? Stone: Well, the subjects seem to have been chosen by our advisers. I'm not sure. One was whether to increase the United States navy or not. Another was on government ownership of railroads. You see, it was before World War One but in that period. I don't remember other subjects. Debating was not my interest so much as acting and making speeches as a leader of organizations such as the YWCA or the student body. I did enjoy the process of organizing. During my senior year at college I organized a grand counCil, cOlllPrised of the presidents of all student organizations. We met together for planning purposes. As Rhoda Ellison says in her History of Huntingdon [interruption to examine the bookJ. &#8226; &#8226; I seemed to have a flair for organizing and coordinating. I took the A.B. in three years and came back my fourth year for a . diploma in ~That we called expression. Reading: "The executive board's prerogatives increased considerably during the yea~s that encolllPassed the first World War. The faculty even honored the board with the perennial subject of its own headaches, the handling of class cuts, as long as the students were 1dlling to attempt it by an honor system. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; The student government was given added dignity with a new custom of a public inauguration of the student &#8226; 5 president." I was the first one inaugurated. Reading:, "Through the Council the extracurricular activities, except social clubs, were for the first time brought under the surveillance of the student goyernment president and into some kind of coordination with each other." S. G.: What was the goal of that kind of coordination? stone: Well, it was in part to help Spread the leadership opportunities, in part to enrich the lmowledge and Yision of each leader through the sharing of ideas; and in part to giye each other support. I always belieYed, in this period, in ceremonializing eyents so peopl'~ would remember. We had the inauguration ceremony on May Day with a dance drama and festiYities. And there was "Senior Lodge" and a thing called the "Senior 'Howl" in which the seniors left campus secretly, just a month before their graduation, or around that time. When other students sudde~ missed them, as in the dining room, "Oh, they must be off in a secret place on Senior Howl" which was camping for the weekend, you know. Telling each other's plans for the future and who was engaged to be married, you lmow, and what you hoped to do. h.Q.: Did you haw any difficulties in setting up this body? Was there any resistance to that idea? Often people who are in leadership don't want to relinquish it. Stone: Well, they didn't haw to, you see. They were on the grand council and then the appeal was made to them to increase the membership and ,leaderShip in each of their own organizations. So it wasn't done from the top by the president. h.Q.: What was your inyolyement in the Y then during those years? This is on the campus itself? Stone: Yes, on the campus itself. We were elected as delegates to go to Blue Ridge, N. C., or to state conferences. And we had student &#8226; 6 government conferences. I met ~ first fiance, as I have said, on the way to a student government conference. During that last year at Huntingdon we felt--and this didn't go over very well--that maybe the debating was getting to be too tense and building up a. lot of hate instead of just competition or rivalry. And so we thought we'd establish a third literary society. No one except the leaders were willing to go into the third society. Oh, the anger that was levelled at us. So we began sort of to regret it. Actually, following that attempt to split them up, the literary societies that had a debate as the culmination, went out of business and departmental clubs came in with emphasis on writing or on world affairs, international relations, or whatever. So that was that kind of change. S. G.: This wasdurlng the period of the suffrage activity. Was there ever any debate or discussion on that? Stone: Not that I recall. And that's interesting because it may be that southern ladies just didn't boldly say that. But they did take a lot of leadership. Oh yes, undoubtedly. S. G.: You don't recall on the campus, either in the debating group or in various campus activities any attention or. &#8226; &#8226; Stone: I now recall a lecture in Montgomery which some of us attended. It was by the suffragette, Dr. Anna Howard Shaw, a large handsome woman. Afterward ~ English teacher asked me about it and I kept using the masculine pronoun, to my astonishment. Perhaps a Freudian slip. She tried to probe, e.g., asking if Dr.Shaw appeared masculine, which she did not, so her mission must have found me ambivalent. Actually, we didn't give much attention to suffrage, partly because we didn't have to assert ourselves with men. We had men professors, yes, and we had some very good ones. I'm looking here at Sir Edward Baxter 7 Perry, a blind musician who taught on our campus, This unusual pianist had given lecture concerts at the college as early as 1893 when it was the A1.a.bruna Conference Female College, Since that time his concert tours of Europe had won him the honor of knighthood and the decoration of "Chevalier, de Melusine" at the hands of the Prince de Lusignan, as the only American to win this decoration. He was very proud of it and wore it constantly, He was a former student of Franz Liszt and of Madame Clara Schuman. He was for nearly four years professor of music interpretation and aesthetics on the campus and during that time showed a generous interest in many student affairs. I remember very much his lecture recitals and how I did enjoy them. ~.: Well, then, you're saying that the fact that it was an all girJ.s' school &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; you weren't as concerned about those kinds of things. Stone: M9.ybe, you know, we didn't have to be the secretaries of everything. We could be presidents and vice-presidents and executive board nembers." Because usually in a coed school the secretary-treasurer job is sort of expected of women. And I've had, to some extent, to fight against the assumption. At UCr;.., for instance, I would often be the only woman in groups of economists or labor relations people. Somebody would invariably look around for who would take the minutes. "Oh, well, there's a woman, let her," I wouldn't accept; I didn't make anything special of it, just said, "Well, I'm not a very good minute taker." And I noticed recently that Stafford Warren, when we organized the emeritus meetings to record oral histories, said, "Now which one of you ladies is going to keep the minutes of the meeting?" We said, "Let's just use the recordings." S, G.: What was the nature of the YHCA focus on the campus? Of the group. There "was actually a chapter on the campus, in other words? &#8226; 8 stone: Oh yes, that was one of the major organizations. And the president of the YWCA had the same general status as the president of the student body. I think it was in the period approximately of rrry sister's and rrry generation, that student government was established. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; Just before that there was a lady principal who ran the school, from that point of view, very much as a boarding school was run in those early days. But we insisted that we were mature stUdents and could run our own student organizations. And we did. But that woman who was used to being a chaperone, the lady principal, had just gradually to be eased out of the college. Because even that early student government and student initiative had come in &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; We put on our ovm shows, we had lots of fun, but we also raised money and did things for good causes. ~.: What were the causes? stone: Raised money for social service or to send people to Blue Ridge so they could talk about ~lOrld affairs and things beyond their horizon. And to the student government conferences allover the South. Probably missionary things. I don't know. For foreign people. But I don't recall that. Let me see if Ellison tells us some of the things that ~re did back in those days. We wrote poetry and stories and put on original plays. Had a ShakeSpeare festival. And we gave a Latin play one year and a Greek play the next--in the language. S. G.: Was the YWCA involved in any of the interracial. . &#8226; .? Stone: Yes. The TIl was the one that invited Negroes from across town both in rrry student days and after I came back as Dean of Women. The TIl kept this custom of bringing the blacks from the other college over to have a Christmas party and some kind of little ritual together. When I came as Dean of Women I thought we should exchange visits on a person to person basis. 9 S. G.: As a student, during this exchange program did you go to the black college as well or they only came to Huntingdon? Stone: I don't recall going while I was a student. We did meet Negro students at a Settlement House in the city. I did insist when I became Dean of Women that we exchange hospitality, be their guests, too. That was a little too adventuresome for students in my time. I think I told you that once as Dean I took a group of students over to the Negro college. The students' most wide-eyed impression was that the blacks were just girls like anybody else. They talked about their dates, about their clothes, about 1vho is this way or that way. They weren't servants, you know. They were from nice families, middle class people and professions. We had chaperones all through my student days. I notice in the History Mrs. Browder spent her 1vhole time taking us to and fro. Our senior year we could sit in the Green Parlor with a boy by ourselves. But most of the time we sat in the chapel, in different parts of the building, and talked with the boy that was our date. A chaperone sort of looking over the scene. When the man who became my fiance came to spend a weekend with me just before he went to France, Mrs. Sturdivant, the Dean of Homen, elected to ride in the chauffered car. She sat in the front but beamed her approval by conversing constantly and looking around all the time. He couldn't even hold hands. So an understanding friend of the family invited me overnight where Brooks and I could have privacy. S. G.: So you weren't allowed to leave the campus? Stone: Without chaperones, unless our parents authorized relatives or friends to pick us up at the college. Our Uncle took US to Governor Henderson's inaugural ball and from time to time to the movies. S. G.: Would groups of girls ~rho went off together also have to be chaperoned ~ Stone: I ~ras even chaperoned to my home for a weekend. My parents welcomed the guest. It was a lovely lady who taught mathematics. And she was asked by the dean of 1&#183;romen, or lady principal, to take my sister and me ~O home. We had. to te~l our parents we were bringing a teacher as a guest. They were cordial and this was taken for granted &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Now what the College did is, when ll\Y Father came down to Montgomery, he could take us out without a chaperone. And did take haU a dozen students for a dinner, you know, downtown. And 10re went with other fathers. ~.: So it was an attempt to maintain a very protective environment. Stone: Very protective, yes. That's true. S. G.: At this time do you recall your own views or interests, if any, on the issue of race re~tions? Stone: They weren't extreme, I'm sure. [ Interruption.] I think it was ~rge~ in the context; of, you know, Christian fe~~owship or that sort of thing. My ~ater view of this was, you know, that's just too parochial, too limited. But at the time, I was not conscious~ prejudiced and certai~ had no strong feelings. None at all of that kind. But it just dian't occur to us to go beyond sort of a. fellowship kind of thing rather than to want Negroes to vote and to have all the other pri vi~eges. It haan't been so long since women were voting, you know. Oh, they hadn't gotten the bMlot unti~ I was out of college. My. grandmother, in her nineties, was one of the first to vote, of women, you know, and many gentlemen asked for the privilege of accompanying her. Yes, I voted in 1920. I was twenty-three when woman's suffrage was passed. So we dian't have the vote. We did work in the Wor~d War, by joining the Red Cross, making patriotic speeches, and having a victory garden. That was one of the things in ll\Y college days that we worked for. You see, I was there from '14 to '~8. s. G.: You dian't have any attitudes against war? 11 Stone: No, I didn't. And as I have mentioned,roy first fiance as well as roy parents and teachers and home town friends were fervently in favor of the "war to end war." Not until I went to Europe and saw the senseless devastation and read George Bernard Shaw did I become a war critic. I helped.raise money for the Red Cross by making speeches over the county, when I was a freshman--no, it was much later, between roy junior and senior year. My knitting for the war was very unsuccessful. I started with a .18.sh cloth this size and, you know, dropping stitches &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; didn't do too well. But I got up packages for soldiers. My fiance sent me names of soldiers who had no fami1,y. Every soldier was entitled to a box of a certain size. The dimensions were given. You had to find a box that would just fit it. And you could put into it food and socks and a few things. Into roy finance's, he got pictures, too. These were just sort of kind1,y things but not really daring things. S. G.: There was not yet a political view attached? Stone: No, not to the war at all. We believed Mr. Wilson, that it was going to be the war to sa.ve democracy and get rid of that old Kaiser and that mean Germany. Later, very soon, as you saw from roy Letters to the newspaper, I came to see Germans as people and they were no more to blame than the other side in getting us into this struggle. S. G.: But during the war itself, you felt very patriotic. stone: Very patriotic, yes. And went around to entertain during roy whole senior year. A camp was established, Camp Sheridan, in Montgomery. Mainly the Ohio soldiers came there. And their parents came down with Palm Beach suits. They thought it would be that warm. They real1,y got very cold in Montgomery in the wintertime. We went out to entertain the soldiers. I was in the glee club as well as the dramatic club. We put on a play or so &#8226; 12 and gave readings and sang as a glee club. But we were&#183; heavily chaperoned. We met young men who applauded and stamped their feet and so on. Then a few of them, highly selected, were allowed to come out and have dates with us. But I didn't want to date them. I was getting flowers twice a week and letters once a day and long distance calls from Brooks and being very loyal. So I think I met only one or two of the Ohl.o soldiers, but it was quite a restricted thing. After I graduated and had gone to teach, I did go around to other camps. See, I graduated in May 1918. The armistice was not signed until that fall. I taught in Ashland that first year and went over to several of the army camps; I went with another teacher, a voice teacher. I was teaching English and expression. I gave readings while she sang or played the piano. We met young men. You know, felt grown UJ:l and free and unchaperoned and so on. But not wise--at least not sophisticated. S. G.: During your last year you were engaged and your plan was to marry and to be the wife of, probably, a minister. Stone: Yes. So that after he died I went into the YWCA work partly as a fulfillment because we both were wondering what to do together. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; He wanted me to come over to France and I didn't &#8226;&#8226;. but those are details. S. G.: When you went to teach, was that after his death already? Stone: No. He was in Europe still. He was wounded in the Battle of the Argonne and was in the base hospital. But it was a minor wound, relatively. He wanted me to come on over but in addition to wanting a formal wedding, I had some uncertainty about it. He had just swept me off my feet and had rushed me so. I didn't get to know him except as a lover and a war hero and that sort of thing. I didn't want to leap into this. I just had some doubts and uneasiness about it. So I said no, come on home, let's get better acquainted. &#8226; 13 We did visit each other's families. He had met my family earlier. After going to his home I asked for sort of--I think you would call it now a moratorium. Let's wait a little while before we make final plans for this. This upset him so, according to what his people told me afterwards. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; He thought it was a question of my wanting to leave him. I did have other men who paid attention to me while he was gone, but I wasn't engaged or in love with any of them. But I think he was worried over that. Though he had gotten safely through the hospital and war, one day. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; He lived in this small town in North Carolina near Pinehurst. There was a wagon with a team of mules that got frightened by an automobile. He rushed out in the street to stop them, because I think some lady was crossing or something of this kind. To stop them. He was in something of a daze because he was worried about this change of affairs. And his leg was crushed between the car and the wagon and it had to be amputated. There is no question, medically, that that had to happen. I didn't get there--they didn't have planes in those days--to be with him. His parents were rather bitter about this. They had a feeling that Brooks just didn't want to live. That he might have tried a little harder if I had gotten there in time. It might not have been medically possible, you know. They certainly had to amputate one leg and he would have been a cripple. But that isn't bad. In those days they wouldn't have had a prosthesis that could be used, but they might have saved the other leg. From Huntingdon I taught a year and then went to Boston, before Brooks got home. I was already registered for Boston before he said "Come on over here." He had a chance to go to Bordeaux university and he thought it would be nice. And it would have been nice, you know. But I said we can go back sometime and come on home. So Brooks came there from the boat. He landed in New York from Europe and came up to see me in Boston where he renewed his courtship. &#8226; 14 . s. G.: What were you doing in Boston then? Stone: studying theatre. Following the same thing. Because I was teaching that. I was teaching English and what we would now call theatre arts. English and expression. In Ashland, the home of Hugo Black~ S. G.: Did you see that as just a temporary thing to do? Stone: No, I felt that I would be getting up plays, writing religious or civic pageants and putting them on--as I did later when I got the YW training and as I had done before. I went for the YWCA training after Brooks died. But I think I had always, from college days and earlier, had something of a leaning towards a religious angle. I've lost that side, except in a broad sense. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; But it was sort of a door into social service. Well, social religion was always a major part in my family. It was never the piety and a.:u that. I loved the pageantry. Methodists never had as much as Catholics, of' course. But I loved singing in the choir and the ceremonies of Christmas and Easter and so on, mainly for the pageantry and for that sort of thing. I don't think I would have wanted to go in for as much pomp and ceremony as the Catholics or the Episcopalians. ~. : During that one year when you were in Ashland, the period right after the war when there were so many riots in the North and lynChings in the South, did you have any ties to any of the interracial groups that were beginning to form? Stone: Apparently not. Except the discussion in YW conferences, in which we were very upset and worked up about those things and talked about them. What should we do? And you know the earliest racial relations bodies were church groups. The group that Will Alexander started in 1919 was the Interracial Commission and the women's group formed later was called the Association of Southern Women for the Prevention of Lynching. My impreSSion is that the &#8226; 15 earliest movements to abolish lynching and to help in Vario~ ways of this kind had a Christian origin--I mean a religious note. They were based on Judeo-Christian ethics. Many of the leaders were, of course, the very progressive Jewish people from ~~ntgomery and from Atlanta. S. C.: In other words, there would be discussion within your-- Stone: The organizations and conferences where I went. I'm sure we did something about either contributing a small amount of money to the interracial movement or holding further discussions. And I went to Tuskegee-".no, I guess I didn't have my Tuskegee visits before I met Myra. h,Q. : Even though there was discussion in these groups, there was no attempt to have the interracial groups that took a stand and tried it, in effect, work as a safety valve in the community. None of that sort of thing. Stone: No, not that I have any strong recollection of. And I believe I would remember it. Though you know you get a little bit confused time-wise as to whether what I did in connection with the people in Atlanta followed my Huntingdon &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; was mainly in the days I was teaching, not the years that I went to school there. So I was a little retarded, I'm afraid. S. G.: That year in Ashland, you had gone from this protected environment to teaching on your own. Stone: On my own and doing church and community work and entertaining soldiers and so on. h,Q.: Did you have your own apartment? Stone: It was a little town and there were no apartments for rent. A :rellow teacher and I had a couple of rooms that we fixed up. We took meals somewhere else. We had our two rooms there together. One a sitting room and one a bedroom. But as I recall, when we had our dates--and we had many dates-we invited them to the parlor of the people who owned the house. Because it ~6 might not have been proper, that young as we were. I was twenty in the beginning of my senior year but in January I was twenty-one. So I was going into twenty-two. It wouldn't have been proper. Heaven knows, now gir~s go out much earlier than that and certainly aren't chaperoned. Yes, I ~ft off chaperonage after co~ge. I think we always doub~-dated. I don't recall, in that first year of freedom. [End of 5ide of tape.] I imagine that I was a fa.ir~ typical deep south person though my sister and I did go to camp in Maine, as counsellors. The first year I graduated my sister and I went up to Maine. It was the next year that I went to Boston. S. G.: Those were your first trips North? Stone: Yes, that's true. And we "did the works" visiting all of New England's historic sites. New York and the theatre and art museums on our own. Which is a litt~e different from my Mother's trip to New York and Boston because she and her cousin had chaperones, had an aunt (and unc~ I think) or someone there with them. They were two young ladies who ventured to go on their own occasiona~~. ~.: How were you received, for instance, when you went up to Boston and to be counsellor, in Maine, as southern women? Stone: I don't recall any special treatment. Except that when I came home from Boston, where I was studying theatre at Emerson College of Oratory, my brothers teased me out of my Boston accent. I had to have it for the school, you know. Not the broadest A but the intermediate A on everything. And they teased me so that I dropped it. I should have kept it. S. G.: How long were you at the school? Stone: Just a summer. And then Brooks came home and that was the end of my professiona~ training. I continued to be interested--for a long time-- &#8226; 17 in helping get up plays and pageants and acting in Houston in little theatre. But as an amateur. Just in a little theatre. S. G.: But when you 1,ent to Ashland to teach, -;ras the plan to go for just the one year? Was it just until your fiance came back? Stone: Yes, that vras the general plan. But I hadn't consciOUSly planned to stop the career altogether. Naturally I wou1.dn ' t have gone on the stage or anything like that. I didn't really have that in view. I laugh about saying my "theatrical career," but I never had any notion of dOing more than teaching and being in little theatre performances. Using such talent as I had to help girls and young people. All the way through when I was in college &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; summers at home with girl scouts or campfire girls or Sunday school classes. Taking them on camping trips or picniCS or various things. I was quite energetic with that. S. G.: So all through those years you were involved in that sort of community work. Stone: Sort of community work, yes. T'nrough the church and through civic groups, too. ~. : It was after your fiance's death that you went into this group work at the Y. "hat vras the nature of that training exactly? Stone: It was in part religious. Nice little talks. I ran across some of the literature recently. Conferences of a religious nature. But hObbies and clubs. I organized in Houston. The YI, trains for several different types. One is industrial relations. And a cousin who went with me to New York decided to take that course and work with people in industry. I had one young group when I got to Houston of mainly minority people from Czechoslovakia and another from lfJexico who lived in Houston and who were working. They came for supper once a week and we had programs. You usually had at your &#8226; 18 programs !l. little invocation or something of a religious nature and then a serious discussion and social activities such as dancing or skating or just some games or whatnot. Outings and picnics and so forth. They aJ.lworked on hobbies. And we wrote plays and pageants and I took them down to Kemah Bay for a week or two. I stayed at the Bay for two months and a different group would come, say, every week or ten days. Various ethnic groups, yes. This was called the Girl Reserve--a teenage group, starting from about the ninth grade and gOing through high school. And you organiz~ them by ages. I was made head of the YW Girl Reserve Department. Head meo.nt of two people. I was the one who had the high school clubs and my assistant had the eighth and ninth grades. She had the junior high. S. G.: What were the goals of these. &#8226; .? Stone: Ml.in1,y character development and growth into whole people with outreach, you know. I actua1l&#165; believe character development was what we used most of the time. By serving others, as well as doing things pleasurable. But you never just had the games and fun. You always had people doing things for others and inviting people in and learning about other countries and other ethnic groups and visiting to and fro. ActualJ;y- in Houston, the Heights, the Houston Heights were, at that time no less than in the recent time when they had aJ.l those murders, was something like our Venice. Less advanced socialJ;yand financialJ;y- than the other side of town. The headquarters were downtown but I had clubs at both ends, you see. All social classes. And to me . . . it was a fairly ne~r experience in a way--except at college I got it to some extent--of knowing children of less advantage who barely had enough money to. come and pay ten cents for supper or whatever it was. I would often fill in a little bit if people couldn't pay. I would ride the streetcar home with some of the little Mexican..Americans whose parents wouldn't want them to be &#8226; 19 out late. I would take them to their door. I wasn't all that old, but I felt very old, you know, compared to these teenagers. :rtr training was in New York on Lexington Avenue. A large national bu:ilding there. They gave courses in child psychology. Afterwards when I studied psychology at both Chicago and Chapel Hill and studied under Groves and so on, I found that I'd had just a bare introduction to this. But there was something of child psychology and something Of religious education. I'd had that at Huntingdon; it was required to have a history of the Bible course and then some New Testament, too. But at Huntingdon I had had ma.in.ly history and English. I had majored in English, so I had gone all through Shakespeare and Chaucer, the whole works in that. S. G.: How long was this training program at the Y? Stone: Just a summer. About six weeks I think. ~.: And then from there you were sent out to Houston? Stone: Yes. You were offered choices. :rtr choice was between Duluth, Minnesota, and Houston, Texas. And when I looked up the geography of Duluth I was glad afterwards I didn't go there. I would have frozen to death. S. G.: Was your choice of Houston primarily because of it being more of a southern experience? Stone: Yes, and I thought Duluth was sort of an industrial area. It just seemed to me sort of a much more strange place. ~.: Your work at the Houston Y was a full-time job? Stone: Yes, 1'ull time for two years. And then I went abroad. ~.: You've described this one group that would meet once a week. What was the nature of some of the others &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Z Stone: . I had about eight or ten different clubs. They met weekly, either in their school or up at the Y. Most of them liked to come to the Y. &#8226; 20 We had a gym and we could put on various kinds of activities. But we usua1J;;r had something serious and something entertaining and then some activity in 'Which we did a service of some kind. Then there was always the community work in which staff were interpreting the Y to other organizations in the community. I was on radio sometimes; that was just coming in. So we would make talks about the YW and what it means. We had a board, both for the girls department and for the larger YWCA. The members would represent the community, you know, and were usua1J;;r benevolent and wealthy people who would come and help set pOlicies and stardards for the Y as a whole. I had people on the Girl Reserve advisory board, as it was called. People who liked children and who liked to help plan their activities and outings. ~.: Was it viewed as an outlet for so-called disadvantaged children? Stone: No. It was that, too, but it had people from the wealthier homes who thought that this would be a very nice thing for their children to do. They had social clubs, too, I suspect. But this was a very nice thing for them to belong to. They paid dues,as I recall, and registered for it. ~.: Was there any sort of interracial work that the Y there in Houston Vias involved in? Stone: No. These other ethnic groups, but not black. There was a black YWCA in another part of the city and I visited it sometimes. It was called the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA. Named for the poetess. Very nice people. But there were no exchange programs. There were these joint conferences with staff, eapecia1J;;r if someone came down from New York or something like that. We'd get together. Their staff was black, yes. And their members, I suppose that they had aU the departments that we did. You know, the YW has one department, usual4', for boarding young girls going away from home to work. And they could get room and board at a YW. That was called something like &#8226; 2J. a placement bureau to help people with getting jobs and help them with living away from home at a reasonable cost and so on. Another department was, as I've said, for the industrial girls. While I had these little ones who bad to meet at night because they were working, Il'\Y" impression, as I now recall it, is that they were to some extent secretaries or bad that type of job rather than directly in industry. But they may have been from industry because it may be, as I look back now, that the industrial department just took older people, the ones who were really earning a living for the family. And mine would be teenagers, you know, who were working. And the teenagers I bad were from the white group and the non-black minorities, such as Spanish and Czech. The majority group were in high school. They weren't ready for college, you see. Some of them went, afterwards, to Rice Institute in the same city. And they would come back to see us. Oh, by the way, I took people--instead of to Blue Ridge where I went as a college girl Il'\Y"self--to Estes Park, Colorado. The different clUbs elected delegates to go out to Estes Park conference ground, where we did a good many things. Got in some sightseeing and climbing of mountains and seeing the snow and played tennis and other things. [We held] sessions at which we discussed very earnestly the goals of life and what one should strive for and the kind of person one wanted to gro.v up and be. Had a lot of reading to do. Kahlil Gibran was coming along as was CoUl~. "Everyday in everyway, getting better and better." (Transcendentalism) And we had to counteract, to some extent &#8226;.&#8226; not just to sit back and hope for things to be right but to do something about it. I took four students, girls, out to Estes Park. One had moved to Houston from California and was extremely prejudiced against orientals. Texasgrmm girls were prejudiced against the blacks or the browns, but not against &#8226; 22 orientals. They thought they were charming and delightf'ul, you know. So we had a wonderf'ul opportunity, going to the bigger conference, to interact with people who had different kinds of views about race. We had a good deal of discussion on race at the big conferences. And we talked about it in Houston. But I don't recall doing anything more than a gesture. Tokenism, I fear. S. G.: Was it talked about in terms of being other peoples' problems or about one's own racist attitude? Stone: No, not the latter. I'm afraid that wes a little too advanced for us. It wes thought about as being hard on the person who suffered the prejudice, but one didn't think that one might be an oppressor. Not as much. I guess we did know that if some people were disadvantaged, it wes from a most:l&#165; social cause, because we certainly believed in the social aspect of religion, social religion. What Reinhold Neibuhr and his group were saying at that time. h,Q.: At that point what wes the sense of your own direction? Ha.d you already decided on your European trip? Stone: No. I had wanted to, but my sister wes the one who stimuJ.a.ted that. She was an art student and she -wa.nted to study abroad. She had saved more money than I and my Father didn't want her to go alone, so he financed me. I never did save very much. h,Q.: But you had no end in view in terms of your work? Stone: Just to continue growing and developing and contributing to society. Expecting to earn my way. I wes en.,uaged again in Houston. This time to an architect who was twenty years my senior. I think I was looking for my Father to some extent. Woody got a little impatient with me for staying so long in Europe and so we final:l&#165; broke it off. S. G.: You still had not reaJ.ly yet defined your own direction. stone: If you mean by direction my philosophy of life, it was growing all the time and not changing radicaJ.ly, though it did change more after my Hmltingdon teaching days when I went abroad in the 'thirties, rather than in the 'twenties. You see it was 1923 and 24 when I went the first time. Shortly after the first World War. Soon enough after the war that Europeans were still having inflation and the Germans were suffering. It was through the Y that we got letters to other YWCAs allover Europe. The president of the advisory board of the larger YWCA in Houston, Mrs. McDowell, had married an Englishman and when her husband died she came back. She wrote a letter of introduction to his people, whom we met and are still in close touch. Got the wedding invitation of the third generation the other day. One of Mrs. McDowell's nephews was at Winchester College, the college of King Alfred. We visited his family there. Mrs. Esdaile, a niece of Mrs. McDowell, was the wife of a famous bibliographer at the British Museum. They were aJ.l rather prominent people. We were very fortunate to get to have their advice. We visited them briefly, mainly for meals or tea, but had their advice on what to see and where to go. ~.: It was primarily really a trip for pleasure and culture. Stone: Culture, mainly. And study, you know, because we both studied. loW sister studied more than I because I didn't have enough grasp of the language. I studied French, but I didn't have enough fluency to do in drama. what she did in art. [ Interruption.] ~.: Are there any highlights of the European trip that you think might be important in terms of your own development? Also, as two single &#8226; 24 women traveling, the kind of experiences that you might have had. How people might have reacted to you. Stone: We had some major references from the. YWs that we looked up in some places. We got suggestions of names of homes, places where we might be paying guests, and we felt comfortable. We wanted to stay in private homes. Occasionally we went to a pension, but that had to be one that was recannnended. In Germany we stayed at the home of a professor who was :from the Hoch Schttle which would be [equivalent to] our high school. He had twin sons who were working on their Doctorates at the University. Carl in physics and Joachim in English. We wanted to practice German, but Joachim wanted to practice English on us. But we did study and we did see every one of the Wagnerian operas. You could buy tickets and perishable things just for nothing. We stayed in Europe eleven and a half months on what we thought would last five or six. This professor's family systematically increased our education of German history, German language, Gennanmusic. We didn't go to theatre because we didn't have that much of a grasp. But we did read the librettos ahead and discuss them. Well, we knew some of them from Mother's musical background. But it was very good. And the young men escorted us around. What we paid for our room and board was tremendous to them. It wasn't much but as I told you, we had to pay in American money. We stayed there two weel~s or maybe a month. , First we lrent to England, and while we were in Scotland w'e vrere at some historic place and vre noticed that two men kept crossing out paths. They were hiking around. Finally they introduced themselves and they ,rere :from Holland. One was the brother-in-law of the young one. He said he was taking his brotherin- law for the first time to England. His brother-in-law was a student at Delft Thliversity, much J"ounger than we. So they just said they were interested in historic sites and ,&#183;That ,rere we doing. We said we were Americans planning to 25 spend some months in Europe and were going to stay in private homes insofar as possible. We 1 d been able to in the English spea..lci.ng countries of' England, Scotland and Ireland. They said, 'Well, if' we may presume to do so, we'd like to introduce you to some Dutch girls. Friends of' our f'amily." We met the Cambiers, with whom ,Ie still visit and correspond. A lovely, lovely f'amily; ancestors going back to the eleventh century. That sort of' thing, you know. We were very f'ortunate. Somehow we sensed that the men were not people trying to pick us up and they sensed that we were genteel enough that we weren't trying to use them. We got into correspondence with the Dutch f'amily, two young women our ages. One was an artist roy sister's age and the other one was roy age. We went f'rom Scotland to Germany, across the North Sea. Spent six or eight weeks in all. Two weeks in Berlin and then in other parts of' Germany. During all that time we wrote to and fro with the Dutch f'riends, so that they met us at the station. They had arranged to have us as paying guests. That was the general arrangment. We would have a room upstairs and their maid would take care of' our laundry. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; This wasn't in the contract, but they just would arrange this. They were so gracious and channing to us that they took us around to meet all their friends. And accompanied us on a tour of' the whole of' Holland. So that we could see the various non-tourist sights, including going with us to Amsterdam and The Hague. So we had very good luck in the homes in which we lived in na.ny of' the countries. In Paris we stayed in a small hotel in the Latin Q,uarter. All of' our f'riends and f'ormer schoolrllates would write their brothers who were studying abroad to look us up. And these Dutch f'riends wrote their brothers, who were living in Paris. So we had many dates. But we double dated always. We never brought men up to our room because that was f'rowned on, though we could have. I believe we did, f'or tea, ,men there were several people. &#8226; 26 We did cook our European breakfast in our room, which cut down the cost. And we didn't take those expensive baths in which three or four peq&amp;gt;le have to wait on you, you know. We sponged. And rrry sister sketched me while I .vas nude at the lavatory because I had a boyish figure. But I think the main thing was absorbing the culture of other countries and reading the history and literature. We didn't go to a country without having read voraciously about the country; to get its history and background. A little of it we had had at home, but it didn't ;nean the same as when we were right there. And we could shq&amp;gt; and come along the local streets of the Latin Q,uarter with a loaf of bread under our arms wrapped in a newspaper. You know, the way they carry things. We went to fifteen countries, but stayed as much as three months each in Vienna and Paris and spent Christmas in Switzerland. And the Czechoslovakian club that I had in Houston had a young woman whose father had been the minister of a John Huss church. Huss was before Martin Luther, you know, breaking away f'r~m the Catholics. I think that's considered Presbyterian. I had already planned before leaving Houston to see her and later her parents who had returned to Prague. Helen Dobias and a friend of hers were in a pension school in Morges, Switzerland. We spent two weeks there in their boarding school. And school mistresses took their students and us to various parts of Switzerland on such occasions as the daffodil time or the narcissus time or skiing from certain slq&amp;gt;es. Celebrating various seasonal festivals. We did that in all the countries. So I was able to write that series of letters to rrry home town newspaper because I could talk about how peq&amp;gt;le lived. And we did meet and live with natives everywhere &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Most peq&amp;gt;le enjoyed speaking English with us. That was the disadvantage to us, that we didn't practice their languages &#8226; 27 more than to buy tickets and to make reservations. If 'we were staying a short while in a country we just stayed at hotels. S. G.: By this time had you decided on your future course of actions? That that kind of cultural absorption-- Stone: Would be used in teaching or in Y work or whatever I did. But as soon as we got back from Europe, after all of this--penniless. Father had to send money to get us home from New York because we felt we should use the very last drop for a Mediterranean cruise. We could do that if we didn't try to get home in any style and if we didn't buy any extra clothes. We wore out suitcases and clothes and threw them away and then came on with less. Because material things mean very little to us compared to education. And we Stones just love that to the bones, every one of us. It seemed a natural thing that one would do this. We certainly wouldn't have felt that we would be gOing often. We thought this was it, this was our trip. You had to go by boat., You couldn't go by plane. You went by train when you were in Europe. There were not even buses then that I recall. I guess some buses maybe. Certainly in the cities. We stayed in a pension in Vienna and then we moved out to an apartment. We were able to rent it through the YWCA. But those who could afford to stay in the pension were mourning the absence of the "beautiful Emperor Franz Joseph." The change and the socialism that was coming in. Many people were very alarmed not only over Marxism but over Freudianism that was also emerging. The YW wanted to know if I could help counteract this psychoanalytic trend. What were some alternatives? Oh,surelyone wouldn't believe in Freud! Well, I was very curious about it but didn't have the background to assess it because I had ,had very little psychology. Mostly history and literature. 28 But I do think cultural expansion was valuable to a person growing up in a provincial community of about 1,500 inhabitants, black and white, and being accustomed to assuming that the blacks would have their school and their church and that they would have different occupations. I had only a f'ew pricks to traditional thinking beforehand. There was a barber who was black and he had a very fine home and he walked past our house all the time. We knew that he and his family were well off' and cultured people. But we never invited them in. There were a f'ew other positions that were not for servants and that the Negroes occupied. But for the most part it was a very provincial community. I think that gradually J!IIf horizons widened enough to take in all ethnic groups, all religions and so on. We never had any great prejudice. I was more uneasy about the Catholics than I was Jewish people. We had highly respected merchants in the only Jewish family in the connnunity. But I knew no Catholics until I went to Europe. The main reason f'or travel was to expand. But never f'or a moment did we f'eel that we wouldn't be using whatever we learned f'or mankind, you know, in some broad, general way. Partly through the church but through the communi ty . Gradually doubt came in as to, you know, the orthodox kinds of' religions, &#167;.:.J!.: Was that while you were at the university? stone: I seldom went to church there in Chicago. I don't remember consciously "doubting" but just sort of slipping away from the church there. Because while you are in a sma.ll town you follow on the pattern--and this is one thing that decided me against ever going back to Dadeville to live--I don't think I could put up vdth that much church work and missionary society. It just is less congenial to me now. &#8226; 29 ~.: When you came back from Europe &#8226; &#8226; . &#8226; stone: We spent a year to recoup the finances. I taught high school. There was an opening. I had to teach Latin and history, I believe because my subjects were being taught by my cousin. I had a delightful time teaching Latin, getting acquainted with the newer books of it because I had a very literal minded teacher of Latin when I went through. I taught right there in Dadeville. And then we decided, five of us cousins, decided to go to Chicago for the summer together. I stayed on. The others didn't. We were just going to take a summer and we rented an apartment. Two of the cousins were musical and they found that Chicago didn't have what they wanted so they went to Northwestern. But they stayed on in the apartment and went by the elevated over to Northwestern. My sister didn't care for the art work. It was too traditional. And she went to Columbia after that summer and took her Master's at Columbia; much more progressive and abstract than Chicago. I stayed on because I discovered social work. I didn't know there was such a subject. ~.: How did you happen to discover it? Had you enrolled &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; ? stone: No. We were just going off to college for graduate work. I already had a diploma and an A. B. But we went to the summer school to get started again. I went into this huge gymnasium and looked around at where they were registering that summer. I never registered anywhere except in the department office after that, but that first summer there were big tables and big Signs. And one said "social service administration. II I wondered what that was. I looked all around. Saw sociology but I had never had any courses in SOCiology or anthropology. Hadn't at that time. I saw psychology &#8226; 30 and that was a little familiar; had one course in that. But I thought "now social service sounds all right." I went over and said "I want to ask about this. I've done YWCA work." And Miss Sophonisba Preston Breckinridge said ''Well now, I think it would be very nice if you came down to school. You can have a little course with Miss Abbott. You can have a little course with me." I remember at times how I got into those "little" courses. They were something, you know. But I hadn't the faintest notion. Miss Breckinridge looked like a little old grandmother, quite innocent. I signed up for a course on immigration with Miss Abbott. A course on the "Child and the State" and found out that Miss Breckinridge was a Doctor of Jurisprudence as well as a Ph. D. in Political Science! And one on community organization. I took four, You are supposed to have only three. And in my naivite I took more than most people did. I forget what the other one was. Casework, probably. I fell in love with social work and came to Dean Abbott's office and said "Miss Abbott, I seem to have done well enough in grades, I'd love to stay on.. Is there any chance I could get a scholarship?" She said, "I'll look into that." She got one for me and so I managed to stay. ~.: So it was almost accidental. Stone: Almost accidental. It wasn't in the sense that I've always been headed toward something that was of a social service type, whether you called it religious to begin with and later called it something else. It's in that general stream of being helpful, being useful, serving people. And of course social work has become more and more scientific. For a while we were as bad as the sociologists who split aI-Jay because they didn't want to be "doing good," they wanted to be scientific. Sociall'lOrk didn't lose its service goal but it did feel that it had to be sure to have theory courses 31 and research courses. To do more than just learn to help people in a kindly way, you know. I suppose that there has always been this theme in my life of wanting to help and finding, somewhat accidentally, the channels through which to do it. When I left Chicago I came to Alabama, partly as a result of my Father's death and my staying on and getting the offer in Alabama that had an appeal to me. It's my country. I want it to be better. I want it to have good programs and so on. I did feel a certain sectional loyalty. (End of side of tape. Proceed to second tape, side C.] S. G.: In Chicago, Breckinridge and Abbott especially &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; both of them had been very involved in the earlier suffrage movement and were very committed to women. Did this have any effect on your own studies or your O1VIl interests? Stone: It didn't narrow my interest in any way toward women but I saw the example of the great leaders in that school. The men were in subordinate places to the 'lomen. The School of Social Service Administration tried to get as many men as possible and it did have Dr. C. C. Carstens, who was a great child welfare authority. And, of course, people from the settlements besides Jane Addams. Tnere was the university settlement house and Graham Taylor was one of the eminent people there. I have a book of his on the settlement movement in the Chicago area. Miss Addams, of course, was there and we went to Hull House and she came to the University. S. G.: Did you have much personal contact with her? Stone: I did, but not as a personal friend and I didn't live at Hull House. I regretted afterwards because I could have, you know. And one of my friends did elect to go there. I wanted to be nearer the university so I Could catch up on the social sciences. As soon as I decided to stay on 32 and they accepted me and gave me a scholarship, Miss AQbott said 'Well, obviously you do have some social science background to make up for. You don't have any to speak of." So she had me take economics and pOlitical science and labor relations, the latter taught by Walter Millis, who was an arbitrator in labor disputes. I took Anthropology with Ellsworth Faris. Abbott and Breckinridge sort of steered me away from sociology but I did take a course with Ernest Burgess on the family. S. G.: They themselves were actually primarily in economics and political science. Stone: Yes they were. Miss Abbott had studied at the London School of Economics and had been very close to Beatrice and Sidney Webb who were very close to Bernard Shaw and the Fabians. We drank all that in at Chicago. This whole feeling of identification with the working people and with the labor movement and with the settlement movement which went along with it. S. C.: What were your ties, for instance, to the settlement movement or the the Women's Trade Union League? Stone: We heard Florence Kelly. We had a series of speakers like that who would come for lectures either to the social service club or to a class. And we went out to hear them. Then our research often took us into contact, I interrupted Chicago twice to do research for the Children's Bureau. Once was to go dovm to Kentucky on one of Miss Breckinridge's special projects to study the minor children of life nrisoners. Another was of mental handicap. Abbott wanted me to do my thesis on that, but I was so in love with Alabama history and had a course on welfare history that I decided to do my JI,s,ster' s thesis on the history of welfare in Alabama from colonial days to the present. 33 And I learned that during the post Civil War period, when the Freedmen's Bureau was there, that it had to take care of more whites than it did blacks. There were many very poor whites who were living in tents or under shelters made of tree boughs. fight in the Civil War. They were so poor. You kncm, they were forced to }!en could be exempt from fighting if they cmned twenty slaves or more or if they paid $200 to have someone substitute for them. I was scandalized by all this. But I had started reading that in college, even before I went to Chicago. My thesis brought me back to the Alabama Department of Archives and History. I read all the documents, federal and state documents from 1705 on through. I've got a pretty good kncmledge of Alabama history. ~.: Had you, by this time, decided you wanted your social work to focus back into the South? Stone: Yes, well, I wanted at least to kncm the South. I didn't kncm whether I would stay in the North or not. I don't think I had a feeling that I '70uld. They offered me a fellcmship for the Doctorate and then they had rather urged me to take a position up there. When I was offered this job to help train child welfare workers at Montevallo, Alabama, they said, "Oh, by all means take that and postpone the Doctoral study. Because Mrs. Tunstall needs you and you can help teach the recruits." But to go on with Chicago. Yes, I had courses, but it didn't appeal to me too much to work with the immiBrants. I don't knov' why, because I certainly loved all ethnic groups. I still had a rural hankering, so that the Kentucky offer appealed to me. But I also liked to work with children. You see, I worked with the girl reserves and I worked in child welfare. I took a number of courses in child welfare. Miss Brecl&#183;.inridge taught one of 34 them--main4r from her book on children and the law, which included child labor and the position of women as children or as nonpersons. "Women, children and idiots" were classed together. So we learned all that from Brecky. I enjoyed law and I had other courses in social work and the law. But I wouldn't have wanted to practice law or I wouldn't have wanted to &#8226; &#8226; . . I've had from the outset what was called a generic interest in social work: method, work wanting to use all the methods, the casework/with small groups, and the community work. And I was brought out here to UCLA to teach "generic social work" and introduce it. It wasn't very popular anywhere and I helped pioneer it out here with a good deal of resistance from the caseworkers. ~.: Did you have field work in Chicago itself? Stone: Field work was in Chicago and my first placement was with a Charity Organization Society or COS. There I had many Negro clients. I read one record that was assigned to me. It was about migrants who had come from the rural South in the 1920' s and who didn't know what to do with a bathtub and put their coal in it. And they didn't know what to do with a clock because they were used to, in the South, rising with the sun and going to bed with the sun. And they didn't need a clock, or they dido't have one. (So there were many stories about their not getting places on time. People still have a little expression, CT, colored time.) But anyhow, this particular case had been carried by a middle class Negro born in the North and speaking Yan..1;:ee, I would call it. She had done the best she could to figure out what this rural migrant had said and ended: up her record "She speaks a strange dialect which I find it difficult to understand." I wanted to add "I speak the same dialect." We practical4r threw our arms around each other when the client heard rrry southern accent. She said "Oh, the first person I've been able to understand!" And so she told me her troubles 35 and how hard it was to shop and to get her children to school and her man to work. You know, all these things that were so difficult. And she and I just got along handsomely. S. G.: So this was actually your first direct contact with experience in social work or interracial work. stone: Yes, it was just kind of a naturaJ. thing in Chicago. Nobody protected you, and I wouldn't have wanted to be. But by this time I think I had a little bit less than a provincial outlook on races and ethnic groups. I was assigned a good many Negro cases after that and I enjoyed them. Though rrry teacher saw to it that I had a variety, too, and people with different kinds of problems. Some of them were mental problems, medical problems, or broken families. h.S!.: Did you also do group work? Stone: Not in Chicago, because they didn't teach it at that time. In :f'a.ct no SChool of social work did until a year or so later. And then the first course was at western Reserve with Grace Coyle. Group work started there. Now Chicago--but late, in the last ten years--has group work. s. G.: Was any of your work itself in Chicago with children? Stone: Oh yes. I had to place some children when a family split apart. I remember one of the cases I was asked to write up for a book of readings. This was a family in which two sets of grandparents of the children were fighting with each other over their custody while there was a temporary separation--this is as I recall it. So I took the little ones to and fro between the grandparents until we got some settlement. They were darling little children. S. G.: Through Abbott and Breckinridge and Hull House and Jane Addams were you participating in any of the labor-- Stone: Movements. Except as all of us were. You see, we had pretty full loads. We went to meetings and we heard speakers and we knew about their programs. And I suppose if we had any money we would 36 have given it. But we just barely eked by on our scholarships and what we could manage for a room and to get our meals at various places. S. G.: What was your political perspective at this point? Had you identified yourself as a socialist at that point? Stone: No, I guess I hadn't. It was not until I went to Sca.ndinavian countries with Harry Laidler that I became a socialist in philosophy. I met Norman Thomas on that trip which Laidler conducted. The sponsoring organization was the League for Industrial Democracy, LID. I know I didn't join the Socialist Party. But I voted for Norman Thomas that year and I joined the LID. I have two of Laidler's books, The History of Socialist Thought and The Road Ahead. S. G.: But while you were at Chicago? Stone: No. We weren't very active politically. My cousins, the Manleys: who lived there, teased their grandmother, who was born in Georgia, I believe, or some deep South place. She insisted on staying a Democrat and they said "you can't belong to that horrible"--it wasn't Daly then but -whoever his predecessor was--"machine." The Republicans are much more honest, and so on. I don't recall voting. I probab1&#165; would have if I'd had legal residence because I was civic minded. But Chicago was a big city. The American Association of Social Workers was not organized at that time, but the National Conference of Social Work was. It was a successor to the Conference of Charities and Corrections. We did go to meetings. I'm sure *A building has been named for John Matthews Manley at the University of Chicago. (Olive Stone) 37 they discussed issues if not ca.ndidates. It was not unti~ Mary Van Kleeck' s period in the 1930's that I began being more active in those movements. I didn't join either the Socialist or the Communist Parties officially. But I cooperated with many groups that were worldng on common goals of civil liberties. That was later than this. In Chicago we were for the people and for causes that Jane Addams worked for and Breckenridge did. We just took for granted that this was a part of our philosophy, our code of life. It wouldn't have to be tested. I don't recall going through any conscious loss of southern provincialism-yes I do. I do recal~ that fellow classmates would occasionally bring out remarks when I'd give a term report to the effect that so-and-so shows a stereotyped southern view. I just hadn't realized it. And I corrected it. But I hadn't been aware. For example, in a course on corrections I had to make a talk on prisons in the South. And I did a lot of research on that. (Mother incidentally sent me some local primary data on jails.) In the course of giving the talk, I said "and in the jails and in the prisons the races are, of course, separated," One classmate said ''Wby?'' I hadn't thought about it, you know. Things like that. M:y teacher, Dr. Steiner was his name, nodded and said "Yes, that's taken for granted." From time to time there were little pricks like this that made me realize that I was just echoing the status quo belief, you know, without challenging it. So I have to go back to childhood and say that we did follow some traditional views, but we didn't stereotype people to the extent of having them lose their indi viduali ty. I think we were good and ldnd, but we didn't lower the barriers and help integrate programs. We tried to improve the blaCks' condition in our community; give them better schools and better 38 churches. And I remember I went one time with a group 'of youngsters when I was in early high school to risit a black church. They went to scoff and I was embarrassed and urged us to leave because I didn't think it was right to risi t as if it were an amusement place. Our family didn't do that. We just weren't that we, I guess. S. G.: The Chicago years were also a time during which you began to reexamine your own-- Stone: Taken for granted, traditional beliefs, yes. I thought I'd sloughed them off by going to New York and New England and Europe and all around. But you know, it takes a long time to get rid of a lot of "isms"--"sexism" now. People are not aware, many times. Women feed the chauvinist riewpoint by accepting the stereotype that others have of them. And racism. We've been reexamining it at UCLA repeatedly, as you know. There have been some occasions when the blacks have come swarming in and demanded. that something happen in the school that wasn't the social work way of doing it. But they had to be aggressive, I guess, to make people sit up and think of all the little subtle ways in which they got put down. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; I believe the most striking experience I had in race relations was at Swarthmore. It was early on. This was an interracial conference at the Quaker college, you know. S. G.: Would that be while you were dean at Huntingdon? Stone: No, innnedia tely afte!'Ward. S. G.: I wanted to ask you about the Kentucky study. Stone: I had, of course, a great experience, because you could ride horseback and do very venturesome things. S. G.:. How was the study organized? Stone: It was a Children's Bureau study. After the fall and winter 39 quarters following that first summer--I'd been. there three quarters--when Miss Breckinridge came and asked if I would go down and take a Children's Bureau e~tion because there was to be a study sponsored by the Bureau in Kentucky. She asked Bertha Hosmer and me to go and severaJ. other people, but we got the appointments. There was a full-time Children's Bureau staff member who was in charge of the study and one other experienced social worker. So there were four of us on the team. We spent three months in study. Ruth Bloodgood, who was the head of it, had dra'Wll up the schedule of questions to ask. She had gone to the head penitentiary, first, at the capital and then to the Bureau of Prisons and had selected 350 cases of life-time prisoners who had minor children, children under 16. S. G.: Both black and white? Stone: Yes, aJ.l types. I did see some blacks on the trip. But we divided the state up geographica~. Bertha was in the southwestern part, which has the highest mountains. I -was in the eastern section. We met, at the beginning of the whole project, in Lexington and at the end of each month in a different place. Once in Louisville and once in Berea College. The four of us. We I d have meetings to share our experiences, turn in our cards, and discuss what our findings were. And in all the places Miss Breckinridge had written ahead so that leading authorities could meet with us and some hospitality could be dispensed. Her brother Deshe BreckinridgeJfor example,sent his chauffeur to meet us when we arrived in Lexington, where he lived. Besides holding serious conferences with speciaJ. authorities and discussions of our work, we were sent out to see Man 0' War,&#183; whom I had never seen, to visit some of the great horse farms, and to see Henry Clay's* home and other historic sites. I later taught *Henry Clay's granddaughter -was Deshe Brec,k i.n ridge' s wife. 40 two summers at the university of Kentucky, so I loved coming back. S. G.: Were you located in one place in the east, or would you travel from spot to spot? Stone: I travelled from spot to spot. We had to learn to sign our transportation slips. Travel would be paid by the government. Had to be sent to Washington. My father thought it was fabulous, that here I was, still a student, and got $175 a month besides travel expenses and board and room or whatever the per diem was. So we had all that arranged through the government. It got me into trouble im;tead of good stead in bootlegging sections of the mountains because the word passed around that there's a woman here from WaShington, maybe a revenue officer, you know. ~.: How were you received? I imagine in rather suspicious territory anyhow. Stone: Well, I had to inquire around, of course, and I usual1;ymnaged to go to a boarding place, or so-called hotel. And in most places they were just frame buildings with thin walls. But I'm a good sleeper. We ate at long tables. I'd try to catch on to what the local points of view were. So you learned a lot about mountain life. It stood me in good stead with a rural study in Alabama and living in a Negro community, which I did on one of my anthropological studies considerab1;y- later in 1942. (The Negroes were suspicious and I had to tell them that I had worked with white farmers in the mountains.) The mountaineers didn't know what a person who was not a mountaineer was going to be like. They had to test me and find out they could trust me. S. G.: Were you going into f'air1;y- remote areas to locate these families? stone: Yes I was, very often doing so. One very striking case-- one or the most pathetic but heart appealing cases, a white family--was of a man who was a farmer, no, had been in the mines and the mines closed at the depression. This was in '25 and '26. From the depression or '21. And the miner went up to try to farm and he got in with some people running a still. They were visited by the revenue officers or the county sheriff and he got scared and fired, killing a deputy sheriff. So he, of course, had to go to prison for life. And left his wire and five children. The sons were 12, 13. And the three little girls, no, two girls, 8, 5 and the baby boy was 3 when I saw them. The mother and these five children did what they could, working in people's crops, you know, and getting enough food to eat, maybe. But finally the mines opened and she became a cook in the boarding house of a mining community but kept the children in the log cabin five miles away. She walked to and fro the five miles each day. It was the only way I could get there, too, by walking a footpath. At any rate, what had happened is that it had been several years since the father had gone to prison when first the oldest, then the second son lied about their age in order to work underground. The mother thought it would be all right. In turn they developed tuberculosis and the mother had two invalid boys there at home. An eight_year_old daughter was the little mother of the family during the absence or her mother, who had to leave them while they were still asleep, but had everything ready. I first talked with the mother and with her consent saw the children in the cabin. They put on new Sears Roebuck clothes for the snapshot. S. G.: How many families did you interview altogether? Stone: I think I had 100. You see, the director had a smaller number. -I'm not sure that she interviewed any. I kind of remember that I had over 100. And Bertha and Sybil Pease also had &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Ruth carried mainly administrative duties, such as making arrangements and analyzing the data. And she wrote the final report. One dramatic experience was in the remote mountains of a county called "Bloody Breathett" because of the feuds. MY" horse and I had to swim a river and follow vague directions through "gulleys" and rocky creek beds. To gain rrry orientation, I inquired at a small mining station , how to reach the home of "Good .eye" McGonery' s place. Now the nickname had been given this pioneer backwoodsman because of his quick temper and skills in sharpshooting. At a recent election held at his general store, a drunk had disturbed "Goodeye" while he was counting votes. When his quieter orders were ignored, Goodeye said, "If you keep that shooting up, you'll make me mad." The drunk did and Goodeye took careful aim, toppled him out the door, and went on counting votes. With this fresh report in mind, the mine employee asked if I were armed and if I were alone. When he got negative replies, he let out a low whistle and exclaillled, ''When you get back--IF you do--let me know because I want to make you superintendent of rrry sawmill!" S. G.: What happened when you finally got there? Stone: I slept in rrry jodphurs, I must confess. Actually, what happened is, he had one daughter left at home. His grown sons had moved out. We still sat at this long table because he had had a large family. His wife and he and the daughter and I. The daughter was as good a shot as her father and dressed in bluejeans. I told her where I wanted to go and she agreed to accompany me that night by moonlight. It was a very rocky path and I could never &#8226; . &#8226; my horse and I couldn't have made it up and down hill and stream without her. I interviewed the family that night in her presence and came back and slept at her house. Earlier the 43 host had bedded down my horse. It was a long trip for the horse to have to ride all day long. S. G.: Did you carry a compass? How did you find your way around? stone: No, I had to stop often to ask directions or try to find my way. And sometimes I found a drunk man on the road and I thought I had best just gently step around that with my horse and not wake him ~. I looked to see if he was harmed, was dying or anything, but I could see that he was just probably drunk. S. G.: Were you ever physically frightened in terms .&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Stone: No, not seriously. And never in my life until this very recent period when people mug you,have I ever had any physical fright. At home in Alabama we never locked our doors. Well, after Dad died Mother did for a while. The very loss of him made us feel we were all alone without protection in the house. But on that Kentucky trip, no. I didn't really. It was an adventure, you see. I always find a challenge in new experiences. At every community I had had some contacts, such as teachers or county officials who could advise on where to stay and where to get my horse for the next trip. I had had a pony or a horse all my life and had had lessons in riding in New England at a girls' camp, but in 1925. I ha.dn 't been riding in some li tt le time. At first I asked for a gentle horse and got an old nag. It just blistered me. So I didn't ask for any gentle horse after that. But one time I got really a race horse. It was a beautiful Kentucky thoroughbred. In and out of the mountains. When we got to an open meadow, without any warning he would shoot across there and I had to cling on until I could get into a stride. No, there was no real danger. At least I don 't think there was. The people outside of 44 Breathett County thought so. The mountain people treated me very kindly and were as nice as they could be. At some places, being from Washington _s an advantage. The very first time, when I got back to the boarding hOUBe, wondering how stiff I would be from that nag, I was sponging in a basin of hot water when a little girl knocked on the door. . "There are folks coming here tonight to see you," she said. "What? I don't know anyone." "Oh yes, they are coming." It seemed that they wanted to have a square dance. That would suit me fine and after I sponged I got over to the dance. They had a record-" Don't bring Lulu." I heard it a thoUBand times that night it seems to me. But there was a young man who had been out to the city and he wanted to show off his foxtrot or tango or some popular step. He had not had any partner before. So he came over and very gravely bowed and I danced with him. I said "Aren't you others going to dance?" "No, we want to watch." It was the first time I had ever put on exhibition dancing. But the :main thing is, it limbered me up and kept me from getting stiff from riding. So it was really good that the "lady from Washington" was there. S. G.: What was the upshot of the study? Stone: It was to recommend legislation. What we actually accomplished was legislation to reimburse the prisoners for their work in the prisons with a certain amount of it, a rather small amount, to be sent home to their families so the families wouldn't get the punishment. No one likes to be in prison, but prisoners at least had good, comfortable places to sleep and clothes and food. And the children didn't. So the Children's Bureau and Miss Breckinridge got that recognition through her contacts 111 the legislature and in the governor's mansion, I presume. S. G.: How long were you in Kentucky? 45 Stone: Just three months. [April, May and June of '"26] And then I went back to. Chicago where I started another study. The one with Savilla Millis on the mentally retarded who had gotten out into the communities from an institution. I was very much interested in that. But before that was over rIJy father died and I had to go home. So I had to ask permission to leave the study. Savilla found a substitute. I then didn't go back to Chicago until a year later. During 1926-27, while aSSisting Mother with the eoltate, I gathered documentary data on rIJy thesis at the State Archives, visited rural areas with the public health nurse, and gave talks in Dadeville and elsewhere in the State. h.Q.: --research for your thesis at that time? Stone: I had already started it. other courses and the thesis were completed during summers between the Montevallo years and before moving to Huntingdon. S. G.: So you were at l-',ontevallo for two years. Stone: Two years. '27-'28, '28-'29. And I went to Huntingdon in the fall of '29. I made talks allover Alabama at request of YWCA and other organizations. On topics like careers for girls. So I really did get started on a joint career of teaching and social work. It would never have occurred to any of us to sit around home and to be useless people. S. G.: You said before that the Chicago people told you about the l-',ontevallo program. Stone: Yes. You see, they were still in touch with me. I just said I wanted to take longer to help rIJy mother. It was during that year that, while helping her, I was interviewed for other posts. 46 I then wrote Dean Abbott that Mrs. Tunstall ha.d~-I assume at the suggestion of someone from the school--gotten in touch to see if I would help start this educational program at Montevallo. Dean Abbott was enthusiastic over the plan to train enough child welfare workers for Alabama's 67 counties. I trained 18 the first year, no the first quarter. Then I but didn't get/six or eight the second quarter. I got a still smaller group, but about as many as the state Child Welfare Department could recruit.* They were mainly teachers who wanted to switch from classroom teaching into social work in the community. ~. : In other words, you were actually offering a program in social work with teachers as the chief recruitees. stone: Oh yes, a full program. I believe we gave the first two quarters of post-graduate study and then the students were supposed to go out in the counties for two years and come back to get the rest in a Master's .degree. But most of them went on to Chicago or to Tulane or to New York or somewhere else and got their Yaster' s. We got a good crop of people, inspired in part by the Depression. S. G.: You stayed for two years in that training program. Stone: Two years with that training program but as an Assistant Professor at the College. S. G.: Were you doing your research during the time you were at Montevallo? Stone: Yes. I completed the poor relief research in the State Archives. S. G.: So Montevallo was really your return to the South and your commitment to .the South? *r also gave introductory courses to undergraduates. 47 stone: Yes, I think that would be &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; and to a side of the South that I had not seen before. I knew something about poverty through roy sister's illiteracy campaign and the country women whom I tried tohelp. But in the backwoods of Alabama near Montevallo I discovered a richJ.;v varied Alabama. through roy students arid direct3.&#165; when I used one of our T-model Fords to rise to an emergency during college vacations.
47
Women's rights.
Women sociologists.
Yes
MP3
Cassette
2

No
No

No
No
Unknown
Sound
Text
Interview with Olive M. Stone by Sherna Berger Gluck, 28 May 1975 G-0059-2, in the Southern Oral History Program Collection #4007, Southern Historical Collection, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Southern Oral History Program Interview Database
#4007, Southern Oral History Program, http://www.lib.unc.edu/mss/inv/s/Southern_Oral_History_Program_Collection.html
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Library. Southern Historical Collection.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
/dc/sohp/



http://dc.lib.unc.edu:80/cdm/ref/collection/sohp/id/11025
2016-05-05
2016-05-05
11025
11067.cpd
/sohp/image/11067.cpd


