ACQUELYN HALL: The first thing I wanted to ask you is just a little bit more about your mother and father. Your mother, you said, was a schoolteacher?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, she taught before I was born.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was her name, first of all?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Rachel Hull.  JACQUELYN HALL: Hull?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: H-u-l-l, Hull: Rachel Evelyn Hull.  JACQUELYN HALL: And where was she educated?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Here in Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: What school?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Howard High School. See, at that time you could finish high school anywhere in the state and go in as a teacher.  JACQUELYN HALL: And where had she been teaching before she married your father?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: She taught at a school called Free Hope, which is still standing; the little building is still standing. And then she taught in Jenkinsville. Free Hope is in Richland County, and the other school where she taught is in Jenkinsville, South Carolina. It's in a large Negro settlement where from freedom, from the Emancipation, the people owned their own property, and still do. One of the largest families anywhere in the nation is in that area, called the Martin family. They had their family reunion here last year, and I guess there must have been, oh I don't know, sixteen hundred of them. [Interruption]   JACQUELYN HALL: Where did she grow up?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: My mother was born and reared in Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: Right in Columbia?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Her homestead was about, oh, five blocks from here.  JACQUELYN HALL: What did her parents do?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, her mother was simply a housewife. She never worked out, as we say. Her father worked for (her father's name was George Hull) the old Railway Express Company, taking care of the horses. And my mother said that he had a remedy, or a cure rather, for lockjaw which was known to him. He must have learned it from some of his masters or something during slavery, but he never gave the secret to the children. But of course horses were very important in those days, because they pulled the ambulances and the carriages and the hacks for family transportation as well as public transportation. So they had all these horses to carry the express wagons. And he took care of them and of horses belonging in the town; if there were a case of lockjaw or if a horse stepped on a nail he knew the cure. They had one son, but somehow or other&#8230; I gathered this from their talking, that the son was &#8230; well, he was the youngest child, the only boy, I'll say. It seems like the mother had a number of children, but only four came to maturity. And this boy, being the only son they pampered him a lot. And he never cared much about being around his father, and I guess his father just thought that maybe after all he wouldn't guard the secret. And maybe he died before he gave him the secret. But they've never known what he did to cure lockjaw.  JACQUELYN HALL: Hmm. What was your grandmother's name, your mother's mother's name?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know. I never knew her name&#8212;at least, if I did I don't remember it. I heard only back to my mother's mother. Now my mother's mother's name was Sarah; and she was a slave. She came from Sumter County in this state. And I think I related in there about her leaving Sumter; I believe I did, I don't know.  JACQUELYN HALL: I think you did.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well anyway, she belonged to a family of Seals, S-e-a-l-s, that owned property in Sumter County. And my mother's mother was in some way or some degree of Turkish ancestry. There was and still is a settlement of Turks in Sumter County, in one section of Sumter County; they're still there. Some years back they wouldn't permit them to go into the white schools, and they would not attend the Negro schools. They tried to force them into the Negro schools; they wouldn't. Well, somehow or other my mother's mother branched off from those Turks. Her mother, she was a house slave and her mother was a quarter slave (that is, lived in the quarters, with what they might call the servant slaves). My mother's mother was very fair and I would judge (although I never saw a picture of her mother, which would be my great-grand-mother) that she was dark skinned. And on one occasion, I understood from my mother that her mother was very devoted to her mother, and after dark she would slip to the quarters to see her mother. There were some rules on some plantations that the house slaves should not associate with the slaves in the quarters. And her mistress found that she had slipped out of the house at night and had gone to the quarters to see her mother, and she had her thrashed or whipped the next morning. Had her whipped, and I understand she was undressed in the presence of some of the people on the plantation, like overseers and like that. And she was so indignified that she decided that she was going to run away from that area of Sumter County and come to Columbia, where her grandmother was. Her grandmother was in slavery (that'd be my great-great-grandmother), my great-great-grandmother on my mother's side was in slavery in Columbia. And she had heard that she was here, and she was going to run away from the slave plantation to get to her grandmother. And on the way into Columbia, my mother said, she saw people on the highway and she ran into the woods to hide. And whoever saw her called her and asked her why was she running and where she was going. And they were union soldiers. And they told her that she wouldn't have to hide, and that she could walk the highway like anybody else did because she was now free. So I conclude that the slaves had been freed already, but the masters of this plantation hadn't told them. I heard my mother say many times that her mother said they told her, "Get right in this road and stay in the highway, and go on to Columbia, because you are free as we are." Then I heard my mother tell how as she was a child, a young girl, that the old slave mistress who had then become poverty-stricken, would come to their home (which was right up here across the street from our governor's mansion). And she said that she had seen her mother give her food many a day when she'd come to their home. And then she'd say to her, "Sarah, I never thought I'd come to this, that you would be able to give me food and be kind to me no matter what I've done." I've heard my mother tell that many a time.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did Sarah feel that her mistress had been kinder to her than her master had been? Or why did she do this; why did she help her mistress? Why did she help her in that way?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh no, no; I never heard her say that she saw the master again. Evidently the old man died, and this old lady found her way to Columbia. And then she found where my grandmother was, and she'd come to see her. And evidently she was hungry and poverty-stricken.  JACQUELYN HALL: I'm wondering if she saw any difference between her master and her mistress in the way they treated the slaves?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I never heard that; I never heard that. But the master did the whipping, did the thrashing. I never got any impression that the master was any more sympathetic or kindly. But I did get the impression that old lady Seals was an old heifer, and that she just told him he had to whip her; and he did. And then she made up her mind she wasn't going to take another whipping, she was going to run away to Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you remember any other stories that your mother told about her mother?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, I don't remember any others. See, my mother's father's people came from Athens, Georgia. How they met up here together I don't know. You know, that's a funny thing about fate: people coming to the end of the world and meeting, and nobody knows why they did. But anyway, he was from Athens. And I've heard her tell how my father's mother was sold away from him in slavery. He was just a lad, and they sold her away. And she had&#8212;you know, the old ladies or the women in those days wore kerchiefs they tied their heads in, and sometimes they'd have one around their neck like a little cape. So we had for years (I don't know what became of it) in my mother's effects&#8212;that is, in our homestead&#8212;but I know that she kept for years this kerchief. When she was sold away from him and he was pleading and holding to her, she pulled off this kerchief and gave it to him as a memento. And then we had for the longest a pair of his little trousers that he was wearing around that time. Whatever slave caretaker, or whoever it was that took care of him, I mean, they had those: I do know that. Eventually he found his mother after freedom was declared, because she came to Columbia. And as I remember it she died here.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you know how he found her?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, I don't.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you know the name of the people who owned him?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, I don't. I do know that evidently when he got back to &#8230; I mean, when freedom was declared no matter where she was sold to she perhaps would come back to Athens. And when she came back to Athens perhaps he was still a lad just freed. I don't mean to say that she found him in Columbia. They evidently found each other after the Emancipation but before he came to Columbia; then she later came to Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did he remember anything about his father?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, never heard about him. They had a cousin by the name of Thena. I heard my mother speak often of Cousin Finia, and I've seen her picture: a very, very beautiful woman that was a very fine seamstress during slavery and even after freedom was declared. On the plantation where she lived she did all the beautiful sewing and embroidery work and all for them. But what her last name was I don't remember. I have known, but I don't remember.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did your father have brothers and sisters? 1 1 For father's family history, see Interview I   MODJESKA SIMKINS: My father?  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: My father had a brother by the name of Frank, and a sister by the name of Bessie. [Omission]  I do know that working along with him (I can't remember now just the position, but this man had something to do with building) was a Scotchman. He came from Paisley, Scotland, and he and my father were very good friends. And they worked together. He was in some kind of supervisory capacity, I guess maybe kind of like a general contractor on those buildings. But I heard him speak of him often. And for years when I was a kid coming up, after he had gone back to Paisley he would write; he would send us cards and letters. He was very devoted to my father. His name was Gabriel (the name comes to me now) McClay. So we always welcomed those cards from Gabriel with, you know, the stamps that weren't like our stamps and the buildings way over, way over across the world, because it's hard for a child now to imagine how wonderful it was to hear that somebody lived across the waters or around the world, or that somebody went around the world. Like my mother used to tell us about Madame Patty, who was a great singer. And then there was a very great singer, a black singer that called herself Black Patty. And I remember when my mother told me that Black Patty had gone all the way around the world; I just thought &#8230; my mind went wild. I just couldn't imagine how anybody could go that far, you know. It's hard for a child to imagine what wonder it was to hear that &#8230; you know, about the trips people made and, you know, these long sea-going voyages and things like that. Of course a number of them were before my childhood, but we heard about them. My mother read to us a lot, and we had to read a lot too.  JACQUELYN HALL: What kind of things did your mother read to you?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, she read current events and portions of the Bible, and children's literature. Of course we were provided by my&#8230; See, when my mother married she didn't teach anymore until her children were up a size; then she went back to teaching. But during that time I had an aunt who was teaching, another that taught a while (maybe until about the time she married.) She married just before my mother; she was the oldest child. And she was married to a physician, one of the first black physicians that came into South Carolina. She sent us books. He was practicing down in Georgetown (that's down on the coast). She sent us books. And this other aunt, my mother's younger sister, would send us books for Christmas&#8212;like, you know, children's stories of the Bible or fairy tales. They don't have fairy tales now like they used to, and I know some of the great wonder has gone out of children's lives, you know. I just reveled. And I read, you know, Hans Christen Anderson fairy tales, "The Little Match Girl" and things like that. The children nowadays don't get to read these things. Ordinarily, I think, they don't; they have another kind of literature. But still, they were sources of great wonder, especially for children who had at that time so little communication with the outside world&#8212;not with TV and radio as we have now, when you see around the world in just the twinkling of an eye. So she read to us. She made particular effort to acquaint us with things as they were, no matter how cruel or atrocious they might be. She read just about all the lynchings, and how these people were mutilated or treated during lynchings. In fact, we were in Huntsville, Alabama when they had a lynching there, and my father told us how one of the lynchers came in and showed him the finger of this Negro. My father was a fearless man. He came in and showed it to my father, as though to intimidate him, I guess. My father was noted for the backing of chimneys. You remember seeing that, perhaps, but there's a certain way if you have a fireplace that you lay the bricks in the chimney that makes sure that you're going to have a draft instead of smoke blowing out. And he was noted for that. Even in his late years here in Columbia it was well known that he just had a kind of special skill in backing chimneys. And so when they built these factories they'd have rows and rows of factory houses all looking just alike. You've seen some of them; they've passed out of existence right now. But then he would have to go and back the chimneys in every one of those factory houses. And he was backing a chimney one Saturday afternoon when this fellow came in and showed him this finger that was cut off this Negro. I guess they wanted to intimidate him as a Negro, you know, knowing that he was well thought of, I guess, by the construction company. But my father was a fearless man. He offered to fight them with his trowel and hammer. They didn't bother him anymore. I guess most of the Negroes in that area were kind of groveling creatures, you know. And the lynchers just "met a pharoah that knew not Joseph," as the Bible says. I didn't have any problem; they didn't try to intimidate him anymore. Now that was in Huntsville, Alabama. My oldest brother was born in Huntsville while we were there, while my father was there working.  JACQUELYN HALL: Are there any differences between your mother and your father? How did they get along with each other?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Fine. They had maybe little tiffs like the average family will have. My father never wanted her to whip us, so most of the things would come up about that. And then my father was a very soft-hearted man. I am like that myself; I just can hardly turn away a person that appears to be in trouble or in need. So my father was like that. And then my father was a very soft-hearted man. I am like that myself; I just can hardly turn away a person that appears to be in trouble or in need. So my father was like that. And although he had an income above average for that time he would sometimes help a fellow, and my mother would say, "Oh that no-good, you're helping him and you need it for your children." And she used to tell me sometimes, "You're going to be just like your daddy; you 're going to die in the poorhouse. You give this and you give that, and you can't turn anybody down." And I'm still the same way&#8212;I think about it all the time&#8212;I'm very soft when it comes to need or apparent need. So most of the differences that I remember were concerning that: his soft-heartedness, the ease with which he could be &#8230; some-times taken in, I would say. Well, she was the strong hand when it came to maintaining financial stability. Now he didn't throw away any money like some men might on drink or gambling or something like that. His only weakness was that he was soft-hearted toward any person in apparent need. And of course she always felt that she had to hold that tight hand on what she had. And when he came home, I've seen him many a time come and throw that pay envelope right in her lap. She didn't demand it, but that's what he'd do. He'd come home: "Well, here it is, Rachel." He'd buy the groceries and come home with a sack of groceries on his back. And you could take two dollars then and buy enough groceries almost to have enough for a mule to pull. He'd have this bag across his back when he'd walk from the carline down to our house, about a mile and a quarter. And what he had left from the groceries, then the bag of candy he bought every Saturday for the children. "Here it is, Rachel;" he'd give her the whole envelope. Well, she was the financier of the family.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was she also the disciplinarian of the children?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, for the most part she took care of that. I guess that came about in large measure because when we first were coming up&#8230; You see, before time for me to start school they did mostly this traveling. Then when it was time for me to be put in school, then they settled down in our homestead that we'd had all the time. So then my father would go different places and work, maybe two or three months at a time, or three or four weeks or whatever it was. Sometimes he would go in a group and work a while and maybe come back weekends or like that. So at that time she had us to herself. And she believed in using a switch. And sometimes he would say, "Oh Rachel, let the children alone; they're not as bad as you say they are." And I've seen on two or three occasions that he'd try to stop the whipping. She would just turn the child loose and give him three or four whacks [laughter]. And she said, "I don't know how long I'm going to live  with these children, but I know if I don't straighten them out somebody will." Now we weren't that bad, but she didn't let us get an inch. She said, "If I give you an inch you'll take an L." Whatever that is, that's what she always said.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were your parents very strict with you?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I would say they were positive. Now, not strict in the sense that sometimes people think, that they've had a hard, fast rules that you were used to doing this. I've heard my mother say sometimes if you dared&#8230; Of course back then children didn't hardly ask their mothers why, you know. Your mother or father'd say thus and so, that was it; that was the law of the Medes and the Persians. But sometimes there was an occasion when she'd say, "Now listen, you do this because I said to." Sometimes you'd get to that point. Now strictly from the standpoint of being almost what you might say cruel in trying to see that something would be done, it was more being just positive. And you understood that evidently when they said that they'd thought it through.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were there any conflicts as you were all growing up around discipline, or your wanting to do things that your parents wouldn't let you do?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't remember any. There might have been. You see, there weren't the tugs on children in those days that there are now, because parents didn't mind other people correcting their children&#8212;maybe you've heard oldsters in your family say that. And I knew that&#8212;well, I just didn't misbehave at school, because I knew if I misbehaved at school (although we didn't have corporal punishment at our school), I knew when I got home if they heard that I misbehaved I was going to get corporal punishment at home, you see. And then I knew that if someone told my mother (I wanted to say call my mother, but we had no telephone) that I misbehaved, that was just like she'd seen it herself. I know my Daddy was working in Spartanburg, and I was doing something some old woman thought I shouldn't have done. I've never forgotten that. I was up the street some houses from where I lived (I was just a little kid, must have been about four or four and a half, maybe, something like that&#8212;not more than five years old). And she grabbed me by my little&#8212;children were wearing aprons then, little tie-around things. And she grabbed me back there and tore me up with a brush, a hairbrush, then turned me loose. And I flew home. And when I got home and my mother found out I had misbehaved she gave me another spanking with a hairbrush. So I knew that anywhere I happened to be, if I misbehaved somebody had their eyes on me, you know. [Omission]   JACQUELYN HALL: Did you just raise food for your own use, or did you raise cotton or anything else?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: We raised cotton eventually, not maybe more than five or six bales because we had the farm largely where we could be occupied. And we raised all our foodstuffs except perhaps rice and sugar&#8212;or coffee, but we didn't bother with coffee much. And we made our own molasses, white potatoes, sweet potatoes, peanuts, vegetables for canning. My mother would corn beef and kill pork. You know, we had smokehouse arrangements; we had our own well. So we were self-sustaining. And in addition to that my father made enough money to supply other needs. We had our cows and butter.  JACQUELYN HALL: You had cows?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh yes, we had cows and pigs and chickens and turkeys.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you run the farm when your mother started back teaching?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, we had the people that came in and help, the hired hands. We had hired hands for plowing until my brothers got old enough. There were families near us that had large boys that did the plowing. Now the whole cultivation for the most part was done by the girls, and the boys when they weren't plowing, like chopping the cotton or hoeing the cotton or working in the gardens.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were you closer to your mother or your father?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't see any difference.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you see one of them as having more influence on you, or that you would be more like one of them in some way?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I think I'm more like my father, only in the way that I expressed a while ago, that I've very tender-hearted, so to speak. My mother was very kind too, but she wasn't &#8230; as loose with money in that kindness, you know. Now she would work all day in the fields with us for long hours, and if there was someone sick in the community she would say, "Now we've got to go and see Mrs. so-and-so tonight. She is sick, and we'll have to go see what we can do for her." And she would prepare things for them and show them how&#8230; When we moved into that area, of course, at that time the people were primitive. There was a lot of pellagra and infant mortality&#8212;I mean, maternal and infant mortality rates were high. They didn't know much about, didn't know anything about nutrition; they ate cornbread and fatback and black molasses. And cotton was king: the men that owned the cotton farms planted the cotton right up the back doors. They had no ground to raise a garden if they wanted one. So most of them didn't like vegetables, and a lot of them don't care about them today. But it was a long time before a lot of country people started eating vegetables. They ate meat, and many of them were existing on salt and water cornbread and fatback and molasses. And on Sunday they'd have a little something extra. They'd have a little something extra to take to church in a basket or something like that.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were you probably much better off than most of your neighbors and the people you went to church with?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, always we were. And I think that our moving into that&#8212;in fact, I know our moving into that community, we were the leavening influence. We had to go to Sunday school, and we could read and most of the little children and their parents couldn't. They were going to school three months, and we were going to paid schools over at Benedict College. And we were able to make our little talks and read and do a lot of things that inspired the children of the area. [Omission]   [END OF TAPE 1, SIDE A]  [TAPE 1, SIDE B] [START OF TAPE 1, SIDE B]  MODJESKA SIMKINS: So they were at the mercy of the power structure where we were not. My father was able to send us to&#8230; See, living in the country we couldn't go to the city schools like the city children because we were living in the rural area. So we went to where we had started, where I had started school before moving to the country which was Benedict College, which at that time had the classes from the primer on up through college. So that's where I went to school from the first day I went to school until I finished college, there at Benedict.  JACQUELYN HALL: Where is Benedict?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Right here in town, just a half a block away from where I work every day. The older children started at Benedict. Later a brother and two sisters who started in the neighborhood rural school entered city schools when they were improved.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you get into school from the country?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: What school?  JACQUELYN HALL: Benedict.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: We had a horse and carriage, and then in later years usually we walked. It was just about five miles, and we walked it. And then we had streetcars available; we used streetcars too, and we were about a mile from the streetcar line. So we used those three modes of travel.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was Benedict like as a school? What were the teachers or the quality of education like?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, the school offered a very, very fine type of education. You see, Benedict was founded by northerners, what were called Yankees, for the benefit of the freedmen, the children of the slaves. And many of the people that came in were great scholars; in fact most of them were. And we had the very finest of training and example. [Omission]   JACQUELYN HALL: Were the teachers mostly unmarried white women at Benedict? Were the teachers mostly white?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Some of them were couples, married couples, and some of them were widows and some were unmarried. People came down with missionary zeal, and all of them were highly religious. We had to study the Bible every day just like we studied everything else, and we got credits in Bible just like we did in arithmetic or geometry or whatever. And we had to attend chapel every day. It was obligatory that we go to chapel where they had devotional services and often some of the very finest speakers of the period. Today students attend chapel if they want to, and some of them never do. But the college saw that we were exposed to the finest minds that came through and that they could get their hands on. And we had a very good library, and we were supposed to use the library. We each had to own a Bible and take it with us to school, so that each had his Bible when they were ready to hold devotionals&#8212;I'm talking about chapel devotionals. There was a prayer meeting every Wednesday evening. And in the dormitories (I don't know about the boys' dormitory; I think it was true in the boys' dormitory), but in the girls' dormitory there were study hours about from seven to nine. There was an area in the dormitories that had&#8230; Well, in the one that I lived in a while, just knew about and in the case of bad weather sometimes we had to stay over, they had just like a long classroom with regular schoolroom desks. And you went to a study period from about seven to nine. Of course you could study other times in your room or go to the library, but it was obligatory that you go to that study hall; they called that going to study hour. And you didn't have any more wasted time or pussyfooting in there than you had in the classroom. Then they demanded that you &#8230; get your lessons, so to speak. There wasn't "you didn't do that well today; you'll do it tomorrow. You bring it back tomorrow." There wasn't anything like that. You did it today. And they told us that anything that was worth doing was worth doing well. And of course as far as my mother's children were concerned, we didn't have study hall. When we got through with our chores, our supper and our chores we had to get our books and sit around in the room where she was around the fire, where my father was if my father was at home. And we had to get our lessons, so we had study hall too [laughter]   JACQUELYN HALL: Were there any black teachers in the school?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. Most of them were white, but as some of them were trained and came to graduation&#8230; I remember one Miss Cecilia Gary who's still living in Chicago: quite elderly, taught Latin for years. She eventually married a man by the name of Mr. McWhorter and she moved to Chicago. There was a Miss Lula Johnson; there was a Miss Alberta Boykin who is still living (she's living in Chicago too). She was one. In a few more years there were two or three others. But in the beginning &#8230; well, there was one that taught mathmatics, a Professor Pegues who taught mathmatics. But for the most part they were white, because they had to be; there weren't enough Negroes trained up to that far for college work at that early time. See, that was just thirty-five to fifty years after slavery. And when they started off they started off mostly training for teachers and preachers. That's what Benedict's, I think its charter or it's plan called for, preparation of ministers and teachers. And of course when they started it took a good while for them, for the slaves to become financially able and keenly conscious of the need of education&#8212;that is as a whole&#8212;to get them into the spirit of sending their children to college. Then many of them even sent their children empty-handed since they had little or nothing, but they wanted them to learn. And they'd just come in wagons and bring them, maybe with one or two pieces of clothing and some potatoes or something like that. But at that time the school took them in. They didn't turn back any children because they didn't have money. They took them in, and the buildings and grounds were kept up by these people helping to pay their schooling. Few families were financially able to pay fully for their children. Even so, all students were given tasks to help up-keep buildings and grounds. Well, now they get maintenance crews to keep the school, and these school cats walk all around and do nothing but hang around and smoke marijuana or do whatever they want to do. They didn't turn back anybody. Some of them were grown when they came to school, and they'd go into a third grade level. But they'd keep working with them and giving them remedial lessons until they'd catch up or something with their age and their classes. So I've gone to grade school with many a grown person old enough almost to be my parent, because they just came out to school from the country in the rough, you know. But they wanted to learn, just like when you read Up From Slavery. That Booker Washington just went. Man, they just came, but they were never turned down. Never!  JACQUELYN HALL: And you got no feeling of paternalism or racism at all from your teachers?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, I didn't see any. I don't remember any earmarks of racism, none. You might call it paternalism if there was extreme interest in their well-being, which I don't think would have been paternalism as we know it today. You see, I've known some whites that have found themselves working with us in the interracial field that showed stronger earmarks of paternalism, that talk about "what we want to do for the Negroes," you know, and that type of thing. But these people served as a Christian duty. They were dedicated to this, almost as a Christian missionary going to the foreign field. Now I know a lot of them have become mercinaries in the power structure, as you perhaps know; many of them that we thought in the beginning were missionaries of burning zeal were tools of the power structure of imperialism, we know that. But there was nothing like that in these people here, because most of them worked for nothing. They came down and they had housing and they had food. And many of them perhaps were people, especially the widows were women whose husbands had left them with some substance. But I know many of them worked for nothing, because they had other means of income. They didn't have Social Security or stuff like that, but very likely they had husbands who had retired with pretty good income and left them income. Some of them were paid eventually, and maybe in the beginning some of them got some type of payment. But, I mean, it was more&#8230; My impression through the years was that they really wanted to serve a purpose in the lives of people who had been so &#8230; thoroughly disregarded.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were any of the teachers at Benedict&#8230; ? How did they respond after World War I and even more after World War II when blacks started trying to take action in behalf of their own lives and so on? Were Benedict teachers supportive of this?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I finished Benedict in 1921. I think by the time that was coming in that a good many of the whites that I am talking about had died out, had either died or were old enough to have retired. There were very few of them there. The only ones that I know very much about were working here at Benedict and at Allen University in the fifties. And they entered into the civil rights movement, and they were thoroughly persecuted by the State. And some of the black teachers kind of bypassed them through fear of being red-smeared, because the only tool with which the political power structure fought them, the political education in the power structure, was to red-smear them. And the average person, whether he's black or white, particularly black, doesn't want to be called a red, you see. That's the way they tried to destroy me, just calling me a Communist fellow traveler and all that stuff. But I didn't pay any attention because I beheld earlier that if some of the things that they claimed the Communists were advocating were some of the things that I believed in, and if that meant being a Communist I'd just have to be one. I never was a card-carrying Communist; in fact, I never have been anything but what I am today. But of course that was their way of trying to quiet people, you know. That was an awful fight here around the late fifties, when Allen and Benedict were censured by the AAVP . And that's another fight that's too long to talk about now.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did any of your teachers have any special influence on you?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't think so. I think I loved them all. I don't think of any. I guess I liked them because they were thorough, because my mother had taught us to be thorough. I don't think that there was any &#8230; I can't think of any that I was more greatly impressed with than another.  JACQUELYN HALL: You graduated, then, in 1921?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: And started teaching.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Right away?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. I taught at Benedict one year; then I went into the city schools.  JACQUELYN HALL: To Booker T. Washington?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: I see. What was that experience like in teaching? What were quality of education and the teaching conditions like?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: At Booker?  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, Booker, the city schools in Columbia have always been described as being perhaps the most outstanding in South Carolina. The system has always been well recognized and highly touted. So I couldn't have taught in a better-regulated system&#8212;&#8212;I don't mean that there weren't better ones, but I mean so far as South Carolina was concerned. And they had good schools and outstanding principals.  JACQUELYN HALL: Who was the principal when you were there?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Cornell Johnson, Cornell A. Johnson. We had a superintendent that was a very fine man, one Dr. Hand, that was very much, in a way, like some of the teachers that I had at Benedict. He was straight-shooting and thorough and respected people for what they were and what they could produce. And so I would say that sofar as being a schoolman, he was a big inspiration, because I never saw any earmark of racism in him, although I don't know where Hand came from. But I do know he was superintendent of schools here, and I do know that during his tenure he tried to do the best he could for all the schools so far as he could with what he had and with what the structure would let him do. And his death was a great loss. I remember him very kindly.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you happen to become a math teacher? That was your father's influence perhaps?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know. I always liked mathematics anyway. And when I went into the schools they didn't have an opening for that. I think one year I taught in the elementary school, around the sixth grade I guess it was. But as soon as they could they put me in a mathematics position. I always liked that; I liked mathematics and I liked medieval history. One of the subjects I taught at Benedict was medieval history. And they tried to get me to teach South Carolina history while I was in the grade thing down there, but I didn't want to&#8212;in fact, I refused to use the textbook. 2 2 The text was Some History of South Carolina. I didn't want to teach it because I didn't have any respect for  it then, and don't have now. But anyway, I taught ancient and medieval history at Benedict. But I was looking for a position in mathematics, and I soon was moved into that.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did you know Wil Lou Gray?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh yes, I've known her for years.  JACQUELYN HALL: What did you think of her adult literacy program and of her as a person?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I think Miss Wil Lou Gray was a product of her time. I've never forgiven her for calling her school the Opportunity School and opening it only to whites. I came near clashing with her on one occasion. And I have nothing against her. I think she has done a good work as she saw it. As I said, a person can be the product of his time and his environment, you know. And so she was moving along those guidelines. And Miss Wil Lou opened night schools &#8230; was instrumental in opening a night school at my mother's school, and they had night sessions there for several years. And she saw that they had materials; but so far as the Opportunity School was concerned &#8230; it seemed to me that she should have felt that black youth needed opportunity as well as white youth. And I've never forgiven her for not being able to see that.  JACQUELYN HALL: When did the Opportunity School open?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know. You'll have to look in the Manual to find out. I don't know. All of those things, those dates are listed in the Legislative Manual.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did you try to do anything about that at the time, or have any clashes with her at the time?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no I didn't. Once when she was kind of&#8230; We were in some meeting where a friend of mine was, and Miss Will Lou was doing a whole lot of talking or heaping accolades upon herself and what she had done. And I leaned over to a friend of mine and said, "I ought to get this old sister right now, because she doesn't need all that praise, because she couldn't see that opportunity was needed by all the youth in South Carolina." And she said, "Let her alone. Don't bother her." She said, "Poor soul, she might have been doing the best she could with the vision she had. Just don't bother her"&#8212;because she knew that I'd run roughshod, you know. And so she asked me please [laughter] not to bother Miss Wil Lou. That was. Alice Spearman, Alice  Wright, Alice Norwood Spearman Wright. She said, "Please don't get involved with Miss Wil Lou tonight, because you know what you're going to do. You're going to turn the meeting out." [laughter]   JACQUELYN HALL: When did you first get involved in, when did you first join the NAACP? I know your mother enrolled you in the Niagara movement when you were a child.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, you see, my mother at night when she used to read me all those old magazines about how they treated the gold diggers in the African Congo and all like that, the gold miners in Africa and different atrocities particularly on the African continent, I learned about those before I ever started to school. She'd show me the pictures, you know, as I told you before. The NAACP's first chapter was organized here, I think, about 1916. But now I guess it was maybe in the early twenties that I became really active, because prior to that I was busy in school and out in the country, not coming into town very much except to come to school and go back. But now I imagine it was in the early twenties; but the branch was founded somewheres around '16 or '17.  JACQUELYN HALL: When you got involved in the NAACP, did you sense any kind of generation conflict or generation gap between the people of your age, the younger members of the organization, and the older&#8230; ?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, all of them were old folks.  JACQUELYN HALL: They were all old?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. They didn't have any youth chapters as they have now. They were all older folks. And, of course, I guess I was perhaps the youngest of the group, because I would go with my mother. My sister who passed in 1926 and I were about the youngest that were going. Of course, you see, being the oldest child in the family and being around grown people most of the time I was just kind of &#8230; more adult in my thinking, I guess. So I think a lot of the oldsters that were in the group didn't think of me as the youngster so much as somebody, a young person with exceptional back-ground that could&#8212;you know, reading and knowing all these things. And they would listen about it; it was more of a deference than there was a difference. That's the way I see it. But I never sensed anything like that.  JACQUELYN HALL: As the oldest child, did you have any special role in the family? What kind of relationship did you have with your brothers and sisters?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: They were supposed to listen to me just as they would to my mother. My mother had the idea that somehow or other her health wasn't so good. I didn't know as much about babies and having babies as children know now as an everyday thing. But it was during her childbearing period that she wasn't very well&#8212;I guess just conditions incidental to childbearing. And she had the idea that she might not live until her children grew up, and she'd always have them obey me in various situations. She'd say, "Now I don't know whether I'll be with you all the time. You've got to listen to somebody." And they listen to me even until this day.  JACQUELYN HALL: That must have made you grow up very fast.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, in a way. By my father being out of town and my mother bearing children, sometimes I'd have to get in the road and get to the carline, and come downtown and look after whatever little business there was to look after. I learned early how to take care of some little family business, and go down and carry messages to my aunt that lived far on the other end of town. While we lived beyond the other end of town and out in the country, I knew how to get the streetcar and go down to their place, or purchase certain things, or maybe pay&#8230; I don't remember any bills we had to pay, except sometimes we had a furniture bill. If there were farm implements my father took care of such payments as that. But there may have been furniture bills. The only thing I can remember bills maybe where we bought some furniture, especially after our home was destroyed by fire. And I can remember having to do that, because my father never allowed us to run charge accounts. I don't run them today. We never, we never ran charge accounts, so it wasn't that type of thing&#8212;although we could have. You know, like people used to get groceries and pay for them at a certain time and all like that, but we never had that. I can remember my mother saying on one occasion (as she said on other occasions), "Now this is all we owe the man now. This is the last I have to pay, so you tell him to mark on that &#8216;Paid In Full&#8217;. And you see that he puts &#8216;Paid In Full&#8217; on that when he gives you that receipt. And," she said, "always when you have a bill, when you pay the last of it you have him mark on it &#8216;Paid In Full.&#8217; And then if you've lost some of the other receipts you'll have that one." See, they didn't have checking accounts, so they just paid. And now I've known children over there that have said to me, "I paid all this"&#8212;happened at Allen's several years. "I know I paid all my bill. They told me I paid up. When I got ready to graduate they told me I owed some more money." I said, "Well, if they told you it's paid off, why didn't you get it &#8216;Paid In Full&#8217;? That's what my Ma always taught me, you know." I've never forgotten that.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did your mother have her babies at home?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: With a midwife or with a doctor?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, midwife.  JACQUELYN HALL: With a midwife?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Somebody that lived around there?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you remember that? What did you kids do when your mother&#8230;  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I remember it. They always sent us to a friend's home.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did you know what was going on?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, didn't know anything about it.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you learn about the birthing of babies?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know, but I was grown enough to be a mother myself before I knew [laughter].   JACQUELYN HALL: Really? [laughter]   MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, they kept us close to cloistered on that type of thing.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were your brothers treated any differently than the girls?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know that they were. All of us had to work, and had to go to bed when we got through working. As I told somebody the other day, I told them about vacation. I said, "My mother and father didn't know how to spell vacation." I said, "God made the world so you tear your body down working in the day; you recreate it resting at night." I said, "But your trouble is you work in the day and then you raise the devil half the night and sleep about four hours. Then the next day you can't half work." See, a lot of people don't realize that. If we treat our bodies like the Lord intended us to treat them we wouldn't need vacations. I'm tired today when I get through work; I take my bath and go to bed, and my body recreates itself overnight. Then next morning I'm fresh to go, unless I cut it one way or the other.  JACQUELYN HALL: Tell me the names of your brothers and sisters and when they were born, if you remember.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh, I don't know when all of them were born.  JACQUELYN HALL: You don't know when they were born?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know when all of them were born. I had a sister that died in infancy. Her name was Sarah Clyde. She died when she was about fourteen months old. And then I had a sister that came to maturity and died in 1926. She was teaching in the Columbia city schools when she died. She had a ruptured appendix and peritonitis. That sister's name was Rovena Lucile. Then my brother who is a practicing physician and a surgeon here was the fourth child. Then I have a brother named Frank and a younger sister named Emma Watson Wheeler.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was his name?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: His name was Henry Dobbins; he was named Dobbins after my grandfather and great-grandfather.  JACQUELYN HALL: Now is he the brother that integrated the university?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No.  JACQUELYN HALL: Didn't one of your brothers?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, that was a sister. Then my brother's name is Henry Dobbins. Then I have another brother whose name is Frank Hull; he carries my mother's maiden name, Frank Hull. Then my next brother's name was Charles Walton; he has passed. And then I had a sister Rebecca, Rachel Rebecca, who integrated the University of South Carolina. Now she was married to a Mr. Roberts, and by that union there were two children. She divorced him and legally applied to take back her maiden name and to change the children's names into the family name. So they go by Montieth. [Omission]   JACQUELYN HALL: I thought that I read that one of the first three black students in the university was a Henri Montieth.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, that's my sister's child.  JACQUELYN HALL: I see, I see.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: She's named Henri. They called it Henri, the French for Henry. She's really named for my brother.  JACQUELYN HALL: I see. So she brought the suit.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: My sister Rebecca brought it in the name of her daughter Henri.  JACQUELYN HALL: Oh, Henri is a girl.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: I see, I see.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you meet your husband? [Andrew Simkins]  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh, he was here in Columbia in business, and I just ran into him, that's all  JACQUELYN HALL: What did he do?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: He was a businessman: a filling station and state liquor store, and in real estate. He did a lot of business in real estate.  JACQUELYN HALL: He had been a wheelwright before this in Columbia?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No. He taught wheelwrighting at South Carolina State College in the time, you know, when they were having buggies and carriages and wagons and all like that, farm implements. But he taught that there. He was also a very good carpenter. He laid all these floors in this house.  JACQUELYN HALL: He built this house?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no. Lord, this house was built before he was born. No, he laid the floors after we came here. These floors were worn and he laid these. This house has a double floor. And then when he left South Carolina State College he worked in insurance awhile with the North Carolina Mutual. And then he went into business here in Columbia. And that's where I met him, after he came to Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: How long did you know each other before you were married?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Hmm. Oh, I guess about six or nine months, something like that.  JACQUELYN HALL: And he had six children?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Five.  JACQUELYN HALL: He had five children?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was it like, suddenly finding yourself the mother of five children?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, it wasn't&#8230; Well, three of the children were living with a relative down in Dorchester County, one of them was with one of his sisters and one with a sister of his mother. So it didn't seem&#8230; We didn't have the three younger children with us for quite a while. And then when they did come the lady that had kept them for several years came with them; so she was &#8230; a second cousin in this way, that she was the child of the oldest sister of a family of ten or eleven children. And these children's mother was the child of the baby of those children. So these little children were very much &#8230; she was almost like a grandmother to them, you see. So she had virtual oversight of them, because I was out working with the TB Association at that time. She had virtual over-sight of them. And then I had a housekeeper too, because I was on the road all the time. I had a very good housekeeper that was with me about sixteen years. So that really after all there wasn't a whole lot that I had to do from the standpoint of actual care, because with the younger ones this elderly cousin was just about like a mother or a grandmother to them&#8212;and she was almost like a mother to me, in a way. And then by that time the two older boys were getting on into college age, so that so far as being bumfuzzled by having a bunch of children to be responsible for all at one time, it wasn't that. And then I didn't have to do (before I got this housekeeper) the laundry or anything like that because when I first married my husband said, "Now, whoever is taking care of your laundry now, if you can keep them you keep them on and let them do that." I never ironed a dress shirt for my husband in my life; all that just channeled after we got this housekeeper into there. And she took care of everything: took care of the home and my clothing and everything, the family, you know, laundry and all like that. And my clothing when I came off the road was ready for me to go back on another trip and like that. So I never did really have the burden of housekeeping, and still don't know how to do much of it, because when I was in the country I would stay in the field rather than work in the house. So it wasn't the problem that it might seem to be.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was your husband a good bit older than you?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Sixteen years.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did you happen to marry an older man?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, how do people happen to marry? They just happen to marry! I don't know why it happened, I just happened to marry, that's all [laughter] . That's the only way I can explain it. It didn't seem to present  any problem. It was just that I married somebody.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was he involved in the kinds of civic activity?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: He wasn't that much interested. He would give, but so far as being involved in the way that I was and to the extent that I was&#8230; He wanted to see changes, and every now and then he'd write a letter. He said, "I want you to write a letter about something I read in the paper this morning," or something like that. "Write a letter to the paper about that." And he would say some things he'd like said in the letter, and he would give to efforts. But now so far as getting out and going on the grind like I did, he didn't do it. Of course, not many people do, as far as that goes. And there are many people in this town that ought to be on a grind for this thing all the time, but you don't hear a thing out of them 'til something happens to them or some of their children. Then here they come wondering if you can't do something. They say, "You know all these people; you're always working with them," and all that type of thing. That's when you hear from them, when they get their tails caught in a crack. But he liked social life; I never did, but he did. So he went to all the parties. He liked to play whist and poker; he came from a large family that were very skillful in cards&#8212;&#8212;their father taught them that. He was a great card player. So he liked those things. He would go to card parties and receptions and things. All those things were boring to me. So it was just understood by our friends that "You see him here, but she just doesn't care for it much." You know, like you might see a husband somewhere and not a wife, you say, "There must be something wrong with them. They must be mad." But my friends understand even today there's no need to invite me to certain things because I wouldn't be there. I just don't care for them, and I don't feel like being bored to give somebody the pleasure of my company.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did he mind your being on the road all the time and so involved in everything?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no, he didn't mind at all. And he was a man that loved company. Very often I'd come home and find people put up here because there wasn't anyplace for Negroes to stay here (you know, like they have now motels and all). And they'd come in. All he had to do it to know that they knew me. I've come home many a time and this guest room and maybe the back one there (that extra room back there) would have people. And he'd say, "Some people came up to the house. They said they knew you and had heard about you, and they worked with you in the Christmas Seal campaign." I said, "Well, that's all right, that's all right." And we'd have a nice time with the company. But he loved company. And that was one of the things that I liked about him more than anything else, that he loved company. And anybody that he knew had been kind to me on the road, he felt like he was indebted to them, because even in those days a lot of people would be kind to you, house you, give you food. And they wouldn't charge you, because they knew that there was nothing else, there was nowhere else to stay. And they felt that you were performing a function that was needed by the people. The pay at some places most times didn't pay at all. And then they'd give you something when you were leaving, like some smoked bacon or some eggs, or some collards, or something or another &#8230; "So glad you stopped at my house. Come back again." See, a lot of them &#8230; then, tv's hadn't come into style, and I was on the road. Well, they were just glad to see somebody from &#8216;way&#8217; cross over yonder somewhere.  JACQUELYN HALL: You had to quit teaching when you got married.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, the Columbia city schools didn't hire any married teachers. So, when you married, if it was in the middle of the school year, you got out.  JACQUELYN HALL: What did you think about that?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I didn't think anything of it. I just accepted that that was their rule, and that was what I had to go by, just like anybody else did. I never bother about something supposed to be laid down. My students were very much upset when I left. But that didn't make any difference. I don't think the superintendent would have cared if I had been kept on. I think the principal might have been glad because I was one he just couldn't handle. He couldn't make me buckle down. I don't mean to do anything bad, but I was one that would stand up and express myself at faculty meetings and things like that. I think if he had wanted to, really, he could have asked the superintendent to make a special case of it, you know. But I think, by George, I've been a lot of places where they wished I would hurry and get out. So that was just one [laughter] . I've been many a place where it felt like, when I was going  out, maybe in a little while I'd feel a knife sticking in my back, you know.  JACQUELYN HALL: That was in 1929, is that right?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: And then you went to work for the TB Association?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. I didn't go to work for them, oh, for about two years. Oh, I don't know, about two years: '31, I guess it was. '31 or '32; I've forgotten which.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was that job like?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, they were looking for somebody to do health education instruction in the schools, teaching health instruction to teachers. The TB Association was entering into a public health instruction&#8212;school health instruction, I should say&#8212;and we were to put on a state-wide program of that. They were looking for somebody that had the type of educational background like I had. Somebody recommended me; I don't know who. I finally took the job. They sent me away to school. I went up to Ypsilanti and took some courses at the University of Michigan at Ypsilanti. A few years later, they sent me up to the University of Michigan &#8230; that school is noted for its work in public health, as you know perhaps. Then, a part of my work was to promote the sale of Christmas seals to help pay for the tuberculosis program.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did they get any money from the state, or was it all from&#8230;  MODJESKA SIMKINS: It was private. The money came from Christmas seals.  JACQUELYN HALL: Who ran the Tuberculosis Association?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: It was run by the South Carolina Tuberculosis Association, which was a private &#8230;  JACQUELYN HALL: Was there a board?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, it had a board.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was it mostly women or men?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, about equal, I guess.  JACQUELYN HALL: And they had what, a colored division?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, they had what they called a Negro program.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were there any blacks on the board?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, not on the board. This Negro group was kind of an advisory group. For instance, when they had the annual meetings, they'd hardly have a Negro there. If they did, they'd put him a way over in the corner somewhere. I never would bother with going to them because I didn't let anybody sit me in a corner. I'd just sit in my own corner in my house. But after I worked my program up quite a while, I had so many volunteers, scores and scores of them, that on several occasions I called my workers together and I'd always have a reception for them here during the State Teachers Association. Many of them were teachers. That irritated me, I mean just angered me because they were always telling me that tuberculosis is the greatest threat to blacks, and yet when they'd have these state meetings and they'd bring these authorities in on tuberculosis, case-finding and all that type of thing, the Negroes weren't there. They had them, and then they would kind of do like a pigeon: eat something and regurgitate it to the little pigeons. Well, that's the kind of thing that was. I really had to tell my boss off one day when she was trying to make some kind of excuse about these separate things. You know, I knew why they were separate 'cause I knew what these segregation things were in these hotels and things. I said, "Well, one thing is boiled down to this. You all are concerned more about eating an old cold piece of chicken and a few little ol' green peas sitting up in the top of a pile of potatoes than you are about actually fighting tuberculosis." Oh, all that stuff just got on my nerves. Every now and then I'd have to boil it over.  JACQUELYN HALL: Who was your boss?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: A woman named Chauncey MacDonald&#8212;C-H-A-U-N-C-E-Y Blackburn. She came from a family of Blackburns, Chauncey Blackburn MacDonald. A highly religious family. I didn't say Christian; I said religious.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did she respond to your &#8230;  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh, she thought it was awful that I would think like that. She thought quite often that I was an awful creature.  JACQUELYN HALL: What other conflicts did you have?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I had several &#8230; one that I think of. Well, there were two other outstanding. One was that she did not want me to work with NAACP, didn't want to hear about me being connected with NAACP in any way. And she called me in one day &#8230; which, I wasn't taking any time from my job working with NAACP. But she didn't want to hear of me bothering &#8230; at that time, the ferment had started in the state. The NAACP conference was organized in 1940, state conference. She heard about that, and the man who was president was a firebrand in a way. And she&#8212;I think some of the Negroes on that board had something to do with it&#8212;but she said that she thought that I ought to let somebody else take on the fight like that, and I tend to what I was doing. I said, "Well, I'm not doing it on the time." I said, "I can belong to NAACP, and it doesn't affect my work. You ask me, you say, you want production. Am I bringing production?" She said, "Yes." I said, "Well, what's the gripe?" Well, she just thought that I ought not be in it. This man Hinton was an awful man and I shouldn't be connected, and she would prefer that I shouldn't. I said, "Well, if that's the way you feel about it, I'll tell you how I feel about it. I'd rather all Negroes die and go to hell with tuberculosis than go through some of the things they're suffering right now, and that the NAACP is trying to stop them." She said, "Ooh, ooh, ooh." Why, she just come near having ten kittens, you know! [laughter]  That was one. And then around in that time, they made a picture down in Tuskegee about &#8230; some picture to help fight tuberculosis called "Let My People Live." And they premiered that picture in Camden. I mean, so far as South Carolina was concerned, they premiered it in Camden. I don't know where I saw it. I guess I saw it &#8230; I don't know where I saw it, but I saw it before she saw it. And some old woman in Camden saw it before she saw it. So she told me that Miss So-and-So in Camden said that they said that they were making "Let My People Live" as a picture by Negroes to help fight tuberculosis among Negroes. But it looks like they had more fair Negroes in it than they had actual showing of black Negroes. I said, "I saw &#8216;Let My People Live&#8217;." I said, "That old woman doesn't know what she's talking about." I said, "She either didn't see the picture or she didn't try to see it through because she got too shook up before she saw all of it." I said, "The preacher they got in there's as black as any ink I ever saw." I said, "And they've got the choir of Tuskegee in it, and I know there's no white people on that. And if there's any yellow ones on that, they didn't make themselves yellow."  [END OF TAPE 1, SIDE B]  [TAPE 2, SIDE A] [START OF TAPE 2, SIDE A]  JACQUELYN HALL: I was just going to ask you why you quit working for the Association in 1942, for the Tuberculosis Association. Isn't that right?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. I quit working for them because the conditions became untenable, because of certain of these, you know, restrictions that were there because of the NAACP. My boss told me that he thought I would have to resign. I told her that I was not going to resign, that she would have to fire me because I hadn't done anything to resign for, and my work (according to what she said to me) had been productive and satisfactory and that I had no reason to resign, and she could just fire me, which she did not want to do. She told me I built up my program on personality, and what she meant by that was that I had made myself so close to the people that maybe it could create a problem. I said, "I think anybody that builds a public relations program builds it on personality." I said, "Jesus Christ built his on personality, so I don't see why you should fault me for that." So as I said yesterday, there were people in that black committee, in that Negro program that she had, that were easily influenced and handled by her. And when push came to shove, why, my opinion is that they decided in the meeting that since &#8230; Well, see, some of them didn't like the thrust that NAACP was making at that time, right at the beginning of the forties, into the political action field trying to get the ballot. So some of them (one or two of them) on that board were as reactionary as she was, even though they were black and she was white (reactionary, I mean, to the program that was evolving at that time towards the civil rights movement). Nobody could foresee at that time that the civil rights movement would gather the momentum that it did in the next ten to fifteen years. But the strength of it at that time was so far removed from what it had been that the Negroes were going to make it very definite that they were out for the federal courts and the ballot. And of course, with what I told you yesterday, I didn't see any need of keeping people from having tuberculosis and then letting them suffer other things that might be worse even than slavery. So then they just decided. And I don't know how that was done, except that I do know that my services were no longer acceptable. I had gone into the program in 1932 with the state being divided into two what they called organized and unorganized sections. I had at that time, as I remember, about thirteen counties that were in the very poorly developed sections of the state, and they were called unorganized. And I had charge of the beginning of the Christmas Seal program in that area, which when I went into it they gave me a report that was around eighteen hundred dollars for the sale in that area (meaning seal sales among Negroes in 1932, as I remember. Those records are at my house.) Then in 1942 when I left I had worked until I had carried the income from the Negro Seal sale to $42,000, see. And then I had organized, helped to organize, clinics. I'd worked with the Health Department. Another difference we had was, as I told you she had her qualms about venereal diseases: the old-time idea that the way you get venereal disease is a sin. She always connected it with illicit sexual activity. And she did not want me to talk about venereal diseases at all in my program; and I aimed my program toward maternal and infant mortality, and venereal diseases&#8212;and tuberculosis&#8212;three of the four things. But anyway, she did not want me to enter into any work in connection with venereal diseases&#8212;that is, in my public health education program. So I refused to conform there, because I knew that the venereal diseases were a problem. And since at that time we didn't have anything but 606 (and it was a long-time treatment) we had to work even harder in preventive programs than you have to today when you have a kind of quick cure, you know. So that was another one of the kind of endemic frictions, her feeling about anybody who had venereal disease not worth bothering with&#8212;they'd been sinning, you know. So anyway, at the time that I left there was a woman by the name of Mrs. Parler. She has a PhD. Well, I guess she's retired from State College now, but her husband was principal of one of the schools in Orangeburg and she was teaching, as I remember, at State College or in one of the city schools. But it was suggested that she be my successor. And the people, although they had nothing against her, they didn't want to accept her. They didn't know her; I'd been working with them for ten years. I knew when some of their children were born and been to their weddings and been involved with them, and handed little cookies or cake or something or other once a year. And a number of them I'd been in Benedict College with; a number of them knew that I was working in efforts that would help their children in generations to come. And the fact is I was tied very closely in with them. But it was something I didn't try to do; it just happened. And then I'm a person that works easily with people. I love people and I sympathize. And so I couldn't help because she said that I based my program on, that it was a popularity program. I didn't make any effort to be popular. I just went on and did my work. However, when Mrs. Parler came on the job she found some letters in the file. They handed her the files to go through. And she ran across some letters concerning the actions taken leading up to my departure. And I don't remember whether Mrs. Parler told me or her husband told me, but one of them told me&#8212;he is now dead. But I was told that when he saw these letters he said, "You cannot work there anymore if that's the way they did her, as good a job as she was doing. You take your things and come home." And that was the end of that. They never had another director of Negro program after that. They tried, but they could never get the Negro populace to accept a person in that position. So that's the milk in the coconut.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were the funds that you raised used in the black community? And was that the limit of the funds that were used there, or did they divide equitably over all?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: They were put into the general fund. We had really a better health education program than there was in the white schools, because nobody had the training that I had. They had sent me away for training, as I told you yesterday, and I had had so many years of teaching experience. And then I was able to organize those clinics. (I may be able to find and send you one of our plans; there ought to be something in my old files.) But I helped organize clinics in what we called independent, unorganized territory, and I helped and worked up these what we called institutes, school health institutes for teachers. And at that time there were no water systems in schools or flushing toilets like that, and we had to teach them about, you know, outdoor privies, how to construct them properly and about having some type of arrangement in the school for individual drinking water service, and then teaching them about certain things like scabies and impetigo and the need for innoculation and all that type of stuff. I mean, all that had to be taught in there. And then I helped to organize midwifery clinics, because practically all the children in the state at that time were being delivered by midwives. And so Mrs. MacDonald, who was my boss, had a sister who was very, very different from herself, very modern in her thinking. And she had charge of the midwifery program in the state, so I worked with her. She was Miss Laura Blackman. And Miss Blackman and I worked closely in the midwifery clinics. And also there were ministers' institutes, where I was able to get the people who came in to hold these institutes for ministers during the summer (kind of like the old vacation Bible schools for children); I was able to get them interested in getting health lectures into those institutes, so we could get them out to their congregations. So all of that was a part of that program, so it would just have been a hard load for her to pull up the hill just jumping in there new, you know. So that was the virtual end of the program of that nature.  JACQUELYN HALL: I wanted to ask you before we go on into the thirties just a couple of things back in about the twenties. In the old Interracial Commission, did you know or work with Mrs. Marion Birnie Wilkinson?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. She was the wife of the president of State College.  JACQUELYN HALL: Right. Can you tell me something about her, what she was like and what kind of role she played in things?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I never worked with her directly in the Interracial set-up. I know that she did belong to the state Interracial. But she lived in Orangeburg. She was a most gracious lady, queenly in her carriage and all, very, very refined. And she organized or was one of the organizers of the Colored Federation of Women's Clubs. I never have joined the clubs myself; I've never been a joiner, I'm more of a lone wolf type of person. But I do know the good work that it did. And I knew her quite well, especially since I worked at State College eleven summers. We also carried this program into the summer school at State College. So I knew her quite well, her husband and her children.  JACQUELYN HALL: What did you think of his administration at State?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, he was president, I think, only &#8230; He wasn't there very long after I got there. I've forgotten what year he died. Anyway, I was at State College when he died, because I'd be down there every summer. But I guess I just have to say that he was about as much as you could expect for the time. All those people largely worked at the whims of the power structure. They didn't always fight for all the money they should have for the school; they didn't demand black participation on the boards. We still don't have any black participant on the boards of the other (white) colleges in the state. But up until just a few years ago the State College board was totally white. And when the board would meet in a summer session they cleared out the home economics house, you know which they had built for demonstration purposes for housekeeping and serving food and all that type of thing, table manners and all that high class home economics work Anyway, then they'd move those board members into there, where they were treated like kings. Some of them were regular old hayseeds, but they were down there on the board of State College, I guess trying to see what they were doing for the Negroes, I reckon, or saying what ought to be done about them. One or two of them were merchants that got the benefit of selling to the school.  JACQUELYN HALL: But at that time you didn't feel extremely critical of the State administration?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: State College administration?  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes. That they could have done much more than they did?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I guess being the people they were they couldn't have. If I had been there I'd have done it different; I mean, being the person I am I would have had perhaps a greater degree of concentration&#8212;because after all, I would have compared what a pittance State College was getting when it was the only source of higher education for Negroes in the state (that is, tax supported) and what these other schools were getting. And I would have been demanding more money. And I would have tried to build the school up to where if a person went, say, through sophomore at State College he would be accepted at the University of South Carolina, which they refused to do because they knew that the advantages were not equivalent, to say nothing of being equal.  JACQUELYN HALL: I know the Federation of Women's Clubs supported a home for delinquent girls.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, it was called the Farwald School, later Wilkenson Home&#8212;now an orphanage.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did they involve themselves in any kind of protest or civil rights action at all?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no. Now I wasn't close enough to them to go to their annual meetings. I didn't have anything against them, and I thought they were doing good work, and from time to time I contributed financially. But it's just not my kind of program. I'm glad they did it, but I was doing something they wouldn't have done, you see. And I felt that since I had the philosophy that I did the best thing to do was to let them have their little thing and I'd take my little thing, you see. But I think whatever they did, it all came and converged into a purpose. But I wasn't close enough to know all of the details.  JACQUELYN HALL: You mentioned when you first joined the Columbia NAACP going to meetings with your mother. Was your mother a member?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes, she was a member.  JACQUELYN HALL: But not your father?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No. My father, as I remember I don't remember him ever having gone. In fact, my father didn't go to very many places. On the weekends he usually stayed at home with the children or around the farm, and relaxed himself, and often oiled and polished his guns (kept for home protection).  JACQUELYN HALL: It wasn't due to any difference in &#8230;  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no.  JACQUELYN HALL: &#8230; philosophy or anything between them?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, no. He was 100 percent for that.  JACQUELYN HALL: Now during the thirties, then, during the period of the Depression, you told when we talked the first time about your efforts to get the WPA to hire black white collar workers, black professionals to teach. Were you involved in any other efforts to try to make the New Deal more responsive to blacks?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: That was about perhaps the only thing there, with the exception of how it tied in with the work that I was doing with the Health Department. You see, I worked closely at that time&#8230; There were certain things that we'd get through the Health Department like literature and maybe film slides or &#8230; cottonseed meal to use for pellagra, because yeast ran short. And they fed yeast a lot to people who were malnourished to the point of developing pellagra. But now other than this particular thing of publicizing the advantages of NYA and WPA and getting as many people, blacks into white collar positions as we could (where they were hiring white collar people of that degree of training), the main thing was that certain things that were done in the school health programs easily tied in with the nutrition processes and all they were trying to get through in the recovery period. [Omission]   JACQUELYN HALL: Why did you stay in the Republican party for so long?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, for the simple reason that I always believed that we ought to have a two-party state. And then too, there was a time that the only way you could show any evidence of party interest&#8212;that is that Negroes could&#8212;was in the so-called Republican party. I did not belong to what was called the Joe Tolbert faction of the party. Old Joe Tolbert, they called him "tieless Joe;" he never wore a tie and his shoes were never laced up that I remember. I never was connected with the Joe Tolbert group. I was connected with the J. Bates Gerald group of the Republican party; it was sometimes spoken of as the Gerald Massering group. And I hoped all through that time that eventually we would have another political entity, that is some way to strike back at what I hated in the South Carolina Democratic party. And so after the rise of the Progressive Democratic party and the effect it had on making certain inroads into the regular Democratic party, then and then after 1948&#8230; In 1948 when the Civil Rights Report was brought out, the Truman Report, certain people who were in the Democratic party and who would not have dared to be called Republicans ran out of the party like a bunch of drowning rats, or rats scared to drown, and came over into the Dixicrat party, which fed again into the South Carolina Republican party. They were not people that were Republicans because they wanted to be Republicans or because they admired the actions of Lincoln or anything like that. They just didn't, could not tolerate the idea of the Civil Rights Report and Truman's actions in that connection. So then when in 1952, that is when Adlai Stevenson was running and when the platform of the&#8230; I mean, I left the party at a meeting where I saw a lot of these people that had come in and had never been in the movement like I was with some other young white Republicans, particularly young men who were anxious, as I was, to see a real sort of party-building, not on emotions but just on actual strategy, because we thought there should be eventually a checks and balances process in the political system, you see. So the last meeting that I attended was in Jefferson Hotel here in Columbia. The hotel is no more; it's where Jefferson Square is now. And I saw all of these tramps coming out and calling themselves Republicans and looking funny at me, and I could see that they&#8230; Well, they looked like they had crawled out of some cracks from somewhere. I didn't know where they had come from. But anyway, I knew from some things they were saying in there that I wasn't going to tolerate that situation. So the last Republican meeting that I attended was in Jefferson Hotel. And when they talked some things I didn't like to hear I gave them a little piece of my mind and walked out and slammed the French door. And that's the last I've been in the Republican meetings. And so in 1952 I voted the Democratic ticket in the Stevenson campaign. I remember we did not have the vote in the Democratic party all that time before, so the only action we could show was every four years to vote in the general election on the Republican ticket, because the primaries were tantamount to election. So the general election didn't mean anything then like it does now. It did in North Carolina, but not in South Carolina. We were definitely a one party state. So the only way you could say where you took a part in politics was every four years to vote in the general election. And then you voted the Republican ticket; that was all you could vote. And my father always said that whatever you could do politically, whenever you had a chance to do anything do that. He always voted; he voted in every general election. And of course when I got my registration ticket I tried to do the same thing. Now we did have in the city what they called a city general election, but it was just a farce because, after all, these Democrats got it in the primary, you know. [Summary of omission concerning involvement in the Southern Conference for Human Welfare: She learned of the organization from Seymour Carol attended the founding meeting at Birmingham in 1938. She got on the mailing list, and later became a member of the SCHW board. He told her about the famous incident in which Eleanor Roosevelt insisted on sitting in the exact center of the auditorium, on the line segregating whites from blacks.]  JACQUELYN HALL: How would you compare the Southern Conference with the Southern Regional Council when it was organized then a few years later?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I would say that I had never quite thought of that. But I would say that the Southern Conference for Human Welfare was organized as a direct outcome of the Roosevelt recovery program, and that I believe it was perhaps closer to the desire to provide absolute human necessities, because the people were on bread lines. My husband didn't have work; he worked on the bread line serving soup and apples to people here that were on the bread line. And the people were just on their knees. People were marching on Washington, being driven into on the horseback&#8212;you know, you've read about that, those things. And the people, many of them were in abject poverty. I've ridden into certain sections of this state where I wondered if South Carolina would ever come back. (Of course that wasn't only South Carolina but I was working in South Carolina.) I've seen pot-bellied children eaten up with hookworm, rickets, impetigo, scabies, every earmark of malnutrition, and nothing to look forward to, nothing. You'd walk in some houses and you wouldn't see anything, nothing. So I would say that ERA started out to administer to the abject human needs, if that's any way to express it. I mean, just a need that was so cruel that it would be hard for the average person to realize. I realized it because I saw it in my job. And I've always said that the most pitiful human being in the world is what Negroes call a "Poor Tacky." You know what a "Poor Tacky" is: a very, very, very poor white person, like we found in mill villages and on tobacco road, that type. And I don't think there's anything more pitiful in the world. I used to ride through these towns where the factories were, the cotton mills, and see those poor little children, barefooted, barelegged, bowlegged, razor shins and pigeon-breasts. You could just look at them and tell they were infested with hookworms, and you'd wonder what was going to come back. So I say that the Roosevelt program came as almost a program out of the hands of Jesus Christ, you know. But now, coming to the Southern Regional, the Southern Regional approached more on a philosophical plane. They appealed to the conditioning of the minds of the people to reach these needs, or merely to raise them to a higher plane of social and political involvement. But this other program I see as one of absolute necessity. You couldn't think about improving the person's mind when he had an empty belly. Christ knew that; Christ didn't preach to people that had an empty stomach. He said, "Feed them. Sit them down and feed them; then I'll preach to them, I'll teach them." And so we used to say in school, we used to tell our teachers that. An empty bag won't stand up; you have to see that the children get food some way. They didn't have school lunchs; a lot of the children didn't have any lunch to bring to school. So I think that although both of them were moving in the same direction, one was where you had to just answer the basic physical, the basic, naked physical needs of the people, and the other was conditioned to a plane of people that could sympathize, and provide and perhaps plan to help raise this level philosophically or socially. Now that's the way I see it. [Omission]   JACQUELYN HALL: And then you were involved in the Council several years?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: What Council?  JACQUELYN HALL: The Southern Regional Council.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh yes, I've always belonged and always worked in it.  JACQUELYN HALL: Remember when the Council first came out in 1951 with a public statement against segregation?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't remember it coming out. I remember that the Southern Conference for Human Welfare did.  JACQUELYN HALL: Earlier than that.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes. [Summary of omission concerning the Southern Conference Education Fund (SCEF): Discussion of red-baiting, Richard Nixon, and her recent resignation from the SCEF board.]  [END OF TAPE 2, SIDE A]  [TAPE 2, SIDE B] [START OF TAPE 2, SIDE B]  JACQUELYN HALL: How would you assess the role that interracial organizations like SCEF and the Southern Regional Council have played in the movement in the South?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I can't fully assess it. I could just say that I don't think the South would be the same without what they did, because they opened the eyes of a number of people. The thing that the political power structure had against the organizations of that kind was the fear that they would bring the black and white mass together. And the power structure has always feared the combining of the forces of black and white masses. I can remember the first meeting of the Southern Negro Youth Congress I went to in Knoxville where there were miners, people in brogan shoes, overalls, just like they wear jeans around here now. The average person didn't think of wearing them then unless they were going to the field or going to the mines. And those fellows came out there with brogans, and overalls, and sunhats, and all of them were working and planning together. Well, the first thing they did when they got a chance was to red smear and disrupt the movement. Now, I think if the Southern Negro Youth Congress, for instance, could have gone on, there would have been a very great change in the South because the younger people would have worked together better. But the power structure doesn't want that. They don't want poor whites and Negroes getting along together. There's always been the effort, either obvious or subtle, on the part of the reigning element to keep the forces of blacks and whites apart. But they built it on the sex angle. They always say, "They'll rape your women. They want to marry your daughter." But they weren't thinking about that. They didn't care any more about a poor white than they did about a Negro. And they still don't. They just give them a little more deference because he's white like they are, but they don't give a damn about a poor white. They'll exploit him just like they will a Negro. I've seen it. I know what I'm talking about. So that was their affair. Why do they have to worry about Negro men and their women? If they hadn't power enough to hold their women, if somebody could take their women from 'em,, why, they ought to take 'em. You see? Just like I hear people say sometimes if a woman can't hold her husband why would she want to get mad with somebody else for taking him? She ought to be able to hold him, treat him right, give him good food, take care of him. You never find, for instance, as I heard an old preacher say once, you'll never find a dog leaving home and going to stay at somebody else's house if you're treating that dog all right at your house. He's not going anywhere else. Well, when you find the dog trotting over there every time you turn around, somebody's throwing him a bone over there. He never gets a bone over here, just gets some dry bread and maybe a kick in the fanny, you know? [laughter]  So, they use that sex thing. And they have used it as a social equality angle. They wanted to keep those forces apart, and they wanted to see that Negroes wouldn't take your job. When the unions come in, they try to tell whites if you get a union, the Negroes will take your jobs. They'll be making much as you make, or they'll bring your salary down to theirs, and all that kind of stuff. It's to divide the forces. They have always done that, and that's the reason a white Populist is not able to get anywhere much in the South. You see, the old Populist movement was killed, killed and almost died being born, because certain people who were Populists, not long after Reconstruction, would have destroyed their scheme.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did you hear or know anything about the Populist movement when you were growing up?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No. My father used to talk about some of those &#8230; I used to hear him talk a lot about Tom Watson in Georgia and his, you know, the effect that, you know &#8230; he always spoke pleasantly of Tom Watson and what he felt that his philosophy would do for the poor man. But they killed off Tom Watson. They kill off anybody who looks like he's going to do something for the poor man or for the masses, just like they're jumping on little old, that little old Carter, now, from Georgia. They're not going to give him an easy time, and they know that he can't do but so much with the Congress that, if he doesn't do it in the first year or two he's in there, after that the honeymoon will be over and he'll be burnt up. But the fact is, they are not interested in the masses or the people coming together. And they realize &#8230; I mean, history has repeated itself that you can't pressure the mass but so much before it revolts. I thought, I still think, I think things are a little easier now. But I would say six months ago, I believed fervently that we were moving toward a revolution in this country.  JACQUELYN HALL: Six months ago?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Why?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, the people were pressured with obligations and, you know, disillusioned by Watergate, disillusioned particularly by the fact that a shoplifter around here might be sent to prison for taking a loaf of bread for his hungry children and Nixon's over there having protection. You hear all the men off the street talking about that coming in here, people on the street. You know, they say, "Why should we behave, why do they put us in jail for thus-and-so, and they're taxing on us to let Nixon sit down and give him protection by the Secret Service and all like that. Now, six to nine months to a year ago, the thinking of this country was volatile. There isn't any getting around it; it was volatile. I sense an easing now, but if Ford stays in there its going to come up again. I mean, if that set stays in there, its going to come up again. [Omission]  You see, there were some very, very highly intelligent young men who organized the Southern Negro Youth Congress, some of the most brilliant men I've ever known.  JACQUELYN HALL: Who were the &#8230;  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, there was Louis Bernham, who's now dead; James Jackson, who's still living and works for the Communist Party; and a fellow named Strong. I've forgotten Strong's first name. And then there was Esther Jackson, James Jackson's wife, now with Freedomways.  JACQUELYN HALL: Is she living?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: She's living&#8212;a brilliant young woman. You know, you perhaps read that James went into hiding for a number of years. Where he went, I don't know, but he was in hiding for a number of years.  JACQUELYN HALL: Why?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, they intended to persecute him like they did some other people who they said had communist leanings. Paul Robeson was closely connected with the Southern Negro Youth Congress. W. E. B. DuBois was an adherer. I don't remember the others. I have some programs from their meetings. I'm hoping, oh, about the next year to get all that stuff out.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did the leaders of the Southern Negro Youth Congress go on to become key people in the civil rights movement twenty years later, or did they leave the South, or what happened to those people?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, they are connected with various interests. Whenever I go to New York, I see them. I was in New York to a dinner there for &#8230; I can't remember his name now, but anyway, I saw a number of them there. They're still interested in some phase of the movement.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was the leadership southern?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I would say it was mixed. I guess the strongest element was perhaps the black students from northern universities.  JACQUELYN HALL: Who came down to the South?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: How would you compare the Congress with SNCC?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I would say it was similar organizations, similar in ideals. It so happened at the time the Congress was on, we didn't have the vote in the South.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were there white students in the organization?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: In the Negro Youth Congress? Yes, there were some. There were, in '46, there were a number of them at Birmingham. Some of them were arrested and persecuted by Bull Connor and his crowd in Birmingham. I was down in Birmingham at the time.  JACQUELYN HALL: The Congress was accused of being a communist front organization, of course.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: What would you say that the role of the Communist Party in the in the southern movement was? There had been  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I don't know. I'm not able to discuss that. I always heard a lot about Communists trying to influence Negroes and organizing them into certain movements and all like that, but I never saw any effect of it. The main effect I saw of the Communist Party in the South&#8212;and I didn't see that&#8212;but I do know that they were highly instrumental in the Scottsboro case. But other than that, I know after the Scottsboro case, Ben Davis, who became an outstanding Communist and served as a Communist Party member of the New York City Council, he lived in Atlanta, born and reared in Atlanta. But I never saw this thing they were talking about, that the Communists were always trying to influence and build a whole phalanx of activities among blacks. I never saw evidences of that. Now, I don't say that it wasn't, but I never saw it. And I got about as sharp eyes as anybody I think. I know none ever approached me. I know that. I never had anybody ask me to belong to the Communist Party or to belong to an organization that could be truthfully said to be communist. Now, I belonged to all kind of things that were called communist fronts, so that I've been Red-smeared up and down South Carolina.  JACQUELYN HALL: Were you ever called before HUAC?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Never. I wanted to be, but they never called me. I wanted to get before them. I thought once kind of during the Henry Wallace campaign that I might be, but I wasn't. I think Clark Foreman was hoping that he would, too, but I don't think they ever called Clark before them.  JACQUELYN HALL: From '42 to '56 then, you were a freelance person, right?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did you do some writing, some journalism during that time?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I did some writing. I did some writing for the Norfolk Journal and Guide for, I guess, about two years.  JACQUELYN HALL: You were a correspondent?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: It was just feature writing on activities in South Carolina. Other than that, I didn't do anything. Mainly during that period I was working with NAACP as a state secretary.  JACQUELYN HALL: How did the state conference of the NAACP get organized? That was during that early, early period.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, a man came into this state from North Carolina. He was a plumber by trade, and he organized the branch in Cheraw, which is up near the North Carolina line.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was his name?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Levi G. Byrd; still living, quite elderly. I think he and I are the only two survivors of the founding group. And he had the vision that the branches that were working autonomously in the state should be called together in a conference. And so that's the reason why it was called together, called together at Benedict, I think, in 1940 I believe it was.  JACQUELYN HALL: And you were elected state secretary at that time?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: No, I wasn't secretary then. The lady who was secretary of the Cheraw branch was secretary for the first year. And it was at her request, her urging that they give me the position, since in the first place whatever we could call the headquarters of the state conference was to be in Columbia. And then she felt that I had had the wider experience in NAACP activities; and then from the standpoint of newswriting and all that kind of thing she said that she would prefer to become the assistant secretary and that I should be secretary. And so then for the next fifteen years I was.  JACQUELYN HALL: Why didn't you ever become chairman of the organization?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Oh, I didn't want to be chairman of that organization. I didn't want to be secretary. I did it because I saw the need, and they asked me to. I have never wanted to be a front officer in anything, and I've never been. In fact, I'd rather not be prominently connected; I've always preferred to be a kind of behind-scene person.  JACQUELYN HALL: Why is that?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: That's just my make-up. I'd rather get behind there and pull strings, like you play with these little puppets, then see the action take place. I'm not particular about being a front person; I never have wanted to be. Sometimes when you're on the outside you can be more effective than when you're on the inside; a lot of people don't realize that. For instance, what good would it be for me to be president of something (all I can do is to preside and break the tie) when I can get over there on the floor as a floor member and raise all the hell I want, you see if I don't like the way somebody's performing. But if I'm up here as president I can't do a thing but preside. And what would I want to be that for? That curbs me, curbs me; no. I can raise a whole lot of more hell from the floor.  JACQUELYN HALL: You said when we talked the first time that the NAACP court cases during this early period were mapped out in your home. Can you tell me about these major cases?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I wouldn't say they were mapped out there. What we did on this end was handled there. You see, naturally a deal of that work sofar as laying the legal groundwork was done in the legal offices at NAACP. But there were some things that had to be done on the local scale. And then they had to come in maybe and contact people who had had experiences with these inequities and take their depositions and stuff like that. You know, there are a lot of things you don't learn in lawbooks. A lot of law is common sense, which a lot of lawyers don't have a lot of common sense. But a lot of law itself is just basic common sense. And so they had to come into the area where these things were happening and talk to a number of people. Of course, on this end the lawyers, Thurgood always stayed in my home. Thurgood Marshall always stayed in my home, as did the others as far as my home could accommodate. We had two extra bedrooms; some lawyers stayed there and the others stayed across the street from me. But they would have their meals and jam sessions around the table in my home.  JACQUELYN HALL: And what were the major cases that the Association was pursuing?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, they pursued the Clarendon case against segregation in schools; that was a landmark case against school segregation. The 1954 decision grew out of that.  JACQUELYN HALL: The Briggs vs. Elliott case?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Yes. And then there was the Elmore case against the primary (Elmore vs. Baskin), and then the Brown vs. somebody. You see, after we got the ballot, got the right to vote in the primary under the [J. Waties] Waring decision, then they said that we could vote in the primary but we could not participate in party or club activities. And that's when Waring had to go back and pass out this decision, you know, where you could go in at the precinct level. Blacks could belong to precinct organizations and move on up to the state convention. Then there was a teachers' salary case that was done at that time&#8212;and some smaller cases, but those were the four major ones. Transportation case: there was a transportation case.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was that about? I don't remember that.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: But transportation. All this you hear raised about busing now, well white people had been fussing all the time&#8212;I mean when I say all the time, from the time they had buses they'd had it. And they used to come along&#8230; I've known times, I've heard my mother talk about how they'd come by and deliberately run you in mud puddles and splash the water and mud on her children, and she'd have to dry them off when they got to school, and spit at them out of the windows and all like that. But they were riding the buses and riding past the no-good black schools to get to the white schools that were better than the black schools. They didn't worry about that; they didn't worry about bussing then. All this mess they're talking about bussing is a bunch of junk. They just don't want them there. They're concerned about integration in the schools, but busing!  JACQUELYN HALL: Was there a court case around the issue for blacks?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: A court case to make them provide buses for black children.  JACQUELYN HALL: What case was that, do you know?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: That came out of Clarendon too. Yes, that came out of Clarendon, because there were buses. You see, some counties had a few buses. I remember in the Clarendon case, when they won that bus case coming out of Clarendon then they sent some buses down to Clarendon, some new buses. And they gave the old buses to the Negroes and took the new buses that were sent down as a result of this case for the whites. And the Negroes made them take them back; they were not going to have them. They were going to have the new buses that were sent down here. So that case, that bus case, as I remember it, had its initiation in Clarendon County.  JACQUELYN HALL: What was your role exactly in all this?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Well, I knew conditions in various parts of the state because I traveled all over the state at that time. And then in the case of the&#8212;well, with the primary case, there was no precedent on which to base the voting case in this state. And they had a slew of law students and lawyers trying to find something on which to hook the primary case, because, you see, in 1944 Olin D. Johnston (then the governor) called the special session of the legislature and fine-combed the code of laws to take out anything that they felt would be a point on which they could hang the primary case. And so in that case we just had to start from scratch. I can remember on one or two occasions when we went to federal court Thurgood would say, "Well, you come up here and sit right by this rail" (you know the rail that divides the lawyers from the observers). He'd say, "You sit right up at the rail, because there might be something we'll have to ask, something about somebody. We might need you right here." Well now, it wouldn't mean I was a lawyer; it'd mean there might be some point that they couldn't get that maybe a lawyer wouldn't think about, but it would have its effect. Sometimes a lawyer could ask a question which, even if the court says it must be withdrawn it's already had its effect, you see.  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes, right.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Of course in the salary case I knew a lot of things because I had worked under the inequities of salary right here in the city schools. My sister was one of those salary cases, the one that sued the university. She was always ready to sue somebody [laughter].  There was something else I meant to tell you about those cases, but I've forgotten. It doesn't come to me now, but there was another important point I meant to give you about that.  JACQUELYN HALL: How do you account for this? It seems to me that this was a real increase in the willingness of the NAACP to take direct court action. The organization grew during this time right after World War II. How do you account for that take-off?  MODJESKA SIMKINS: Of that what?  JACQUELYN HALL: It seemed like a real take-off point for the organization.  MODJESKA SIMKINS: I think the type of leadership we got into the conference at the beginning, a different type of leadership, a different type of president we had and the determination of people who had been begging these different&#8230; You know they had these little Democratic clubs, just like they have these private clubs and they don't let Negroes and Jews come in. Well, they had these little political clubs running the same ways. The Negroes had just gotten tired of begging and appealing and asking for a playground and their taking the thing under consideration, or asking for police protection, or asking for lights. And you go up there and sit down and beg and appeal to them old cats, and then they say, "Well, we'll take it under consideration." And maybe that's the last you hear of it. They just got tired; they just figured that they were tired of begging, tired of appealing, just tired, you know, of being pushed around.
138
School integration--South Carolina.
Women civil rights workers.
African American women civil rights workers--Southern States.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Southern Regional Council.
Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Yes
MP3
Cassette
5:45:13
Original extent: 6 cassettes
No
No
No
No
No

#4007, Southern Oral History Program, http://www.lib.unc.edu/mss/inv/s/Southern_Oral_History_Program_Collection.html
/dc/sohp/

Cassette LC is 7 cassettes, not 6 like the original.

http://dc.lib.unc.edu:80/cdm/ref/collection/sohp/id/11155
2016-05-03
2016-05-03
11155
11197.cpd
/sohp/image/11197.cpd


