Mary Frederickson: You said in your letter that you were born in  I896 in Bonnerton, North Carolina.  Miriam Bonner Gamp: Yes, I was.  MF: On the plantation of your great-grandfather. I wondered who was  living on the plantation at the time you were born.  Camp: Ky great-grandfather.  MF: He was still living then?  Camp: Yes. And my great-aunt who reared my mother, because her mother  had died.  MF: I see. Why were your parents there?  Camp: Well, my father wasn't, I guess ^Taughter7&#8212;or if he were I  don1t know about it. My father was a marine engineer at the time, and he  and my mother were living with his parents in Washington, North Carolina.  And she wanted to have the baby down there at her old home.  MF: I see.  Camp: I was her first child, so she went there for me, and then two  years later for my brother. But I guess by that time my great-grandfather  had probably died, because after that all the children were born in  Washington, except the one that was born in Azusa, California.  MF: That's interesting. Why do you think she wanted to have them born  on the plantation?  Camp: Well, I don't know. It was her home. And her great-aunt who  had reared her, (my great-aunt) was really like her  mother. And there were several doctors there who were cousins, so there  was no problem about a doctor.  MF: I see. Was her father there as well?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 2  Camp: Her father? No. Her mother had died when my mother was about  two years old, I think; I think she died in childbirth. And my great-aunt,  my mother's aunt (her mother's sister) said she would take my mother and  rear her if my grandfather would never take her away even if he married  that my mother would be left with her. And so he did that, and he did  remarry; had three little girls by that woman. But though my mother was  friendly with them, would go to visit them, her home was with her great  grandfather and her aunt. They reared her.  KF: I see. Do you remember your great-grandfather then?  Gamp: I used to rather distinctly, but not much anymore. I was  probably about three the last time I saw him.  MF: I see. You said that when you were very small then your mother  took you back to her parents-in-law in Washington.  Camp: Back to my father's parents, yes, where they lived. And then  after my brother was born,two years later they had a house of their own,  and moved about two blocks from my grandparents.  MF: I see. Do you remember your father1s parents, your paternal  grandparents?  Camp: Ch, very well, very well. I was about eleven, I guess, when my  grandmother died and twelve when my grandfather died.  MF: I see. What were they doing in Washington, North Carolina?  white  Camp: Well, we belonged to the very first/settlers of Bath, the first  settlement in North Carolina. Our family lived in Beaufort County, and most  /first white settlers in Washingtoi^  of them moved to Washington./ It was founded by one of my mother's  ancestors, Colonel James Bonner.  KF: Bonner was your. . . .  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp: Was my maiden name.  MF: Was your maiden name.  Camp: I was Miriam Young Bonner.  MF: That was your mother's. . . ?  Camp: /laughter/ The funny thing is my mother's mother was Miriam  Young Bonner, and ny mother was Kary Young Best; her father was Robert Best.  And then she naned her first child for her mother, Miriam Young Bonner.  It happened I had the same name because very distantly my mother and father  are cousins.  MF: I see. I was confused about the name /laughter/".  Camp: Very distantly.  MF: I see, OK. What had most of your relatives in Beaufort County  done? Had they been farmers? Did they have land?  Camp: Originally, of course, they all had land. But after the war,  the Civil War, many of then moved to Washington. Ch, one of my uncles by  a  marriage was/judge of the Supreme Court of North Carolina.* Another one,  was a superior^ court judge of the First Judicial District.  I think he was judge of the Supreme Court  too. Others were lawyers, some were doctors. My grandfather, oh wholesale  groceries he bought for one of his relatives that had a store, I guess or  something. I really don't know too much about what he did. His letters,  by the way, my grandfather's letters written to my grandmother during the  Collection.  Civil War, are in the Southern Historical / And I had a very interes  ting experience. I didn't want to trust the letters, somehow, to the mail,  and I took them myself to Chapel Hill. And the man who was in charge of the  Collection  Southern Historical / met me and took me down to the archives /laughter/.  In addition to my great-uncle George Brown who was a Supreme Court if N.C.  judge, I had a cousin by marriage, Judge Shepherd.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp h  And the funny thing is that that night he showed me that two of my cousins  had given their material to that library. One was Herbert Bonner, who had  been a congressman from Washington, and the other one was Lindsay Warren,  who's been a comptroller-general of the United States in Washington, D.C.  And here waa I with ay grandfather's ^laughter/ letters, and he was their  uncle&#8212;or great-uncle, I guess.  MFj This was your grandfather Bonner?  Camp: Macon Bonner, my father's father.  MF: Had he fought in the war?  Camp: Yes, he was a very young lieutenant stationed at Fort Fisher  near Wilmington. And these are the letters he wrote to my grandmother.  and  MF: What happened to him after the war? Was he able to come back &amp;gt;^ort  of pick up where he left off?  Camp: Oh yes, yes. My father was born during the war; he was the  oldest of eleven children. But subsequently my grandmother and grandfather  had ten more, so he certainly ^/Taughter/ lived on.  MF: ^Taughter^ Yes, yes. I just wondered. It seems that so many of  the young men who went off to war were crushed by the experience. All of a  sudden they came back to nothing.  Camp: Well, he came back. I mean, I think he was considered the  richest young nan in that area. And I guess most of what he had was in  ^Taughter^ Confederate money. Anyway he was very poor after that. They had  land; but of course the taxes were so high, nobody to work their land.  MFj So that1 s when they moved to Washington, moved into town?  Camp: Well yes, from what we called out in the country.  MF; Right, OK. What .about your father's life? Do you remember him  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 5  talking about what it was like when he was a child?  Gamp: Yes. It was very hard. He was born during the war, when  they were refugees. I think he was born in Washington, but they went to  Wilson and I don't know how many other places. The town of Washington was  burned, I think it was twice. So when he cane back they who were well-to-do  became poor. And he was the oldest of, I told you, of eventually there  were eleven children. And Washington1s on a river called the Pamlico River,  and he always loved the water. So as soon as he could he went out on the  boats. I remember he was going to take out a big boat, and there was nobody  to take out this boat. So he wasn1t yet twenty-one, but they gave him his  pilot1s license. So he was always really very fond of the water. But when  y mother had these two children she didn't want him away so much. So he  bought interest in the ice factory there in Washington and became the  general manager and part-owner.  You said that he was a marine engineer at the time that  vou were born.  Camp: Yes he was.  ': And he traveled without his. . . ? What exactly did he do?  Camp: Well, I think it was on what they called. ... I've so often  wished I1d gone into detail about this with him. I had a million chances,  and he would have loved it, but it just never occurred to me. But I think  it was what they called the Old Dominion Line, and I think they went from  Norfolk to Baltimore or something.  MF: So it was the Merchant Marine, right?  Camp: Ho, it had nothing to do with the government; I mean it was a  private line apparently.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 6  MF: Right, that's what I mean.  Camp: Old Dominion Line was the name of it.  MF: So he never went to college then?  Camp: No he didn't.  MF: And started working really when he was very young?  Camp: Yes, very young.  MF: What about those children who were younger than him? Did he help  send them on to school?  Camp: No, no, because he really couldn't, I guess. My family were  Episcopalians, and most of the women went to St. Mary1s. But my grandmother  (his mother) was an unusual student and wrote beautifully. I remember the  (and I am sure there were others',)  book club/; ahe was always a literary person. And she not only had gone  to St. Mary's, but she had also gone to Salem. And I guess two of her  sisters had been at Salem too, because I had the delightful experience once  of meeting a very old lady that somebody told me about. She' d been  teaching there when they were there. We went over for the service that the  Moravians have, the Easter service, and we went up to see this old lady.  Somebody took me when they heard that my grandmother had been there. And  she said she remembered the Ellison girls /laughter/, it was nice to know  somebody who had known them when they were young like that.  MF: This would have been right before the Civil War then?  Camp: Oh, that was before the war.  MF: It would have been.  Camp: And my grandfather, her husband (the one that wrote these letters,  Macon Bonner) went to what later became Princeton. At that time it was kind  of an academy, and later became Princeton College.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 7  MF: Where did they meet? Were they from the same general area?  Camp: Oh yesl They grew up together in the same town, in Washington.  Everybody there grew up together for generations and generations /laughter^.  MF: /laughter^ What did your grandmother study when she was at Salem?  Did she maybe spark your first interest in English?  Camps Well, I think it was literature and history; she was always  very much interested in those* Even I can remember that.  MF: Did you have close contact with her when you were small? Did she  maybe teach you to read?  Camp: Oh no, no, she didn't teach me to read. I can't remember when  I learned to read, because I was always, it seemed to me, reading. But what  help I had probably came from my mother's aunt, the one who reared her, and  my mother. My mother was educated to be a teacher, but when she came out  here she became a librarian. I'll have to show you her beautiful scroll.  You ought to see somebody who really contributed a lot. This was presented  to her on her ninetieth birthday.  MF: "Mary Y. Bonner, whose service to the people of Azusa and the  public library spent a longer period of time than that of any other librarian.  January 25, 1964." Oh, that's beautiful.  Camp: Let's see what it says there. "Whose labors bore fruit in  pleasure and learning still manifest among the people of our community,  and whose gracious personality is still remembered with affection by thousands  of men, women and children. We gratefully offer our warm regards and feli  citations on her ninetieth birthday^' I am very proud of that. She was a  marvelous person.  MF: She started working when you came out here?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 8  Camps No, she didn't start the library that soon. She had another  child after she came out here. Of course there were seven of us; I was  the oldest. But I think I was in Berkeley in 1915 when she started the  library,  MF: So she actually started the public library?  Camp: Oh no, no, no. The library was there; it was a Carnegie  library.  MF: She became the librarian?  Camp: She became the librarian, yes.  MF: How long did she work for them: thirty or forty years?  Camp: Oh, it must have been over thirty.  MF: Oh, that's wonderful.  Camp: She went in first as an assistant, and then when they had trouble  with the head librarian they made her head librarian daughter/. l  MF: Back to your father for just a minute, since he came from such a  long line or prominent North Carolinians. ...  Camp: So did my mother. My mother was the one descended from Colonel  James, but they were both descended from, I guess, Colonel James1 s grand  father.  MF: Was he at all interested in going into North Carolina polities?  Camp: Who, my grandfather?  MF: Your father?  Camp: My father? No, my father cared nothing about politics.  My mother was always president of the Women1s Club or the PTA, active in  many things, but my father never was interested. But my father was fifteen  years older than my mother; that made a big difference. When they came out  1It was not "trouble." She resigned, as I recall, to go somewhere else.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 9  to California it was really very difficult for my father to adjust, and  difficult for him really to get the kind of work that he cared about. He  had to take things that he didn't like and didn't care about. So for him  I think it was a mistake, but for my mother it was probably a great oppor  tunity.  MP: Let me ask you a few things about your mother's life when she was  small. You said that she was reared on her grandfather' s plantation. Was  she born there on that plantation^ or nearby.  Camp: She probably was.  MFi Did she talk about what her life was like when she was small and  when she was a child?  Camp: Yes, sometimes.  MF: She was the only child on that plantation, wasn't she?  Camp: Yes. There were black children, and she played with them. And  then of course, as you know the families in those days were very close, and  they1 d go visiting a lot, be a lot of aunts and uncles and cousins  that would come. I guess it wasn't too lonely. But I think she was tutored  by a very able cousin of hers. He was quite a genealogist and historian.  Then she did go off to I guess what they called the normal school in Washing  ton to study to be a teacher, an elementary teacher.  MF: In Washington in Beaufort County?  Camp: Yes, in Beaufort County.  MF: So she was trained to be a teacher there, and then finished her  formal schooling there? Or did she go on?  Camp: Yes.  MF: Did she ever teach? Did she ever work as a teacher?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 10  Gamp: I doubt it. I mean, I don't really remember. She married when  I guesa she must have been about twenty-one or something like that.  MP&#187; Do you remember ever hearing how she met your father?  Camp: Well, my father used to tell me about going down to her grand  father1 s plantation when my mother was five years old, and seeing my mother  then /laughter/.  MF: /laughter/ So she was starred!  Camp: /laughter/ I think his mother was her Sunday  school teacher at St. Peter's Episcopal Church. And I guess his mother liked  her and introduced her to my father; I don't know how else. But everybody  in the town knew everybody.  MFt But when your mother was five your father would have been twenty,  right?  Oampt Something like that.  MF: /laughter/ So he had to wait for her to grow up, literally.  Camp: I don't think he waited,- I think he had other girlfriends  daughter/. Anyway, he never married any of them. when my mother came along,  why, they did of course get married.  MF: He was quite old to be married for the first time.  Camp: Yes he was. And that's why in a way he always seemed . . . sort  of more like a grandfather, I guess, to us than a father.  MF: I see. You said that your mother was active in the Women's Club  groups. I wondered if she ever was active at all or interested in politics,  or how educated she was in it?  Camp: Oh yes. She was one of the first to vote for&#8212;as I remember,  seems to me it was Woodrow Wilson. But I can remember when they got the  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 11  vote, why she was very excited about it. She was a feminist, all for  women1 s suffrage and women1s rights. Oh yes.  MF: /laughter^ Do you remember her actually campaigning for suffrage  or working?  Camp: Oh, she was a quiet type that didn't really get out the way I  have gotten out ^laughter/ and talked and campaigned. But in her groups  she was effective. And as president of these different things, when &#171;he  was active and in touch with people they always knew how she felt and  what she thought.  MF: Was she active in North Carolina before you left there?  Camp: No, no.  MF: She was tied down at that time with really small children.  Camp: Yes, yes. I guess she didn't belong to the Addisoo Book Club,  which was a sort of intellectual club of the town. But when my aunt Mary  MacDonald would go up to Baltimore (she did quite often in the winter), then  my mother would go to the Addisco Book Club/laughter/.  MFt This is the aunt who had raised your mother?  Camp: No, no, no, this was my father's aunt. My aunt who reared her  died when I was a little girlj I don't remember her.  MF: Do you think that in Washington there were avenues for women?  There were clubs and things?  Camp: Yes.  MF: Were there opportunities for women to become involved?  Camp: Probably not for all women. These were very exclusive little  groups in the book clubs. The Addisco was the old one and "the" club, but  younger women coming along formed their own clubs. And they had some  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 12  intellectual life. A lot of their life was around the church. Most of  my family were on both sides Episcopalian, Way back there were a. number  of Quakers that came from England to Rhode Island. One of them was an  Anthony that Susan Anthony is descended from. Several others were French  Huguenots. But the Episcopalians absorbed them all. And when you read  the story back you can understand why, because the Quakers were denied the  right to be citizens, because you had to take an oath of allegiance to the  king and to the queen. And if you didn't do that you couldn't hold property  or couldn't vote and so on. So maybe it was just true love, but anyway  /laughter/ they seemed to have married Episcopalians and been absorbed by  the Episcopalians, all of them.  MP: What effect do you think it had on your mother that her own mother  had died so young? Do you think that had something to do with her concern  for women or concern for women1s rights in some way?  Camp: No. I think that my mother, she was a very quiet, gentle but  remarkable woman. And I think she would have been that in any circumstance.  But there was certainly much more opportunity for her, I think, in Azusa  than there would have been in Washington. That1s why I say the move for  her was good$ but it was not a good move for my father because he was too  old, really, to adjust and to get into anything at that stage.  MPj I see. I wanted to talk in a minute about your move to California,  which I find really fascinating. But I wanted to ask first what you remember  about the years you spent in North Carolina as a child. You were thirteen,  I believe you said, when you moved.  Camp: Oh, I remember all about it /laughter/, practically. Those are  vivid memories /laughter/.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 15  MF: Did you always live in Washington in all of that time?  Campi Yes, yes.  MF: Which house do you remember most growing up in? Did you live  in one house?  Campj We lived in one house. It was remodeled. It was a smaller  house, and as more children came daughter/ they had to make it a bigger  house. But it's still in Washington. It was remodeled again after we left.  But the last time I was there (I can't remember how many years ago, maybe  seven) I went all through the house.  MFj And you were very close, you said, to your father's parents who  lived not very far away?  Camp: Yes I was, and to all my. ... See, I had great-aunts scattered  all over the town, cousins all over the town. I'd walk from one end to the  other and ^laughter/ see so many of my relatives.  MF: Was it a very small town at that time?  Camp: Yes, it was small.  MF: Did your family have servants working in the house?  Oampt Yes, we always had. We had a cook and usually a nurse when the  children were small-sometimes even an &#163;aughter7 assistant nurse. And there  was a white man, I remember, who used to~we had a great big place, and we had  a pony and a phaeton-come and take care of the pony and the phaeton and the  yard.  MF: Phaeton?  Campj It was a little two-seated buggy. And every afternoon that was  pretty my mother used to take us out into the woods; in those days it was  safe, and Washington was surrounded by pine woods. And we'd go out into  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp Ik  these pine woods and pick wildflowers. The children just loved it. So  that from the time I. ... I can't remember when I didn't love nature  and feel a part of nature, because we were a part of it /laughter^.  MPj You said that when your mother grew up on this plantation she  had played with the children of the black people on the plantation.  Campi Yes, I'm sure she must have, because those were the children  that were there.  MF: Did you have the same sorts of relationships with black children  in Washington?  Camp: No.  MPj Did you ever have any contact with children of the . . .  Camp: No.  MP: . . . people who worked in your house?  Camp: No.  MPs Do you remember any very close relatianships with blacks?  Camp: Oh yes, but it was not with black children.  MFj But with adults?  Camp: But with the adults, because these great-aunts of mine had these  marvelous cooks that they'd had for ages. We'd call them Aunt: Aunt Julia,  Aunt Lettuce. But those were the old ones. The younger ones, like the cook  we had, we just called them Molly. We had a good relationship, but it was  a servant. ... It was no feeling then of any kind of equality.  MF: Do you think that that situation has shaped any of your later  feelings about race in the South, or about race relations?  Camp: Well, of course it was very difficult for me, because also the  Civil War and the South. When I came out here, I remember the first time,  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 15  for instance, they were singing "Marching Through Georgia." Well, to me  that was the most terrible thing in the world, because Sherman had burned  so much of Georgia, burned our town. When I was little I was brought up  as a child of the Confederacy. So it was very, very difficult for me, and  my whole world was just simply turned upside down topsy-turvy. I remember  the first time in high school there were some black students (not many,  just maybe two or something like that) that were athletes. And I remember  . I mean, it was a little hard getting used to it, the equality that  you had in the classrooms. But certainly I had ... certainly absorbed  these prejudices and customs of the group in which I grew up. But they were  of course broken down decidedly, and I have had many very fine black friends.  MF: Did the whole process of breaking down those prejudices. . . ?  Camp: It was very painful for a child.  MF: Did it go on for a long period of time?  Camp: Well yes, in a way, because I didn't really have too much con  tact there. There were only these two boys, as I remember, that were in  school, so there was really very little contact. Then when I went up to  Berkeley there really wasn't much contact. It was really, I guess, after  I came back from Bryn Mawr and the last time when I began to have more  association as I went into different groups and joined in things. I had  been very active in the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom,  which was founded by Jane Addams in 1915. But I went out in these different  areas and met black people on an equal plane and of course came to know them  as people, why there was no problem then. It just simply melted away; it  didn't mean anything.  MF: What about your parents? Did thoy have the same sort of, go through  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 16  the same sort of process?  Camp: No. I don't think it ever completely broke down with them.  Not with my father; but with my mother, she was such a warm, human person  that to her a person was a person /laughter/, you know. But as far as I  was concerned, I remember here when I was choosing the board for the&#8212;I  was going to be president of the Parent-Teacher1 s in the school where my  son went. And we had only one Negro family. It just happened that they  were very unusual people; Loren Miller, who became a leader in the civil  rights movement out here,was a lawyer (I had known him before), and his  wife Juanita, who was a very active social worker. And one of the women  that was going to be on the board came to me and said, "Well, I don't know  why you have to have Mrs. Miller en the board"&#8212;meaning because she was  black&#8212;"there's only one black child in the school." And I said, "Well,  I'm not doing this on the basis of the quota system. I asked her to be  chairman of legislation because she's the most capable one there." I said,  "She knows more about it than any of the others" /laughter/. She didn't  like that one bit. So this prejudice is certainly not confined to North  Carolina or the South.  MP: Certainly. Did you ever notice anything different about your  parents' attitude toward servants or toward even poorer white people in the  town of Washington when you were little than other townspeople?  Camp: Oh yes. It was quite a hierarchy. There were the aristocrats  (those of us who went back for generations in the area) and what they used  to call&#8212;let me see, what did they call them?&#8212;plain but nice people, or  something like that, or the common people or something. And then, of course,  at the bottom of the lot were the blacks. There was quite a hierarchy when  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 17  I was a child; I imagine there still is.  MF: What about a hierarchy within different kinds &#169;f churches? You  said that your family belonged to the Episcopal church. How did you view  Methodists or Baptists?  Gamp: Yes, there was. Oh yes, that too. The only other one that  really rated equal, I think, to the Episcopal church was the Presbyterian,  and I had some relatives in the Presbyterian too. But yes, they tended to  think that they were very nice people but rather ordinary.  MPj Did your mother ever break out of that or try to deal with that  in a different way?  Camp: No, no. She was mere occupied really with her family and  really didn't.  MF: What about your companions when you were a child? You said that  there were cousins and all sorts of relatives around. What about all these  brothers and sisters? Were you close to them?  Camp: Not very. I was older, and I was very active. They sort of  stayed home, the little ones, with my mother and the nurses, and I was  covering the waterfront, the town.  MF: Did you do that by yourself?  Campt Oh no, oh no, I had cousins who wandered with me, and the  rector1s daughter, when it was very proper. She never went into some of  these excursions ^aughtery'; I was always going to see what was going on  everywhere, I guess. But I always had plenty of friends that went with me  who had curiosity such as mine.  MF: Did all of your brothers and sisters stay in California when your  family moved out here, or have they scattered across the country?  Tly mother1s father, as I recall, was a Methodist, and so were some of  her cousins. I had a good friend who was a Baptist. I went to her  church when she was baptized.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 18  Oampi You mean are they all here now?  MF: Right.  Camp: Yes, they're all here now. I was, again, the only wanderer.  MF: The only one who ever went back east?  Camp: Yes, and lived and stayed back there for a long time.  MF&#187; I was going to ask you if you were closer to one parent than the  other. You were obviously much daughter/ closer to your mother.  Camp: Much closer to my mother, oh yes.  MFt Did she really serve as a model for your behavior to y*u? Did  you want to be like her?  Oampi No, because I was much more like my father in temperament, I'm  sure, than my mother. I was much more the adventurer and the wanderer.  In his early days when he wandered, when he went off in the boats, that was  really what he liked. That was the mistake he made, marrying and getting  tied down /laughter^.  MF: I was going to say, did he always kind of seem to have that wander  lust after that?  Gamp: Well, I think it was taken out of him.  MFj He had too many responsibilities /laughter^.  Gamp* Yes, I think it was taken out of him. And, by then^don't forget,  he was fifteen years older than my mother, and by then he was getting kind of  old anyway. But he had such a zest for life and insatiable curiosity and  interest in people and so on, that I have really much more than my mother.  My mother is a much more balanced, sane, reasonable type of person /Taughter7.  MF: Did you have contact with your father? I mean, did he read t&#169; you  or did he tell you stories?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 19  Camp: My main contact that I remember was going down and getting  money /laughter^ from him. We had a plaoe in Washington that was very  popular and run by a little old lady named Miss Molly Vines. Sho not only  had this little gift shop that had all these things in it that were faeci-we  children  nating to us ('/ were probably terrible nuisances to her; she probably  thought we were going to break all the china), but she also had as a side  she had a freezer of homemade ice cream, chocolate ice cream. And I remem  ber my father mostly going down and getting, I think it was a nickel a  dish /laughter^ getting a nickel for some ice cream from Miss Molly Vines.  But otherwise I remember, for instance, an incident like this with my father.  There was a little house owned by a lady (she probably was young, but to me  she seemed like an old lady) Miss Mary Prime, and then our house. And here  was this big Episcopal church yard where some of my ancestors had been  buried, and people had been buried for a long, long time, this big churchyard.  Well, in the day I liked it, because it had trees and flowers. It was like  a park almost, you know, except for the tombstones. And I was interested in  those too /laughter^ because so many of them were people that I had heard  about or ancestors, you know, or relatives. So that never had any fear for  me in the daytime. But at night we were always afraid. And the bedroom  that my sister and I had, a big bedroom, overlooked the churchyard /laughter/.  I remember there was one young black nurse that we had,named Geneva, and she  used to tell us these tales about the ghosts. And oh, she'd take them on;  II d never seen a better actress. And finally my father said, you know, no  more of these tales. There's nobody there, nobody in therej there's nothing  to be afraid of. And I remember he took my brother by one hand and took me  by the other and insisted on taking us all through that graveyard and showing  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 20  us there was nothing in it ^Iaughter7, there wasn't any such thing as  ghests. I didn't appreciate that, but perhaps that was good treatment  /jTaughter/. I don't knew.  MFj You didn't appreciate it because yeu were afraid?  Oampj Oh yes. Then my father also used to take us when they used te  have things like the eld fiddlers' convention; I can remember that. And he  just  loved music, so we always were taken (my brother and I,/the two older ones)  to the old fiddlers1 convention. And I loved music too. And then whenever  the circus came to town (he loved the circus and so did we) he'd always take  us up to the circus.  MP: What was the fiddlers' convention like in Washington, N.C.?  Oamp: Well, there were these men that came from all kinds of surround  ing places, I guess, and played the violin. That's all I remember vaguely,  you know, about all this.  MF: Would there be a crowd of people who would come?  Camps Oh yes, I'm sure. But my father, as I said, was the one that  would always take us out to anything that was exciting ^laughter/. But my  mother took us every pretty afternoon; every afternoon we1 d go out, &#171;&#171;t into  the pine woods.  MF: You said that the pine woods were safe back then.  Campj Yes. I don't remember ever being afraid.  MF: I wondered if you ever heard anything about trouble between blacks  and whites, any kind of rumors of lynching or rumors of. . . ?  Camp: Well no. There's something in my mind, but I don't know how  correct it is, how true it is. But it seems to me that once there was some  thing about one of the doctors, white doctor who had his driver that I think  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 21  was black who put some poison in something, and that he was lynched, as I  remember. I sort of remember that one time when we were coming back,  instead of taking the usual route that my mother took from the woods she  went a different way. And I asked her why. I don't think she told me,  but I think I asked until I found out. Somebody told me that; now  whether that was true or not I don't know. You know, sometimes when I think  about these many things that I have a vague memory about, I1d really like to  know whether they're true or not true; I don't know.  MF: Do you have any idea how old you might have been at that time?  Gamp: Oh, probably maybe six or seven.  MF: What about other things that were sort of that children were not  supposed to be aware of or to know about? What about being told about sex  or being told about. . . ?  Camp: Oh, very strict, and my mother too. She never talked about  that. She gave me when I was getting/the point that I should "What Every  Girl Should Know" or some such thing as that to read /laughter^. That was  about it. But I remember when I was quite little once one of the girls told  me that "Your mother's going to have a baby." Well, I think I was kind of  fed up on babies by that time, and I said, "Well how do you know?" And she  said, "Look at her stomach; she has a big stomach." Well, that really  went  intrigued me. And I remember we / over to my great-aunt1 s (this was an  aunt of my mother who was very strict) and we were whispering, you know.  Lizzie  Aunt / said, "Well, what are you children whispering about?" And I said,  "About where babies come from." And she sent me home, as if it was. . . .  BEGIN SIDE II TAPE I  mother  So my/ told me yes, she was going to have another baby. And then she showed  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 22  me some things she was making (she was a very good seamstress and she could  make just beautiful thingsj you know, in those days embroider and feather  stitch and all these things). So I was never domestic and I never cared a  thing about sewing. But I remember she gave me a little piece of cloth and  (I never cared about dolls either) I made &#163;aughter7 (probably the only thing  I ever made for a doll in all my life) a little sacque to look like the one  that she was making.  But sex was taboo, yes. But every now and then you1 d hear something,  the children would hear something and then they' d talk with each other.  ever  Not so much brothers and sisters&#8212;I don't remember/talking to them about any  of this&#8212;but with others your own age.  MF&#187; But always sort of in complete ignorance and always curious.  Oampj Oh yes. And always the feeling that there was something really  shameful about it. I remember there was a case of a girl that I knew and  cared a great deal about whose mother had become pregnant before she was  married. Then later she had married the man, but people would still talk  about things, you know, in sort of whispers. And somebody said one day about  "that baby," "it was a good thing that baby died." I remember asking, "How  would that baby be different from any of the other daughter/ babies these  two people have had?"-as if it were the baby's fault, you know, or something  wicked. But their attitude was not the attitude we have today of free and  open discussion.  MP&#187; Do you think that the fact that people were so close to the church  had a lot to do with that? Or was the church an Important part of your life?  Oamps Oh, the church was a yery_ important part of the life. When you  went into Lent, like noWj ym had a mtle miU ^ ^ ^^ ^^ f^  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 23  your mite box. And Good Friday, you know, you went through all the story  of the Crucifixion. And then when Sunday came, that was a big day though.  You got a new dress, new hat, new shoes. We marched around the church, and  that was very, very significant.  MP: What about within your own family? Did you have family prayers?  Was your father a religious man?  Campt No, he wasn't unless he got sick; then he'd suddenly become  quite religious. Then he'd forgive people that he hadn't /laughter/ been  very nice to, and ask them to forgive him.  MPj /laughter/ Did he go to church, do you know, with the family?  Camp: Very seldom. But he insisted on our going, of course.  MP: And your mother went?  Campt Not too often because of the children, the babies.  MP: Was that acceptable, for parents to stay home and to just send your  children?  Camp: Well, in our case my grandparents were pillars of the church  and their families had been pillars of the church since it was founded (in  fact they were among the founders), so we were certainly accepted.  MF: Was your father sort of different from the rest of his family?  Did he stand out as being unusual?  Camp: Oh yes, yes, yes he did.  MPt How did they regard him?  Oampj As a character, I think /laughter/.  MF: Friendly toleration? /Taughter/  Camp: Very, very friendly character. In fact, my father was a very  good mimic. In the course of his travels seeing so many people, he could  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 24  tell marvelous stories and take off people, so that he was usually the  life of the party /laughter/. People liked him. My mother was much more  quiet; you had to know her to really care about and appreciate her. But  I don't know what this has to do with the Southern Summer School.  MPt Oh, well. ... /interruption/ I wanted to ask you about the  schools that you went to. You said that you attended St. Pater* s Episcopal  church school until you were around. ...  Campi No, not at school. It was the infant class. From the time I  could toddle I was sent into the infant class and so on. But that of course  was religious education.  KPt Ch, it wasn't a school?  Camp: No, no, that was the religious education. But that was very  important in our lives. Also the fact that I think every Saturday afternoon  we had to go into the room that was the vestry room. I1d sit on this bunk  that held the vestments, and we had to /laughter/ sew these pieces of cloth  I remember,  for quilts for the orphans. I used to get so sick of the orphans /laughter/,/  because I wanted to go out and play, I didn't want to sit there sewing; I  hated to sew anyway, and sit still that long.  MF: Did you ever meet any of the orphans you were covering up?/faughter/  Camps Oh no, no, they were out in Thomasville or someplace, you know.  We never saw them. If we'd known them or anything about them we would have  felt differently. But it wasn't like a person; we never saw. We just had  to sew all these little pieces /laughter/ together.  But that was very much a part of our life. And my father had an idea  that no child should be confined in a school, have to go to a school until  he was eight years old. So I didn't go until I was eight, and then I went  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 25  to this private school that was run by a maiden lady who was a very good  friend of my great-aunt' s and had even taught my father when he was a boy.  MF: Oh my goodnessl  Camp! Miss Betty Robinson. And it was held in the Masonic Hall, so  that was always very interesting. We always wanted to see if we couldn't  find the goat and all these other things we'd heard about with the Masons,  (We never did.) Oh yes, it was a small. . . .  MF: Was your father a Mason?  Camp: No, but my grandfather was. My father didn't like to join any-as  I think about it,  thingj/I don't know of his joining anything.  MP: Interesting.  Camp: He was a strong individualist.  MF: Did you ever go to any public schools in North Carolina?  Camp: les, after this private school. And there was a young woman  there who taught the young children the reading, I remember. Miss Betty  used to have a spelling bee, I think it was every Friday afternoon or some  thing. And all the children in the school stood up to spell, including the  big ones. My aunt who was six years older than I was in the big one, and  she still laughs about it, because I used to be the champion speller. I'd  spell them all down ^TaughterJ7.  Anyway, then I went, I insisted on going to the public school, because  I thought it would be more interesting: so many more people there, bigger,  more exciting. And I think it was probably in the sixth grade that I went  into the public school.  MF: Did a lot of your friends in town go to the public school?  Camp: Yes, quite a number of them, yea.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 26  MPj Did your parents have any feeling about not sending you there,  or did they readily agree to send you?  Oampj No. I don't think it was that so much as the fact that Papa  had gone to Miss Betty, Mary my aunt went to Miss Betty, everybody went to  Miss Betty in my little set. So I just went to Miss Betty /faughter7.  MP: I see. Was the public school bigger and more exciting and more  interesting?  Damp: Oh yes, yes, of course. It not only had the small group of  children that I was used to, but it had all these I1 d never heard of /laughter^  One of them was a fascinating one that I used to (lived up in the north end  of town) go up to see her a lot. I remember we used to climb trees. I can  still remember her name; her name was Neppie Arthur.  MF: Did all of the children in Washington go to one public school&#8212;all  the white children anyway?  Oampj Yes.  MFi So you met children who were not as well off as your parents?  damps Oh, I met children from all the different gradations of the  hierachy. Of course they wouldn't like to hear it called a hierarchy, but  in a way it was.  MFt What about the teachers? Where did they come from? Do you  remember any of them?  Oampt No. One of them, I remember, she married somebody, I think,  in the town, one of the old families. But the others were people I really  don't know. I remember one of them, her name was Betty too; I don't remem  ber her last name. That was the first one I had. I met her on the street  after I had gone back sometime. Oh Lewis, I think her name was Betty Lewis.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 27  Somebody said, "Do you remember her? This is Miriam Bonner. Do you  remember her?" "Oh yea," she said, "such a good spellerl" /laughter^  It seemed to be my one reputation: such a good spellerl And my son is  a very poor speller ^Taughter^.  MF: j/laughter/ You had a reputation. You said that when you were  thirteen (which must have been in around 1909). &#8226; &#8226;  Camps It was 1909.  MF: . . . your family decided to move to California. I wondered how  that decision was made and why your father decided (or your mother and  father decided) to go.  Camp: Well, I think one reason was that I had an uncle, my father1a  brother that was out here. And he was always writing these glowing ascounts.  MF: Do you have any of those letters that he wrote?  Camp: No. And then we had been having a lot of sickness. In those  days they didn't know, I guess, what caused malaria. Anyway, we had a lot  of malaria. I can1t remember just how old I was, but at one stage I had  typhoid fever, and the doctor thought I was going to die. They sent to  not  Norfolk for a trained nurse, and I had curls and he told her/to cut off  told her no, to leave the curls on, because he wanted my mother to remember  me that way. So my mother chopped them off, you know. I was very, very  ill, almost dying. And my sister Virginia almost died of dyptheria, and a  number of these sisters and brothers that my father had had died. So he  sort of felt, "Well, if it's so beautiful out there and so wonderful and  everybody's so healthy we'll move out." So he just. . . .  MF: Had his parents died by that time?  Camp: Yes, both parents had died.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 28  MFt So it was easier to go.  Gamp: Yes, it was easier to go.  MFj Did he go with any specific job in mind, or did he go saying he1 d  find work?  Caapj My uncle, my father had sent him the money for an orange grove.  And we had this orange grove that was just across from the sign that said  "Azusa City Limits," /Taughter^ but it was considerably out of town. My  father, of course, knew nothing about growing oranges, and he had bad luck.  There was a freeze, I think, one year and a flood. So he was thoroughly  disgusted with growing oranges and sold the ranch, and we moved into Azv sa.  MFt Then what did he do after that?  Oamp: Well, he had various jobs in engineering. He was really a marine  engineer, but he was a fine mechanic.  MF: Did he ever go back to working on the ships?  Oamp: No, no.  MFj When you moved, how did you get out here?  Oampi Took a train, the train.  MFt You remember the trip?  Gamps Oh yesI  MFt Did it take a long, long time?  Oampt I remember the first time I saw a mountain. I was looking out of  the window in my berth and I saw something coming up so close to the window,  you know. I looked up and here was this great big mountain. I didn1t  realize I was going to be climbing mountains so much daughter/. I used to  climb mountains so much all around here and up in Mono County when we  lived up there.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 29  MFt Did your parents move a lot of furniture? Did they put it on  the train?  Camp: Yes, and most of it was wrecked. They trusted somebody (my  father always trusted everybody) and trusted this man who said, you know,  he'd pack it and everything would be fine. We got out here, a lot of it was  broken.  MF: How did all of these aunts and uncles and cousins and everyone  feel about your going?  Gampt Oh, I think they were very ... sick about it, very unhappy.  MFt Did they sort of ... I don't know, did they try to keep your dad  from going,  Camp: No, no, no.  MFt How did your mother feel about moving?  Camp: Well, I think she thought it would be. See, my uncle  wrote these glowing letters, so they just thought. ... Well, as a matter  of fact we have been on the whole very healthy out here /laughter/. But I  think they've been healthy in North Carolina too. When I go back there my  cousin who1 s my age and has lived in Washington all of her life and this  rector's daughter who was my closest friend (well Dora's a little bit  younger, but Rena, the rector's daughter is my age), they're just as  healthy as far as I can see as I am /laughter/. So maybe it wouldn't have  made any difference.  MFt What was Los Angeles like when you were out here, Los Angeles  County?  Camp: Oh, it was beautiful: no smog, no smog. Azusa was the area where  people came (Monrovia and Duarte, very close to Azusa) where people  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 30  came fer their lungs from all over the verld. There was this big Pottenger  Sanitarium in Monrovia, and orange groves and lemon groves. It was just  beautiful. You'd take the old Pacific Electric from Azusa into Los Angeles,  and you1 d go through all these orange groves, you know: beautiful. You  can't imagine what it was like; everything's been cut down now, and all the  real estate developers have put up little houses everywhere.  MFt It just seems to me that that was so early. It must have been  very exciting, like being a pioneer.  Camp: Oh, it was so beautiful. I was with two people&#8212;well, in fact,  they have in Azusa what they call Pioneer Days or something like that once  a year. And my mother was always considered one of them and invited to  daughter/ ride in the carriage and so on, so I guess in a way we were.  MF: Were there many families like you coming out, or did mainly single  men come out?  Campt No, no families came.  MF: That just seems very unusual to me.  Campt There were some families that came, and mostly for health  reasons. Most of the people I can think of came for their health.  MF: Did people think you were strange because you were from the South?  Camp1 Yes. In fact, (and I really don't know that this is true) it  was not easy for me because, as you ean imagine, I was suddenly thrust from  an environment of such security, such security: knowing everybody, and my  world was, you know, so secure. And then out on the ranch there was a  school on one corner of the ranch, but they didn't have the seventh and  eighth grades. Now I really could have gone in high school at that point,  because I had been having algebra and Latin, as I remember. But I was a  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 51  little hesitant about it, this new situation, and so I thought, "Well, I'll  go in the seventh grade." Picked it all up by myself while going to seventh  grade ^/laughter/. So I don't know, probably my uncle got permission for me  to be going to the seventh grade. But when I came in one of the boys told  me that the principal, who had both the seventh and eighth grades and the  administration, naturally, I suppose, didn't want anotherpupil. He may have  said this and he may not have said it, but anyway this boy (I still remember  his name, a red-haired boy ^/laughter/) said the principal didn't want me  because he said I was from the South and that I would be backward, and that  it would be difficult for me to keep Up and I might have a lot of extra  work to do. Now whether he did or he didn't, I don't know, but anyway . . .  it was not very pleasant for me. As I say, I was just thirteen. And I had  to come all by myself; I rode a bicycle from the ranch into town. And when  there was a flood (as there used to be before the dams were built) I'd really  have some problem getting across these channels, you know, full of water.  Then this boy that I was telling you about, he used to stick his foot out  almost every time I went down the aisle. I can remember one of the Hawks  boys (I never could remember which it was, whether it was Kenneth, Howard  or what Hawks), but one of the Hawks that later became famous in the movie  industry used to take my braid ^Iaughter7 and put it in his inkwell /Iaughter7.  And I'd get it all over my dress and have a nice mess when I got home to try  to get that off.  But then gradually I made friends and made my place. Then the eighth  grade, by then they had put in the seventh and eighth grades out on this  little Center school at the corner of the ranch. I had to go there because  I was in that district to the eighth grade. I didn't want to, because I  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 52  already had my friends here, but I had to. And there were some very rough  girls there, I can remember. Their fathers were foremen on seme of the  ranches, and they really didn't like southerners} they were mean, really  mean. So I was very glad when my father sold the ranch ^/Taughte^. We  moved into Azusa and I was back with my friends.  MPi Hew did the schools in general compare to the schools you'd been  to in North Carolina?  Camp* Well, I really don't remember that. I mean, to me a lesson was  a lesson. I really preferred it, I guess, in North Carolina because I knew  people and it was more fun. But as I got adjusted out here it was all right.  And then when I went to high school I had four years in the same high school.  I had a very dear friend there that was really, I think of all the friends  I've had (and I've had so many) was the closest to me. Then a lot of other  friends too, and the life there was rich. I didn't remember that I'd ever  sung in a glee club, but one of my friends showed me ^aughter^ her old  annual when I went up to visit my son Slaughter/ in Oregon. There was a picture  of me with her in the glee club. ^laughter/ Well, that's one experience I  had forgotten. I used to play tennis a lot; I was a good tennis player. I  had a very rich, happy time.  MPj What about teachers who particularly influenced you in high school?  Campt Well, I always had this affinity for the English teacher, for some  reason. I remember I had quite a crush on the freshman English teacher. But  that was nothing like the crush on the junior high school, the teacher in my  junior year. She had this pale geld hair and she looked like, I always felt,  Elaine in Tennyson's "Idylls" ^Taughter7. And she somehow was very under  standing and very kind. And she used to invite me over to her house for tea,  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 55  and then after she was married she1d invite me to come to see her. And when  the baby was born I went to see her and so on. I don11 know why. But, you  see, I've lived so many places, and I can't keep up with everybody; so some  of the people I really care most about I haven't kept up with. But I'm sure  she'8 dead by this time.  MF: But did she sort of. . . ?  Oampj &#169;aly strengthened my resolve. Then in the senior year they started  a junior college, and my class would be the first for the junior college. So  of course they wanted us with the basis for the junior college. No, I was  going to Berkeley. I didn't know why; it was the university. I was going  to Berkeley, and nothing they would say. . . . But practically all of my  friends stayed, just all of them, and went to the junior college. And I went  off to Berkeley by myself ^Iaughter7.  MPj How did your parents feel about that? Were they supportive?  Camp: Well my father, I think, always thought, you know. ... He  never demurred about anything that I know of; I never heard him object to  anything. And my mother was always a strong support; if there was something  I wanted she'd do everything she could to help me get it.  MFt Why do you think you wanted to go to Berkeley?  Camp: I don't know.  MFt Had you heard abiut it?  Campj It was just the state university, I guess. Of course in those  days Berkeley didn't mean what it's meant lately /laughter7; it simply was  the state university. As far as I know I can't remember knowing anybody  who even went there. Well, there was one girl, but I didn't like her anyway;  I hardly knew her.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  MF: But none of your teachers had been trained there?  Gamp? Not those that I knew well. The one that was my idol in my  junior year went to USC /laughter/, and I never wanted to go to USC for  some reason. The Univer&#171;fety&#187; I was going to the University. So I went to  the University.  MPj Was there ever any question at all about there not being enough  money to send you to college?  Campt Well no. I was going to work my way if necessary, and I did some  of that in my freshman year. Then, I guess by my sophomore year, I was a  reader in logic when I was taking logic, and I was a tutor in Latin, and I  was a reader in English. When I graduated I taught English, taught fresh  man English.  MFi What did the readers do?  Gamp: They correct the papers and grade them.  MF: I see, /Taughter/ OK. What were your plans about what you would  do in the future when you started to college? What did you see yourself  doing?  Camp: When I was in high school I was very much interested in social  service? thought I'd go into social work. And I read all the books of Jacob  Riis about New York. Now I1d never been to New York and I dldn1t know any  thing about that type of life, but I just gobbled it up* everything Jacob  Riis wrote, everything Jane Addams wrote. And when I graduated from high  school and I was one of the speakers at the commencement, my subject was  "Jane Addams and Hull House."  MFs That's very interesting.  Camp: And I thought then, until then I came into touch with Ben Lindsay,  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 35  and then I thought the juvenile court. So I couldn't make up my mind: I  thought I might be an English teacher, I thought I might be a soeial worker,  and I thought I might go into juvenile court law (a number of my relatives in  North Carolina were lawyers, and a lot of lawyers in my father's family). I  thought I could be a lawyer&#8212;only juvenile court, no other kind of law. But  then when I got to Berkeley I still wasn't sure in my junior year whether I  would go into teaching or whether I would go into social work. And I always  loved history. So I took enough history and enough social economics (my  economics really, except for basic economics, is in the social economics  field) so that I had a secondary certificate so that I could teach those  subjects. But then I had decided when I had to make up my mind what would  be my major, I had decided then on English, and wanted to teach.  MF: Who first introduced you to social work? Who in Azuaa was reading  Jacob Riis and Jane Addams?  Gamp: I don't think anybody else, but the books were in the library  and I was gobbling them up.  MF&amp;lt; So you just found them?  Camp: I was gobbling them up. I was all for reforming the world. And  I don't know why I didn't. ... I remember going over and talking to some  body about the juvenile court law and going to work with Ben Lindsay. Qut  then I decided, I think, that that was too long and too expensive, and I  think I gave it up for that reason as being not one of the feasible things  to do.  MF: Did you sort of rationalize teaching as being a way to reform?  Camp: No, I don't think so. I think that was just because I loved the  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 56  subject,and I liked teaching in the tutoring I had done and so on. The  teaching that I did, I found it very interesting, liked it.  MF: You entered Berkeley in 1915.  Camp: Yes.  MF; What was it like then? How many students were there?  Camp: I have no idea, but it was certainly relatively small. And it  state  was the only/University, you see; all these others were started later. In  fact, when I had graduated (in fact I had my masters, I guess) was when they  started UCLA down here. And several of the people I knew in the English  department and some of the other professors were very influential, and they  suggested that I come and teach there. Well, that would have been a very  practical thing to do. I would have been on the ground floor of UCLA and  just simply worked my way up there. But nothing that practical, I guess,  ever really held me very long /laughter7. No sir, then I had to go to New  York. Now why New York too and why Columbia? I didn't know anybody in  Columbia, and I didn't know anybody in New York, but that was the next Mecca.  And I had a fellowship that was given to me by the University of California,  so off I went. The sensible thing to have done would have been to have  U.C., Berkeley  gotten my doctorate at / and gone into UCLA teaching.  MF: To go back to Berkeley for just a minute, who were the teachers  who influenced you most? Did you study under any people in particular?  Camp: Well, I think probably the man in the English department did  influence me most, the man named Benjamin Kurtz, K-u-r-t-z. Oh, there were  others: Arthur Brodeur 3f the English department; Lucy Ward Stebbins, who  was the Dean of Women and also teacher of economics.  MF: How many women were at Berkeley then?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 57  Campj Well not very many. That's another thing&#187; when I was talking  about going into university teaching I remember one of my professors (I  don't remember now which one it was) said, "It'll be a long, hard struggle."  He said, "They'll take a third-rate man anytime to a first-rate woman."  And that was true at that stage; there weren't many women. Miss Stebbins  was the Dean of Women and professor of economics. And Jessica Peixotto (I  could work with her too) taught in economics. I was trying to think. I  can't seem to remember anybody in English except those of us who had like  teaching assistant jobs. I taught regular freshman English the year I got  my masters, but I wouldn' t have done that if it hadn't been, I think, a war  situation.  MP* So they asked you to stay on because they needed teachers?  Gamp: No, I was getting my masters, so they asked me to take this fresh  man English class. But I can't remember women in the department, now that  I think about it.  MPj What about the students? Were there many women students like in  the undergraduate. . . . ?  Oampj Yes, many. I remember when a friend of mine wrote to me about  Kennette  women coming to Chapel Hill. She said (Madge/ ), "You're so used to  co-education. How do you work out these problems with the women and so on?"  And I said, "Well, I don't know, because it was already worked out when I  got here." It was all co-educational.  MP: It was co-educational from the very beginning, wasn't it?  Camp: As far as I know.  MFj Did you live in a dorm with lots of other women?  Camps The first year I lived in a private home. But in my second and  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 38  third and fourth years I lived in ... well, it was really like a coope  rative. We had a housemother and a cook and a student to wait on tables.  And we had our own officers and our student council, our house meetings once  a week.  MF: How many people lived there?  Campt And we parcelled out the jobs and rotated things. It's funny,  I don't know,but I think there must have been about twenty of us living in  the house and probably about fifteen who belonged that lived on the campus&#8212;  I mean, lived in other places.  MF: It was sort of like a. . . ?  Campt Well, it was a club. We called the the Mekatina Club.  MF: Meccatina Club?  Campt Mekatina. Then they went national, and I can't remember now  what it was. And they asked all of us to join the national sorority. But  by then I was in that part of my life that that was done /faughter7.  MFt Other than the Mekatina Club, what were the main student activities  at Berkeley then? Were you involved in many?  Camp: Not much, not much. I really had to earn part of my way.  MFt How did you do that?  Camp: Well, I tutored, and I told you I read papers.  MF: Right.  Camp: In logic and English, and tutored in Latin. Taught in English,  in the English department. So I was really much too busy for much  that was extra. What extra I did usually was in connection with the house  and the activities of the house.  MFt Were there big debates about social or political issues? It was  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 59  sort of right before the suffrage amendment was passed. Were the women  students interested in suffrage?  Camp: Well, California got it very early, you see, and I think we  already had it, as I can remember, I think we got it in 1916.^  MP: So that would be right after you started to Berkeley.  Camp: Yes, so that that again was no problem  MFs What about other political issues? About World War I?  Camp: Not much. There may have been, but I wasn't in contact with  it. I knew people who went, I knew students who went into World War I.  HFt Was there any move to oppose the war that you remember?  Camp: But I don1t remember any, don1t remember*  MFt What about your political views?  Camp: It1s funny. The wife of one of the professors asked me once to  go to (and this is the first contact I ever had with any labor group) a  meeting of the, I guess it was the Central Labor Council in San Francisco.  It was some trade union group or labor group. That was not long after the  Mooney and Billings bombing. There was an argument, I can remember: some  body got so angry there and went out of the room (wouldn't even stay any  longer). And I often wonder what that was all about. I mean, I really  didn't know anything about any of the labor movement /laughter/ at that  time, and really didn't know very much when I went to the Southern Summer  School because I had really never been exposed to it in any way.  I was teaching English, as you know, at the North Carolina College for  Women, and Lois MacDonald was a YWCA secretary there. So when they needed  somebody to teach English that summer she had recommended me, so they offered  me the job. Now, I must have ... I can't quite remember, because the YWCA  5ln fact, California got suffrage for woman Oct. 10, 1911. No wonder I  took it for grantedl  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 40  was starting some classes out here for industrial workers.  MFs When you were in college?  Camps No, when I was teaching. After I left North Carolina, see, I  left and went to Europe for a year. When I came back, when I was teaching  at the Long Beach Junior College there was a YWCA secretary there who wanted  me to do something that summer with some industrial workers1 project here in  California. And I got this letter asking me to come back to the Southern  then  Summer School; and I felt that would be interesting and/b*ck to North  Carolina would be interesting, so I accepted that job. In looking through  some of this I came across her letter /Taughter7 telling me that she was  sorry that I had decided not to take this one.  MPs So you never had any contact with the YWCA when you were at Berkeley?  Camps No. Did I &#169;r didn't I? Not much, not really actively.  MFs They did have some sort of group on campus?  Camp; Oh yes, they had a YWCA there, and I knew people who were active  in it. But I myself was not active in it. I belonged to the Episcopal  church that was near the campus&#8212;I've even forgotten the name of that at  Berkeley.  MFj I was going to ask if you continued being active in the church to  a degree.  Camp: Well yes, but not as much. You see what happened, when I came  out here there was no Episcopal church in Azusa so I went to the Presbyterian  church. So in a way I had broken the pattern, you see.  MFt That strong tie that your family has had?  Camps Yes, very strong family tie. I hadn't broken it, it was broken  for me5 there was no Episcopal church in Azusa.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  MPt When you left Berkeley in it must have been 1920. . . .  Camp: Yes, I had my masters by then. I went to Columbiaj I had a  fellowship from Berkeley.  MF: Who did you study with at Columbia?  Camp: Oh goodness, that's so long ago I can't even remember.  MF: No one in particular that you went to study with?  Campi No, no. The one that really was the most interesting, I think,  was Carl Van Doren in his American literature class, because I had never. .  I had studied American history, but I had never studied American literature  per se. Of course I'd always read a great deal, but I don't think I'd ever  taken a course in it. And I took it with him. Then I" d really have to think  hard: there was a number of them, but I oan't. . . . There was a man named  Wright who taught the course in romanticism, and Kraft, I think, taught  philology. And the man who was head of the department, goodness, he even  wrote a textbook that we studied in high school; I can't remember. /Thorndike7  MF: Did you think seriously at that time &#171;f going on for a PhD?  Camp: Yes, I did.  MF: What made you decide not to?  Camp: I went to teach down in North Carolina.  MF: How did you get that job? Who contacted you about that?  Camp: I can't remember exactly, but I think somebody told me that Dr.  Foust was there recruiting teachers. I made an appointment with him; I guess  I must have,  MF: Did you decide at that time that you'd really like to go back to  North Carolina?  Camp: Yes, I guess I did. I think all my decisions have just never been  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 42  really thought-out decisions at all. Whatever I do I seem to do as a  rule just sort of on the spur of the moment. I heard he was there, I  decided I'd do it; I went, I did it ^laughter/.  MFt /laughter^ When you were in New York City in 1920 that was a  very exciting time in New York City. What were you involved in? Where  did you live? Did you meet a lot of good friends?  Camp: I lived on the campus of Columbia in the graduate women's hall,  Fernald Hall. Do you know it, Fernald Hall? I did have some very good  friends there. One very good friend that I had known all the way through  the University of California was there, a Jewish girl that I was very fond  of, a brilliant girl. Then I met some others in the hall where I lived.  But I really was very busy with my courses. Though I went out a lot to  opera, concerts, the theater; and we used to go roaming around New York  all the time when we had a holiday or like a Saturday. And we did go down  into the ghetto area, and took a trip over to Ellis Island and all that sort  of thing. The Henry Street Settlement, we used to go there.  MFs Just to visit?  Camp: Just to visit.  MF: Did you ever meet any of the people who were involved in settlement  work then? Your old interest in Lindsay and Jacob Riis, was that revived  at all?  Camp: No, no. Well, it was always there; it was always dormant anyway.  But at that time I was so busy with these courses that I really was quite  immersed in the library with the courses. And then when I wasn' t, then it  was more or less the theater. ...  BEGIN SIDE I TAPE II  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  cpntact with any of the people who were in the YWCA in  New York at that time?  Gamp: No.  MFs Then for the next five years, from 1921 to '26. ...  Camp: I taught in North Carolina.  MP: In North Carolina. What was the atmosphere at North Carolina  College for Women in the early twenties? It seems that it would be quite  a contrast from the experience you had had at Berkeley.  Camp: Well, it probably was, but I don't know. I really went there  thinking I'd stay at the most two years, and I was so happy there I stayed  five. And I never would have broken loose if I hadn1t just up and, again,  up and did it, because I would have done like practically everybody else  I knew, stayed on there and retired and lived there the rest of my life.  MP&#187; Right. What did you like about it so much? What was so attractive?  Camps Well, it's hard to say. I liked the students&#8212;very interesting  contacts. And there was a freedom about it; now perhaps there wouldn't have  been freedom if we'd gone into any controversial thing, but I wasn't interes  ted in the controversial things at that point especially. We didn't have so  much to teach that you couldn't teach. lou had time to read, to study, to  prepare, to have your class leisurely in an atmosphere without pressure;  conferences with the students, individual conferences that you came to know  them and came to be very fond of most of them, almost as if they were your  family. And some of the teachers I cared a great deal about,  MPj Who were your closest friends on the faculty?  Camp: A woman named Mildred Gould&#65533;&#65533;funny, she was a Georgian educated  at Columbia.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 44  MF: Did you meet her at Columbia?  Camp i No, no, I met her at NCCW. Ann Ketch in, who was a South  Carolinian, educated at Columbia; Louise Irby, who was from Tennessee.  It1 s so funny, often I think of that, the gravitation sort of towards the  southern people. Elva Barrow, who was a Virginiani really, my closest  friends there were southerners.  MF&#187; Were there a lot of people there who weren't southerners?  Campj Oh yes; and I knew them, and a few of them were really, you know,  friends from the middle West. But my closest friends were these southern  women, when I stop to think about it.  MFs Were there many men on the faculty there?  Campt A few, not very many.  MF: Were you close to any of them?  Campt No, not really. There were some marriages. There was a man  there&#8212;funny I can't remember his name&#8212;who was in the history department.  He married Carolina Hazen, who was in the history department. And there -  a man there named Frederick Morrison,* I think he was in education. Oh, there  were men. Most of them were married, but there were a few single men. But  for the most part the single women didn't go out with the single men /laughter^-  I mean, they had their friends elsewhere and we had ours elsewhere. I really  had very little, not much contact with the town. I had a cousin who lived '-  Greensboro, very much of proper society, a Presbyterian and very, very properj  a beautiful home, beautiful food. And I used to go there every now and then  for Sunday dinner. But otherwise there was very little contact with the town.  MFt Just sort of this nice group of people around on the campus?  Campj Yes. Almost like a nunnery life in a way. And it was very  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 45  comfortable and very pleasant.  MP: Were most of the students satisfied and happy with it?  Camp: I really don't know. I made a few friends. There was one stu  dent that I still correspond with, and several others that I correspond with  occasionally. But this one I correspond with regularly. And most of the  women that I cared about, my friends, have died; in fact all of them are dead,  I think.  MF: The student you still correspond with, is she still in North Caro  lina?  Camps No, she lives in Washington, D.C. She was a journalist. I guess  her husband was a journalist, though I never met him. He's been dead too for  some time. And there are several other students that write to me occasionally,  and maybe I'll write them back once. But I just don't have time. And I have  such a large correspondence-&#8212;I have a large family&#8212;that I just don't have  time for a lot of them.  MFs That's exciting, though, that they still write to you after such a  long time.  Campj Well it is, it's marvelous; it is marvelous.  MF: Most of the students who were there, what were they interested in?  What did they want to do?  Campt Well, at that time really there wasn't too much for women except  teaching.  MF: Right. Were most of them planning to be teachers?  Camp: I suppose a lot of them were. Some of them weren't planning, as  far as I know, to be anything ^laughter/. They just hoped to get married  and have families. Maybe they did; probably they did.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 46  MFt Was it easy to get married coming to a women's school like that?  I mean, was there an active social life?  Camp: No, I don't think there was too much, not on the campus. They  would have it when they went home, I suppose.  MF: What were the most important organizations for students?  Camp: They had two societies, and you sort of automatically fell into  one or the other, I can't remember which one I fell into. And they had an  initiation ceremony or something like that; they really didn't mean very much.  MF: Was the YWCA active?  Camps Yes, there was an active YWCA on the campus.  MF: What kinds of things did they do?  Camp: Oh, you'd have to ask Lois that ^Iaughter7 because I don't know.  MF: Did you have any contact with the "Y*? I mean, were you involved  or an advisor at all?  Camp: No, no.  MF: How did you meet Lois MacDonald then? Were you very close friends?  Camp: No, no, but we knew each other&#8212;everybody knew each other ^Taughter7.  MF: What was her particular position?  Camp: Oh, she was secretary of the YWCA on the campus.  MF: I mean, did you know anything about the work she was doing?  Camp: Not much.  MFj How did you finally leave? In 1926 you left?  Camp: Again, it was just a case of resigning and going to Europe.  MF: Oh, there was one other person I wanted to ask you about. Did you  know Harriet Elliott?  Camp: Oh yes, I knew Aunt Hit.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 47  MF&#187; Aunt Hit?  Camp: That's what, I guess, her nephews called her; they used to call  her Aunt Hit.  MP: What was she like? I've heard her name so many times.  Camp: Always busy and bubbling, always busy. She'd come in and she'd  well  ask you about something; then she'd look at her watch and, "Oh,/l have to go."  Off ehe'd jump, off she'd go. She wasn't the restful type that you could  have a conversation with.  MFj /laughter/ Did she have a close relationship with a lot &#169;f the  students who were there?  Oampt Yes, yes, with a lot of the students. And then she was active  more in the political life. She was quite good friends, I think, of Laura  Cone of the Gone mills. And there was a very prominent Jewish woman who was  one of the leaders in the political life there, and she was very good friends  with them. She used to play golf with them.  MFj What were her politics?  Gamp: Well, I guess Democratic; I think it was in Roosevelt's adminis  tration she got some very prominent job such as no woman had ever had before.  MP: Yes. But she was always very much within the proper lines of  political activity for women. I mean, she was interested in reform or in  improving industrial conditions?  Oamp: Yes. No,she didn't go into the labor angle, I think, at all.  She had come from Illinois, I think a mining town&#8212;Cart ondale, it seems to  me&#8212;but I don't think there was any of the interest. I never saw any. In  fact, I can't think of anybody there that showed any interest in the working  class or the labor movement.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 48  MFs What about interracial work?  Camp: Can't remember anybody ever knowing there was such a thing.  MF: Oh really? Even in the YWCA you never heard of that?  Campj Well, you see, I wasn't. ...  heard  MPt Yes, but I just wondered if you ever/about anything that they  were doing.  Campt No. I mean, Lois would have to tell you that, because I really  don't know. I don't know. I was almost wholly interested, I think, in my  students and the work with them. And it was a confining sort of thing; I  mean, you were on the campus. You were free to go to town and so on, but  I never took any part in any of the activities.  MP: Were students free to sort of come and go as they pleased?  Camp: As far as I know. I think in the dormitories they had a certain  hour that they were supposed to be in.  MF: But it was pretty open? It wasn't terribly restricted?  Oampi No, I don't think it was.  MPi When you left in 1926, how did you plan to go to Europe? How did  that trip come up? Were you offered a fellowship?  Camp 1 No, no. I had to take all the money I had to go on it.  MF: Did you go with someone else?  Camp: No, I went alone. But a friend of mine and her husband were in  England; in fact, they met me at Plymouth. And they had rented a car, and I  went with them all through Oornwall and Devonshire and Oxfordshire and  Worcestershire and Cambridgeshire. And then we took the car and went ever  to Normandy and Brittany. This friend I had known in California. I didn't  really know her too well. She was a character too, and she was older than I  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 49  and much more sophisticated, much more. And she was fairly wealthy. And  I had met her up in Berkeley, where she had a brief period between husbands.  Then later when she had married the second or third and went to her home in  Oatalina in the summer, I went over and spent a week with her. Then I guess  I had done that for another summer, probably spent a week with her.  MF: What was her name?  Camp: Goodness, which of her names?  MF: Oh, she married daughter/; it doesn't matter.  Gamp: Anyway, she loved to walk, and she was really quite literary.  And she liked me because I liked to walk and I would talk with her about  literature or anything that came up that was interesting. And by then she  had married, I guess it was the third husband, and he was lame. So she  really had, I think. ...  MF: That was a mistake if she wanted to walk /laughter^.  Camp: ... wanted me to come because I'd walk with her. So we left  him usually around the hotel or boarding house or wherever we were, and she  and I would walk all over the whole countryside, all over the territory.  We walked all over, I guess, Cornwall, Land1 s End, and then later all over  everything, just the two of us. And we had a marvelous time. Then I went  with them all through Brittany and Normandy, and then we went into Paris  together. But in Paris I had a very good friend, (I had several friends, but  one very close friend) who was studying the violin there. And her younger  sister had been my closest friend all through high school, and then she had  died of tuberculosis. So I suppose in a way it was because May was going  and because Edith was there and so on. I spent the winter in Paris, but as  soon as it began to get a little towards spring I went on all by myself  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 50  down to southern France. Then I really travelled alone all through Italy  and all through Switzerland, Holland and Belgium and everyplace /laughter7.  MFi How did you travel? By train most of the time?  Camps Most of the time train; occasionally boat, but most of the time  train.  MFi Was it common for a young woman to take off by herself?  Campi No, I don't think it was; it wasn't so common. I still remember  these two middle-aged English w&#171;men in Rome in the little pension where I  was staying. I was going down to Naples, and one woman said, "Oh, I think  you1 re so brave to go to Naples all by yourself and travel alone as you do."  And the other one said, "Bnm, you can call her brave, but I call it fool-hardiness."  /laughter/ I always remember that. There were times when I  thought maybe she was right, plenty of times. But it was a wonderful  experience,  MF: /laughter/ Did you have any trouble?  Campi No, not really; not really. I mean, whatever I had I always  got out of /Taughter/.  MF: Oh, I bet it was an incredible experience.  Camp: Oh, it was, marvelous.  MF: Did you study at any schools?  Campi No, except in Paris I was studying French down at the Alliance  Franchise.  MFi Then when you came back home you decided to come back to Oalifornia.  Campi Yes.  MFi You were gone for a year; this was in 1927?  Campi Yes. And then I taught English at the Long Beach Junior College,  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 51  Long Beach California Junior College.  MF: Right. How did you get that job?  Campj Through the University of California. And that was a time  when there were so few jobs and the Depression was coming on; I think if  I had really known about the Depression /laughter/ as much as I knew later  I never would have gone. But just like that Louise was going with Holly  to Europe, and just like that I decided I1d borrow money and take what I  had and go with her, because Louise said she couldn't go.  MF: That was in 1930, three years later.  Campt That was '29 and 'JO. So we went to Europe. And I learned,  that's where I really began learning things, because I was in Vienna and I  was in Germany. And I saw the coming of the Fascist movement, really, in  Germany. And I was scared as hell.  MF&#187; Had you gone to Germany before, when you'd been there before?  Did you travel in Germany?  Campt No, no, no.  MFj What was it like? Why were you so. . . ?  Camp: Well, there was a lot of unemployment, a lot of poverty and a  lot of. ... I was in touch, see I was studying by then the worker schools,  the labor movement, and I was in touch with some people who really saw the  Faacitta were coming. I think World War I had been a terrific. ... It  had a terrific impact on me, because though I didn11 really lose anybody in  it, if I had been a man I would have been in that war, you know. And my  fear of war, and I think almost obsession with war, goes back to my childhood,  to the Civil War. From the time I was born all I heard about was the terrible  things that the war had done. And so this idea of ... this Fascism and  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 52  really  another war I think was just so horrible to me. I mean, that1 s/when I  started to learn what the world was really like /laughter/, I guess. But  as horrible as we thought it would be, it turned out to be so much worse  than we could ever have imaginedj six million Jews killed, I mean the  terror of it, the horror of it.  MP: When you went into Germany in I929 and ' 50 things were still open,  weren't they? I mean, Hitler was just, just beginning to come to power.  Campt Just beginning, just beginning. But I was there at the time that  Bruning had what he called, as I remember, the Republik Schutz Gesetz,  republic,  this law for the defense of the / which really was giving dictatorial  powers to the government. And dictatorial powers were not going to solve  the problems of the unemployment and the hunger that we saw.  MPt When you were in Vienna. . . .  Gamp: The Socialists were in power.  MF: Right. I read an article that you wrote about that.  Camp: Where did you get that?  MFs It was in the little News, the News that the Southern Summer School  published.  Camp: Oh really?  MF: Yes.  Camp: Oh, I don't even have that. Hmm.  MF: It seemed very optimistic about the Social Democrats, about the  programs they were doing but not optimistic about them being able to stay  in power.  Camp: That's right, and I was right. And I was right. We used to take  a bus&#8212;I mean a train, I guess, or a subway. Holly and I were staying in a  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 55  little apartment out in the Grinzing area, the area where Beethoven used  to live. I walked there on this Beethoven's walk, part of the W&#167;lnerWald.  But there was an apartment house there called the Karl Marx House which you  saw when you got off the subway, and I think they said a thousand families  lived in it. And when the Fascists seized power in Vienna that place was  just machine gunned, just destroyed. And Vienna was an architect's dream;  these housing projects were done by architects, and just beautiful and  different. Somewhere (I don't know where) I used to have a book  with all these different houses, building projects, libraries and kinder  gartens. They were all destroyed, you see.  MF: You went with Hollace Ransdell, and she had, I guess, made the  original plans for the trip herself?  Camps Yes. She was going with Louise.  MFs Why had she planned to go?  Campt Well, her main interest, I think, then was Vienna; she wanted to  see what was going on in Vienna. And she'd never been to Europe; she wanted  to go to Europe. I'm sure she hadn't been to Europe at that time.  MF: Why couldn't Louise go at the last minute?  Oampj I've forgotten; I've forgotten why. Maybe it was because she was  going to marry Mac or something. Anyway she didn't go; she couldn't go.  And just like that I decided I'd go with her.  Did Holly go&#8212;  MFj/ one thing I was interested in &#8212; to study specific workers' edu  cation programs?  Camp: Well, we both did. We both studied the workers' education move  ment.  MFj But that was definitely part of the plan, to see how workers'  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 54  education programs were handled in other countries?  Camp: Oh yes, yes, yes, right.  MF: What was Hollace Ransdell like?  Camp: Oh, she was a charming person, very bright&#8212;very bright. That  was a long time ago.  MF: I got the feeling from talking to her that at one time she was very  optimistic about politics in this country changing dramatically. She was  really sort of interested in basic social change, in a major social change  more, perhaps, than a lot of the women who were involved in the school. Was  that true?  Camp: Perhaps. I really, you know, had never known her before she came  to Southern Summer School. And I think she was probably more conscious of  the basic roots than the rest of us were. She lived in New York, and I  think perhaps in Hew York she had contacts with maybe more sophisticated  people than some of us had had.  MF: What did you find when you compared different workers' education  programs. You were not only in Vienna but in England.  Camp: Well, we started out in London, yes. Well, really what we found,  I think, basically, were that they were really (most of them) tied up with  political movements very definitely. In England the workers' education&#8212;I  don't remember the different names even anymore, but there was one group  that was supported more or less by the trade union and by the Labor party, I  guess. And that was an attempt to really make the workers articulate and  conscious of their needs and their need to organize in trade unions, political  groups, cooperatives and so on. And that was a group that was primarily, I  would say, perhaps more like the Liberal party is now and the trade unions.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 55  MFs Had they set up the London Labor College then?  Camp: I guess so.  MP: That was a college that was closed in '28, right before you got  there, which had been operating.  Campi I don't remember these details. But then there was another greup,  and that group was much smaller and more radical. They were really to the  left of this group. That group was more like the Social Democratic group;  the other were a little more like the left Socialists. And then of course  there was the Communist group. We didn't really see or hear of or have any  contact with any of the Communist groups.  MP&#187; How did those groups talk about each other?  Campj Well, daughter/ they didn't like each other. They were very  critical of each other; they were all very critical. That was more or less  true wherever we went. Of course as far as the Vienna situation was con  cerned, the Socialists were in control, seemingly. It was a facade; they  weren't in control at all, but seemingly they were. They had the votes, I  mean, Democratic votes, but the wealth was in somebody else's hand. So that  actually there I don't think I met anybody who wasn't&#8212;I mean I met people  who were critical of it and who didn't think it would last, but who were not  setting up schools or classes that were different. But they did have certain,  I guess almost certain theatrical groups where they acted out in the theater  some of the problems that wore perhaps a little more basic and perhaps more  critical. But mostly it was a going concerns it was a big success.  MPj You wrote about the difference between the Christian Socialists  and the Social Democrats in Vienna, and the sort of struggle between those  groups, and I think mentioned at one time that they set up different schools.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 56  And some wouldn't attend. . . .  Ooapt Well, they probably did. I've forgotten. I mean, the basic  thing there was the power of the Social Democrats. But there were these  undoubted opposition groups. It was just that, as far as I can remember,  I didn't have contact with them. But then when I got to Germany Holly and  I went out to a school in Leipzig; it was not in Leipzig, it was out of  Leipzig. And it was in kind of an old mansion. But these were workers,  and mostly, I guess, people unemployed who didn't seem to have muoh. And  it was coldj I don't think they had any heat. And as I remember when we  ate it was like one great big dish of soup /laughter/ or something like  that. But the man who had that was a very interesting man. He was blind,  but he had students read to him. And he was really the one who told me  first about the coming of this power that would strangle all these things.  I think they had money from the, it seems to me it was Thuringia,  provincial government. But this man who was there wouldn't let them have  it. And if I remember, I think that was the man that first hired Hitler  and gave him status of a German citizen; I can't remember anymore. But  anyway, he was very well aware of the attempt that would be made to strangle  all this, and I found him a very interesting person. We were there not too  many hours, not too long.  Then when we got to Berlin, there again, as I say, there was this  Republik Sohutz Gesetz . And there were workers that would come out demon  strating in the Potsdamerplatz. They would just be moved on. These  policemen on horseback, they'd come and they'd just, you know,  with those billyclubs, hitting people on the heads and everything.  MPi Were you actually frightened there? Were you frightened?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 57  Oampj Well, I was once, in a demonstration. I happened to be at a  certain place /laughter/ at a certain tine where there was a demonstration  where the police were breaking it up, and I was a little afraid they might  think I was part of the demonstration. I thought they might take my pass  port.  But they had classes there in the workers group. They were fighting  for control of the workers1 minds, of course. There were some classes that  were conducted by these Nazis, evening classes, classes for workers. And  the Communists had their classes. And there were very interesting things  going on in the theater that were radical. One of them, I remember,  was against the abortion law. I think of it so often here, because I remember  that play so well, Then of course mostly there there were  these workers of the Social Democratic type, and labor unions. Some of those  labor unions had schools, had buildings and schools that were just beautiful  where the students really had all kinds of facilities, and where they'd go for  weekends or a summer. And they were taught parliamentary law--a lot of good  that was going to do them&#8212;and how to conduct meetings, and how to keep  books and so on, as well as how to make speeches, how to write reports, and  labor history. And the same thing was true in Belgium. In Brussels there  was a labor school there run by the Social Democrats and the Socialists. And  the Labor party people sent students there, some of them all year round (I  mean, for a regular course, year's course). So there was plenty of activity.  What they were really doing was fighting for power, I guess, through trying  to get control of these workers in their different groups' ideologies.  MFi Did you travel in Denmark as well?  Gampj Yes. I went up to Copenhagen, and we went to a labor school that  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 58  was just out at&#8212;oh, you knew, where Hamlet was /laughter/.  MFj Elsinore?  Camp: At the castle at Elsinore /laughter/. That was interesting too,  because there again were these of the Social Democratic type.  MFj Did you visit any of the folk schools in Denmark?  Gamps No.  MF: Any of the folk cooperatives?  Camp: No, no. I visited one of these Social Democratic schools in  Copenhagen. And I can remember the man who was the director of it said they  took a few Communists because they were the yeast in the dough, /laughter/  They kept the students on their toes /laughter/, challenging them all the  time.  MFj /laughter/ Were you reading things at this time, any particular  writers or theoreticians about workers' education who had an influence on  Camp: No, but I read whatever I could get my hands on. You know,  whatever I saw I read, but I don11 remember particularly any more.  MFj Did you meet many workers? Were you actually in contact with many  of them?  Camps Only through these classes. And there they would talk to you;  in fact, they were eager to talk. They liked to have people come, and were  very eager to talk.  MF: Well, how did you translate this experience to what was going on  and what you'd been involved with to some extent in this country? Did you  see the same sorts of things beginning to go on? Were people fighting for  political power through workers' education programs, or were they that  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 59  widespread /laughter/? Were they that important?  Gamps I think there was a beginning of it before the World War.  MFt World War I?  Oampj Yes, They were springing up all around. I'd hear about one,  I think, in Madison, Wisconsin and one somewhere else. San Francisco had a  very fine labor school up there. I imagine they were springing up all over.  MF: And what happened? When you were working in the Southern Summer  School in '29 and earlier ('28 and '29 and "JO), did you feel you were part  of a movement? Was it a workers' education movement?  Gamp: Yes, we felt that way when we were at Burnsville particularly,  because of the Marion strike, I think. And we did march, as I remember, in  a demonstration. And when the workers were on trial we went to some of the  trials. I think that gave you a sense of being part of it&#187; mostly the  Marion, and then of course the girls talking. And you heard so much about  these different places that they did give you some idea of a feeling that  you were a part of it.  MFj Did you see the set-up in Europe, with the different political  parties having their own schools, an advantage or a disadvantage? I mean,  if you translated that to this country would you have gone with a system  where, say, the Socialist party (which at that time was viable /laughter/). . . ?  Camp: Well, they have had their schools.  MF: Right. But, I mean, did you think that that was the way to proceed?  Were you interested in pursuing that kind of thing yourself, becoming invol  ved politically to further the workers' education movement? Or did it ever  go that far?  Oampj Well yes, to a certain extent.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 60  MF: I mean, were the people who were at the Southern Summer School. . . .  As I understand from what I1 ve read there was a real hesitation to become  aligned with any labor group, for that matter, but any political group  either.  Camp: We did join, some of us, I joined the teachers' union at Brook-wood.  Brookwood was the outstanding labor college with A.J. Muste; and that  was the one that everybody looked up to, was Brookwood and Muste.  MF: I see.  Camp: I came across when I was hunting through this stuff my union  card /laughter/ with Brookwood Labor, Brookwood.  MF: So there was an attempt to try to join some group nationally.  Camp: Well, I joined that teachers1 union, I remember; that was the  Brookwood Local.  MF: I see.  Camp: A.J. Muste,I've always wanted to get around and follow his  career. He became a very outstanding pacifist, you know, a leader of the  pacifist movement. And I think the Fellowship of Reconciliation owes a lot  to him. /interruption/  MF: I wanted to ask you what you remember most vividly about the  Southern Summer School, about the faculty and the students and the interaction  between them. What was the atmosphere like in the school?  Camp: Very friendly, very cooperative.  MF: I've read in many places where Louise MacLaren would describe that  it was a cooperative community. There wasn't a hia*archy.  Camp: No, there wasn't. They called us, I remember, by our first names,  and we called them by their first names, and it was really just like one big  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 6l  happy family. It was very cooperative.  MF: If you described the students, could you describe them as a group?  I mean, were most of them shy or were they. . . ?  Camp: No, they were very different, very much individuals. Some were  strong and outspoken, some were shy (you had to encourage them to get any  thing out of them at all, sort of draw it out and make them realize that you  were a friend, interested in them. Then they1 d talk.)  MF: Did most of them seem very young?  Gamp: No, there were older ones and yeunger ones. It was quite a mixed  group  MF: And what about married women vs. single women?  Camp: There were some married women toe.  MF: Were you ever involved in the recruiting process?  Camp: No, never. I think Louise did that: raising the funds, getting  students.  MF: If you had to say (in all of the discussion and debates that have  gone on about whether working class people in the South have any kind of  class consciousness), were these people class conscious, for lack of a  better term?  Camp: To a certain extent. They were conscious of the fact that they  had to work for a living and that the conditions of their work were not very  pleasing to most of them. And of course that was a period when there was a  lot of what they called the "stretch-out" system, when they had to work a  number of machines and it was really too difficult for them. And some of the  strikes, I think, really had aB a basis that so-called technology, or what  the workers called the "stretch-out" system.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 62  MF: Right. Were they angry?  Camp: Yes, some of them were very angry. And a strange thing too&#8212;  not strange, I guess&#8212;when they came together the girls from like Elizabethton  seemed to think it was because the bosses were German. But then when the  girls from Marion spoke they weren't German. And the Enka mills, we got  very few from there,but that was a Dutch-owned. And then some of them,  like speaking of the Cone mills, Jewish; and at Danville there was a man,  again Nordic type like themselves; and southern, I think. So they came to  realize it wasn't a matter of nationality, nor was it a matter of whether  the man came from North or South, but that it was a profit motive of the  factory to get as much out of them as possible and pay as little as possible.  MF: Do you think the school gave them any way or any ideas about ways  that they could channel their anger?  Camp: Well, the school did point to the fact that if they would stick  together, if they would organize, cooperate with each other that they1 d have  much more bargaining power than if they were just individuals striking out in  anger. Yes, in that sense.  MF: Was there any idea of people, of these women going back and starting  workers' education classes, or trying to feed into the organized labor move  ment?  Camp: Well, I think there was a hope that they might participate. The  United Textile Workers was organizing down there; and our group had nothing  really to do with the Communist group, which also was organizing, the National  Textile Workers' Union. So I think there was definitely the feeling that,  you know, if they1 d cooperate with the United Textile Workers Union that that  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 63  BEGIN SIDE II TAPE II  were not employed by any union. It was only to get them to see that  if they could cooperate and organize themselves they'd get some sort of  bargaining power, that then they would have more strength when it came to  their conditions of labor and their wages and hours and so on*  MFt What about the YWCA as an organizing group? Was there any feeling  that that was at all effective? A lot of these women came from the YWCA,  Camp: Yes, they had come from the YWCA, and I guess in their communi  ties the industrial branch of the YWCA had been quite effective in trying  to get the women in their classes to see that they had something in common  with the other workers.  MF: There were some faculty people I wanted to ask you about. Louise  McLaren, from the things I've read it seems to me that . . . would it be  misleading to say that the school would never have kept running as long as  it did without her?  Campj Oh, I think that1s very true. She was the one that raised the  fundsj she was the organizer, the administrator, getting the students,  making the contacts,  MF: Why do you think she was so committed to this work? From reading  her correspondence it is a committment, it's an incredible dedication.  Campj Definitely a committment. I really don't know. But she was a  Vassar graduate, and went into the industrial YWCA. And I guess she felt  that this was something so important, that these workers have a chance.  The conditions of their lives probably appealed to her; she thought it was  terrible that they should have to live under such conditions.  MF: Do you have any clue as to why she was so dedicated to workers in  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 6k  the South in particular? She wasn't from the South.  Camp: No, she was not a southern worker. But she did work, I think,  or have contact with some of the YWOA people who were working in the South,  because I had a very good friend here in Los Angeles. Her name was Elizabeth  Hughes, who had worked for the YWCA in the South, I think in Texas (I've  forgotten where). And she knew Louise and admired her very much. So it  oay be. ...  MP: She worked for the school later, Elizabeth Hughes.  Camp: No, not Elizabeth Hughes. Amy Hewes worked at Bryn Mawr.  MP: Oh, this is Elizabeth H-e-w-e-s?  Camp: No, Elizabeth H-u-g-h-e-s.  MF: She did, in around "Ajj she was a field worker for a summer or some  thing like that under Louise.  Camp: Really? She never told me that.  MF: Is she still here in Los Angeles?  Camp: She died of cancer about five years ago. She was another very  dedicated person.  So maybe Louise just thought it was worse in the South.  MP: I was wondering if she maybe felt that/Sie South, because of the  movement or the concentration of the textiles from the northeast to the South  that there was sort of a new field, and really crucial to. ...  Camp: I think she did.  MF: . . .to the national organization.  Camp: I think she did.  MP: What about her interest in organizing women workers in particular?  What do you think that came out of?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 65  Campj Oh, probably she had worked more with women! at Vassar, it  was a women1s school, and in the YW she was with women. I think she had  just more or less been associated with women; I mean, that seemed to be  the field of interest in which she found herself.  MFt She seemed to at times want or push certain AFL officials she  knew to try to start organizing drives among women, and received usually  a pretty negative response. A few people were interested in organizing  women at the time.  Camp: Very few, any more than the women workers were interested in  the black workers.  MF&#187; I wanted to ask you about Lois MacDonald, and I was trying to  get some sense of the way she interacted with students. Did they like her  a lot?  Campj Very much, very much.  MFi Was she very effective the way she worked with them.  Campj Oh yes, oh yes, yes. She was laughing and jolly, had a marvelous  sense of humor. They did like her very much. Everybody liked Lois.  MF: How closely did Louise and Lois work together in sort of setting  up the school in the beginning? Did you get some sense of that at all?  Campj Yes. They were very close friends, very close friends.  MF: I was interested in Hollace Ransdell's work with labor drama /\&amp;\xghUr/.  How did the students react to her, to the plays?  Camp: They enjoyed them; they were very enthusiastic.  MF: Was she easy to work with?  Camp: Well, I think she had certain standards, and was rather demanding,  but I think they appreciated that because they got good results. She was a  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 66  very able person.  MPj Do you know anything about her later work with the 010 . . .  Camp: No, I really don't.  MFt . . . as editor of the CIC news?  Were the faculty members the four years you were there good friends,  would you say?  Oampj Yes, very good friends, very good friends.  MF: What about differences in committment to the whole thing? Was  everyone sort of in the whole project to the same degree?  Oamp: I think so. Probably Louise the most, because she was the back  bone of it and held us together. But I think all of us were dedicated, loved  it, felt that it was worthwhile.  MF: Did you ever work with anyone on the faculty who didn't think it  was worthwhile, who thought it was a waste of time?  Camp: No.  MFt Did anyone like that ever show up /faughter7 one summer?  Camp: No, no. I never saw anybody show up like that.  MF: What about long-range sorts of goals that people had? Did people  like Louise McLaren and Hollace Ransdell really see workers' education as a  way to bring about some great changer  Oampt I really don't know.  MFj What I'm thinking of is perhaps a way of changing things more  effectively than, say, going with organized labor all the way. I mean, in  many ways they were oftentimes very critical of organized labor.  Oamp: I really don't know; I couldn't answer that.  MFt What about your own feeling on that, as far as you were concerned?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 67  Campi Well, I don't think any of us really knew what the future would  bring. All we knew was that this was important for the time. And what  happened, I don't think we were too concerned about it really.  MFj The avenues that you had come down until 1928 or '29 sort of lead  you into workers' education. There would be no way for you to get involved  in organized labor really, would there have been?  Camp: No, no&#8212;except, as I said /laughter/, I belonged to the Brook-wood  Local /laughter/.  HP 1 Right, right.  Camp 1 The American Federation of Teachers.  MPi Did you ever contemplate, for instance, trying to work as an  organizer or something like that for the United Textile Workers?  Camp: Maybe in some of my wild moments.  MF: Do you think that they ever would have asked any of you to go into  towns and organize?  Campj Oh, I think they probably would have been glad enough to get any  help they could get.  MFt Really?  Camp: I imagine; I really don't know.  MF: Were there any political differences among people on the faculty  when you were there? Were any faculty members more committed to one political  philosophy than another?  Camp: Well, not much when I was there. I mean, we all pretty much .  I guess we really didn't quite know where we were going, but we just hoped  /laughter/ that things would get better, you know, believed that if there  were more education there1d probably be more intelligent action.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 68  MF: But few people had any kind of program set out that they were. . . ?  Camp: No, I don't think so, not when I was there.  MF: What about later? Was there any? I sort of got drifts of. . . .  Well, it was a time of incredible faction daughter/, and I felt that in a  way the school got involved in that to a certain extent. In the early years  I sort of thought of you as a group, not all of one mind but all of basically  one mind. And then later it seemed like that people wanted to go in different  directions.  Camp: I was there only four summers, and these four summers were more  or less united, I think, in what we were doing.  MF&#187; Was there ever any discussion of bringing men into the school when  you were there?  Camp5 I can't remember that; I don't remember.  MF: During the four summers that you were there, could you think of any  ways in which the school changed, over that period from '28 to '51?  Camp: Well, I think the most active and intense period was the period  at Burnsville during the Marion textile strike, when we had the workers going  back and forth from Marion to the school. And we'd go to Marion and go to  the court, as I said, when they were being tried. I think that was the most  exciting one, where you felt you were really part of something.  MF: Were you in close contact with the organizers: Alfred Hoffman, was  Camp: No, really it was more the students in the school and through maybe  their husbands or people that they knew rather than with the organizers, as  I remember it.  MF: I see. Did their husbands ever come to the school during then?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 69  Camp: I can't remember; maybe to a social event or something of that  kind, but I don't remember.  MFi Did you go into the town and meet a lot of the people who were on  strike?  Camp: In Marion?  MF: Right.  Campt Yes, we did in Marion, because you see at Burnsville we weren't  too far from Marion.  MF: Right. That was really the first time, or only time, that that  happened, that you went right into a community.  Camp: Yes, and that was the most exciting of them all, and I think  probably the most vital.  MF: How did you feel about, or how did the women at the school or the  faculty feel about their role in the strike? Was there anything they could  sort of  do, or was it something that was/being played out that would turn out?  Camp: No, I think it was being played out. The only thing we could do  was to show our sympathy with the strikers through our students. And I  remember once we did march /laughter/ in some demonstration. And, as I said,  I remember going to the court when they were being tried.  MF: Do you remember hearing later about the second strike in October,  when the six workers were killed? Do you remember hearing? Did you follow  Marion and what was going on?  Camp: I did probably in a way, but I was . . . was I in Europe then or  someplace?  MF: Yes. You left for Europe, you must have left right after the  school that year, right?  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Gamp 70  Gamp: I guess so.  MFt In '29.  Camps After all, we were going and looking at things day and night,  you know, and busy. You hear about things, but it1 s something far off and  you're no longer part of it really.  MF: Did you ever want to go back to Marion and see what had happened?  Camp: Yes. And I always wanted to know what happened to the girls,  the women at the school. But again, I don't know, I guess when I close one  chapter and go into another I just don't have much time.  MF: What was the relationship, as you saw it, between the school and  organized labor?  Campt Well, I really can't tell you that either, because I don't know  too much about it. I know that Mary Barker (was that her name?), she was  tied up with the teachers' union.  MF: American Federation of Teachers.  Camp1 And she was very much a union person. And she came to visit the  that  school and was interested. But I can't remember, really,/any of the labor  people took especially active part in anything. If they did it would have  been more in conversations with Louise or maybe giving something, a  scholarship for somebody or something of that kind.  MF: Do you remember ever discussing with students problems that they  had had becoming members of unions? Every southern worker at that time was  having trouble /laughter/ becoming a member of a union, but I mean as women  particularly.  Gamp: No, I don't.  MF: Did you get any sense from the autobiographies and from talking  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 71  with them about their experiences of the way in which they fit into their  community? I mean, within their own families they were workers. I mean,  there was nothing about sort of saving women from work except when they  were having a child, nothing about keeping them from working?  Camps No, no.  MF: Was that reflected in the sense that they had of themselves as  being . . . workers who had responsibilities and who were needed by other  people, and who had a place in the community?  Camp: Yes, definitely they felt. ... I mean, they worked hard, and  there wasn't much extra time. And so many of them would have dependents, either  children, husbands, mothers, fathers, some older relative. And I think there  was very little time for anything except just work.  MPt We talked a few minutes ago about the school as a vacation experience  for some of these women. What about it as a. ... Do you think it served  as sort of a space where they could come and maybe for the first time have  time to contemplate what had happened to them?  Camps Yes, I do, definitely* the first time that they'd had a chance  to rest, to relax, to re-create, to "rap" as they say now with other women,  and to read some&#8212;some of them did read; we had a library there. And they  talked a lot among themselves, talked with us. It was a wonderful experience  of freedom and securityt three meals a day, a place to sleep and nothing to  do except just go to classes.  MFi What do you think most of them, or some of them, got out of their  with  contact/the faculty, with you and with other faculty members?  Camps I don't know. I guess they felt we were much luckier than they  were. /laughter/ Teaching was much easier than working in a textile mill.  Interview number G-0013 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,  The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.  Camp 72  ^laughter/ No wonder Bessie wanted her children to be educated ^laughter/  and not have them work in the mill.  MFi Do you think there was a feeling that possibly they could either  stem the tide against the stretch-out, or that they could do something by  going on strike or speaking out in s
99
MP3




Oral Histories of the American South
#4007, Southern Oral History Program, http://www.lib.unc.edu/mss/inv/s/Southern_Oral_History_Program_Collection.html
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Library. Southern Historical Collection.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
/dc/sohp/



http://dc.lib.unc.edu:80/cdm/ref/collection/sohp/id/11487
2016-05-05
2016-05-05
11487
11529.cpd
/sohp/image/11529.cpd

