SG: Now before we get to the activities while you were at William  and Mary, I wanted to see if there were other progressive causes at the  same time besides the involvement with the Southern Committee, because you  talked about a group cal.led Social Workers for Republican Spa.in. Was that  after you had already left Chapel Hill? Was that during William and Mary?  Stone: Yes, that was during the William and Mary period that "Social  Work Committee to Aid Spanish Democracy" formed ma.inly to aid Spanish  refugee children. And I wrote to President Roosevelt (I have a copy of  the letter there) urging that the embargo on Republican Spain (Jan., 1939)  be lifted.  SG: For U.S. intervention?  Stone: For U.S. recognition of the legal government. I wrote Editor  Dabney a.long this line. I think the social workers (Social Work Committee  to Aid Spanish Democracy) were raising money to be helpful to children in  Spa.in and in French refugee camps. But I had very little contact with tlat:  I merely sent money. But the people who were on the letterhead of that  social work group were the ranking social workers of the nation, f'.rom the  University of Chicago and from Colmnbia University, and people like the  Abbotts and the Breckinridge and so on and so forth.  SG: So this was just kind of support; it wasn't an active involvement.  Your main focus was still the Southern Committee?  Stone: Yes indeed. I received constantly appeals for financial or  moral support of organizations: here's a list of them that I did help in  that way. And I made talks at the Urban League a.nd the NAACP. And when I  got to Richmond it was quite all right to be active in the American Civil  Liberties Union, which couldn't have been done in the deep South, because  anything Yankee or radical or biracial and so on would be forbidden there--  7 2  labor organization and so on. But especially we couldn't have the &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226;  It was to tarnish everything if it could be proved that some "outsider" such  as the Yankees had brought it in.  SG: But Virginia was a very different situation.  Stone: Very different. The upper South was much more liberal, but  some people said that it was because of the liberal atmosphere and the  tolerance that was there that the really liberal-minded people were not  stirred to do something. It was too comfortable. Whereas in the deep South  [where] the contrast was so striking, and where the deprivation of rights  was so dramatic, you got people in Georgia, Alabama a.nd so on who were  liberals to reaJ..l.y take a.ction--as they didn't bother to do so much in the  upper South. I'm not sure whether that's true or not, but at any rate that's  the impression that people had.  SG: But when you went to Virginia you felt freer to expand into more  things, then, and to be more open about it than you would?  Stone: Yes. But I did fall into the trap of spreading myself too thin,  so that I moved in many directions. I was on call to come to Washington,  and did go to testify on poll tax or farm tenants or various other problems.  SG: Who would you usually go testify for, Olive? Particular groups  who's called?  Stone: They would ask if I &#8226; let me see if I can find those telegrams  connected I didn't go one time but sent testimony. It was a  hearing on a bill, you know, for poll tax. Felt it was important to get as  many &#8226; &#8226; [interruption]  SG: You were involved in the poll tax lobbying and testifying? Would  that have been towards the end of your stay in William and Mary?  Stone: I think it was. There it is; let's see the date of this: 1940.  3  Yes, so it was.  SG: And you would be cal.led by what sort of people? What sort of  people was it that would call you to testify?  Stone: This is signed by Congressman Lee Guyer. "Dr. Olive Stone.  William and Ma.ry College. Hearings on my Anti-R&amp;gt;ll Tax Bill set for April 2,  3, 9 and 10. Would you be able to testify before the subcommittee of the  House Judiciary Committee? Please advise which date." And I sent a night  letter March 26, 194-0 to the congressman. "Regret that professional. duties  prevent my attending such committee hearings on your anti-poll tax bill in  April. Dates conflict with out-of-state conference requiring my attendance.  Am sending letter signed by group of Richmonders interested in your progressive  action. Is there something further I can do?" So I would scramble  around, get up signatures &#8226; &#8226;  SG: Now, were you being cal.led on because of your involvement with  the Southern Committee?  Stone: No. I imagine, I was just known as a liberal who worked on  many causes. People who were more active than I, preachers and these other  people who had these organizations to which I sent contributions (one dollar  or five dollars [laughter] as the case might be) and for whom I could gather  some signatures or persuade people to write some letters &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226;  SG: Well now by this time the Southern Co:mmi ttee was al.ready fairly  dead, and the Gelders had taken over the name and had become the National  Committee for People's Rights, hadn't it?  Stone: Yes; by 1940, yes. Because the Southern Conference for Human  Welfare was really the basic organization --until a~er its third meeting,  When it just folded, you know. It met in 1938, 1940 and 1942. In that  middle period it was still going very strong. Incidentally, Vann Woodward  I  4  says that Birmingham was the &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; what's the South African capital?  SG: Johannesburg.  Stone: Was the Johannesburg of the South, you know, with Bull  Conners and all those terrifying people--the goons hired to break up unions-who  just used force and left and right attacked people. They grabbed Gelders  and beat him so that he was never well enough to &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; &#8226;  BEGIN SIDE II, TAPE I  SG: It sounds like there was this meeting in November, 1937 where you  talked about joining other groups. And Gelders's letter was in 1938 saying  that since the Committee for People's Rights was no longer so active, how  would everyone feel about using the National Committee name. Was it because  of the formation of the Southern Conference for Human Welfare that your  Committee became less active?  Stone: I think so. I think that what we couldn't say of Virginia we  said of Chapel Hill, that many of the most active people scattered to their  various communities. Though it did happen that Poteat went to the Middle  West too; he was called by his church out there. He was a Baptist minister  and they call people, and he went to the Middle West--! think in Michigan,  or it may have been Indiana. And to some extent this happened at William  and Mary. I left; I took sabbatical in 1941-42, and went to the Miss.  Delta and to L.S.U. where Harold Hoffsommer was teaching.  SG: It was a combination of its being Doctoral students who were the  most active, and the formation of the Southern Conference for Human Welfare  that seems to have contributed to [it] the demise of the SCPR.  Stone : Yes, I think that 's true. And Bill Couch, by the way, went to  the University of Chicago Press; he had been director of the University of  North Carolina. Press. He's back in Chapel Hill now, but he went to Chicago  5  at some point. I know he was there when I was a visiting professor at the  University of Kentucky and the Stout University in Wisconsin the summer of  1939 and the summer of 194-0. And I think it was 194-0 that Bill had gone to  Chicago.  So some of the people who were not just students were scattering, too.  The people who stayed in Chapel Hill were largely the playwrights and those  regionalists. And no one was fighting them. I really think Odum went the  proper way, because he didn't arouse so much opposition. You remember in  this Southern Regional Council that there was a meeting first of the blacks,  then of the whites, then of the two. And they moved on in; and this has  endured. And yet Highlander has too, which took a different course. Instead  of being cautious and careful and &#8226; actually, the Highlander people have  taken some very radical actions.  SG: Right. They have become, I think, a more radical group again  with the civil rights movement in the sixties.  Stone: But the South, and the nation, have moved to and fro on this.  Woodward in his wonderfUl analysis of Jim Crow shows how the lights went  out entirely in the 1960's, you know. But he compares the 1930's and  1940's with the 1830's and 184o's. Have you read that?  SG: Yes.  Stone : At any rate, he shows how; and this is borne out by the Grimke  experience about which Katharine Lumpkin wrote. For a while the people  working for abolition of slavery bad strong support and little opposition  in the thirties (1830's) but the status quo began to clamp down against them  in the 1840's.  Grimke  And we noticed how even the Quakers, the husband of Angeline  I don't think he was timid, I think he was a.ctuaJ.ly fighting  against the role of women, the leadership of women more than he was  6  abandoning the fight against slavery. I could be wrong in that. At any  rate, in the 1930's there was great liberalism in the South and in the very  earliest part of 194o, and then it closed down. People couldn't say anything;  the Mccarthy era was underway. And the same thing happened in the  1950's and sixties; there was this push of liberalism, and then the closing  down.  SG: Well, it seems that when the Committee for People's Rights--you  went to William and Mary in '36 &#8226; &#8226;  Stone: The fall of '36, yes.  SG: And it seems the group was still going then and you were involved  in the Richmond Chapter.  Stone: Yes.  SG: Then you became involved in, you talked about having become  involved at that time in some of the women ' s groups that were forming as  part of' the anti-lynching movement.  Stone: Yes.  SG&#183; Now was that as part of the Committee for People's Rights, or  were these separate?  Stone: No, these were organized elsewhere . Jessie Daniel Ames devoted  her whole life to the lynching situation. And I was one of the hundred women  to sign that special petition; she just wrote and asked me to . Is this on  the poll tax? Yes, this is poll tax. And I had letters f'rom Mrs . Albert  Lee Thomas, Temporary Chairman--she was in Alabama. . She just writes me,  "The group meeting in Atlanta decided to draw up plans for a Southwide  women's committee to be submitted to the other signers of the statement of  one hundred women . " Well, we had a hundred women in both, I believe; I 'm  not sure of that . Did you read what you brought me?  7  SC: Yes.  Stone: Did she speak of a hundred women in the anti-lynching, or was  it a hundred women in the poll tax?  SG: I don't remember the figure right now. What she did, apparently,  was organize on a state-by-state basis, and have women go talk to the  sheriffs of the particular counties as a way to prevent lynching.  Stone: This poll ta.x business seems to have brought me letters from  Margo Gayle, who's with that fa.ct-finding group in Atlanta. I wrote  Virginius Dabney; I don't know why I didn't send it--I must have rewritten  it. "December, 1940. Dear .&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; " fttr goodness, I put "Dear Dr. !8.bney";  no wonder I had to write it over!  SG: Now, so both the poll tax and the lynching work were, then, in  the early forties?  Stone: Yes, the early 1940 's. And I think it was proper that the  women took a strong leadership role in lynching, because, as you know, the  whole feeling in the South was the protection of white womanhood against  these so-called "vicious people" who'd like nothing better than to grab a  white waman--which was not true to the slightest degree [laughter]. And the  women had to come out and say, "We don't want to be protected, and we do not  want lynching to take place."  I joined it but I was not particularly active. I didn't care too much  for these single causes [laughter] &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; though I think there's real value  in having a clear-cut single good and winning it [laughter] and then go to  another one. I did join both the anti-poll tax and the anti-lynching groups  just to the extent of giving some contributions and signing my name, and  being one of those that were counted. I think it was useful to the organization  to have as many states as possible and as many groo.ps. But usually  8  my name just appeared as a professor from William and Mary or wherever I  was.  SG: I see. So it was primarily in terms of this petition and then  being called for testimony.  Stone : Things like that in the two causes. And then I was, as I said,  an official. representative in the first Southern Conference for Human Welfare.  My name continued in the second conference, but I did not go to  either it or the third one.  SG: So you went to just the first one?  Stone : Yes &#8226; And one of the reasons for this is that I became heavily  involved with Dr. Ernest Groves at Chapel Hill, who was finding it revolutionary  to teach courses on marriage and the family, and especia.lly birth  control and radical issues of this kind, and who wanted me to substitute for  him at the University of Kentucky (I got invited back on my own) and Stout  University in Wisconsin. For two summers I did that.  SG: Now did you also teach that at William and Mary, then?  Stone: Yes, I taught the same course. {And I had to get substitutes:  I believe once when I had an operation, but also sometimes when I went to  meetings.) I helped with the "Groves Conference on Marriage and the Family"  and was his right-hand man [sic] in some of the publications and some of  the national conferences on family.  SG: In other words, you were turning more towards some of these  interests in your academic work and away from the civil rights work you'd  been doing?  Stone: Yes, though I al.ways felt that [laughter] it required a liberal  stance and a liberal point of view to take pa.rt in that. If I were still  involved in the family matters I'd probably be on the pro-abortion list,  9  because I was with the birth control group. I felt I could go on with these  programs at the same time that I worked on civil rights issues. But I  helped organize a Virginia state conference on marriage and the family, and  I was the executive secretary of that.  I had a great [laughter] penchant for organizing, and I think I did  very well on that. But I did not have a good penchant for raising money.  I gave money [laughter] but I never could raise it. I think what you need  is an aggressive fund-raiser to have any cause succeed. If I had raised  more than fifteen hundred dollars (which is a.11 I could do in Chapel Hill)  for the Southern Committee for People's Rights, if I had gotten hundred  dollar and two hundred dollar contributors from a.11 over and fired them  (laughter] with financial responsibility, it would have lasted better, I  think. Though I 'm not sure; I think people have to really be committed in  the use of their time.  SG: Do you reca.11 how you were appointed to the Southern Conference  on Human Welfare, that 1938 meeting?  Stone: Governor Price wrote a letter which I have (and I have his  beautiful certificate here also). I think he heard about me through his  sister, who was a social work student at William and Mary . But she heard  a.bout me through other activities of a liberal cause, I think. But I have  his letter (which I can send to Chapel Hill), in which he appoints me and  says he regrets that they do not have money to pay my way.  SG: Do you reca.11 much about that meeting, Olive?  Stone: No. According to all the records (we have written records of  that) it was held in Birmingham, which was [laughter] probably a bad place  since it was the Johannesburg [laughter] of the South. And the race issue  was raised during the meeting, and a supposedly-defunct law was enforced  r  10  by the sheriff ma.king the blacks sit in a separate section. And the conference  decided not to argue this, but to go on with the meeting; to stay  with the issues instead of a rule or whatever could be raised there . But  it was eventually the more open work of the Communists that did bring the  Southern Conference to an end, when Paul Robeson came to the third meeting,  according to the records that I've read, and asked for &#8226;&#8226;  SG: Do you recall why you didn't go again, why a:f'ter that first one?  Stone : Well, I think by this time I was involved with Groves ' work,  you see, 1939 and 1940. So that I guess that was the main thing : that I  was busy with other activities .  SG: It wasn't for political reasons or anything?  Stone: No, no it wasn 't. I had not felt that &#8226;&#8226; And I was much  more a.kin to what Howard Kester said about the Fellowship of Reconciliation  and what Lucy Dl.ndolph Ma.son said. She said that she was willing to accept  and tolerate Communists, because she wanted as many groups as possible to  organize, you know. (I really would love to read her papers; they're at  Duke University. I have a couple of good letters from her that I can send  U. of N.C . or Duke if they want them. )  SG: How did you happen to meet her?  Stone: I don't know how she learned about me, perhaps through Gelders  since it was in 1937 (Mason and Gelders worked with unions, she in Atlanta  and he in Birmingham) . She appeared in Richmond, and I recognized her to  be from an old Virginia family, you know, from the Masons and the ~ndolphs ,  a descendant of among the best known families in Virginia . She called me  one day and wanted to meet me at William and Mary . I invited her to speak  to my class. I invited everybody [laughter] with a. relevant cause to speak  to my class at one time or another . Prince Akiki &#183; Ny abonga from Africa  I  11  spoke to my class; spoke also at a convocation at William and Mary and wore  his princely robes. And he looked very handsome with the long white robes  embroidered in gold silk, and with a lovely turban around his head. Looked  quite regal; when he dressed in ordinary clothes [laughter] afterwards he  didn't look so regal [laughter].  SG: This was after the formation of the Southern Committee for Human  Welfare that you met Miss Ma.son?  Stone: No, it was before in 1937, but the following year she and  Gelders and Virginia Durr approached Mrs . Roosevelt about the Southern Conference  on Human Welfare.  SG: But you didn't become involved in any of the activities she was  involved in?  Stone: No, farm unions were my field of interest . I never could--as  I told you before--get any personal interest in industrial unions . And that  was her area; she was with the National. Textile Unions . My heart was always  in the country [laughter] with the farmers and farm problems, and I worked  very hard with anything having to do with farmers programs: their foreclosures,  great difficulties, you know, in the West where I went with the  "School on Wheels" and the South where Farmers Unions and the Sharecropper  Union were my research objects and received my sympathetic support. Also  out of my own personal experience; I grew up in a small rural community and  knew the farmers and their problems better.  When I was on that Sabbatical leave in 1942 I made a tour of the  Mississippi Delta in -rey car, and invited two Doctoral students from L.s.u.,  where Hoffsonmer [Harold], and some other professors there had made an  earlier study. And we were given some respondents ' names so that we could  go back and call on the people to see how they were faring since the research.  12  It gave us an opening to meet people in the Delta area, and I could do some  comparing with my experience in the southeast. I think the Louisiana people,  or Mississippi Delta and that area, were far ahead of Alabama and Georgia in  getting huge corporation farms and mechanized farms and so on. Later, when  the strikes and the difficulties ca.me to Mississippi, those wage workers and  tenants were just put out on the road, you know, with their two or three  belongings. And some church groups came and put up tents and helped protect  them for a while. But I had some first-hand acquaintance with where things  were and what they were like on that Sabbatical when I toured around.  Then I became interested in Gees Bend and did my first long-term research  there in 1942. And I did a follow-up in 1962; went back to Alabama and found  that people were very uneasy: among the blacks, that they might have their  land on Gees Bend first flooded and then maybe that the whites would move in  and bother it; and among the whites, because there had been a study by an  anthropologist orton Ru.bin (Plantation County, U. of N.C. Press, 1951) inbetween  times when I was out here. And when I met Ru.bin at a sociological  meeting, he told me about how the sheriff advised him not to remain in  cam:len when he revisited following the publication of his book. The sheriff  didn't think any Yankees or outsiders would be welcome. And Ru.bin d.idn 't  stay. When I went I had a California license on my car and I was uneasy. I  went around and met everybody in Camden, the county seat of Wilcox County,  and introduced myself as southern-born, Alabama-born, with the true accent  (laughter]. And I talked with the preachers and did the rounds that one  has to make to get accepted (the school superintendent, and so on) and was  able to get out safely. Though (laughter] I don't know how many people  might have felt. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; I was there in 1962 on my follow-up and the "Mississippi  Sunnner" was in progress, wasn't it? No it was after the Mississippi  Summer, but there was tension still., you know.  SG: Right. There 'd been a lot of changes &#8226;  Stone: A lot of changes. So I think that just about covers it,  doesn't it?  SG: When the Southern Conference for Human Welfare began--do you  13  remember--by this time it sounds like the Southern Committee for People's  Rights was pretty much defunct.  Stone: Dead; yes, it was defunct.  SG: What was your vision of what this new group would be able to do  when you went to that first meeting?  Stone: I thought it would be a way of coalescing the proliferating  movements, both in separate states and especially the many, many little  single-track approaches. I didn't expect same of them to go out of existence,  such as the anti-lynching and the anti-poll tax, until they had accomplished  their missions. But many of these blossomed and died down, you see,  and I really felt it was splendid to have an organization that would bring  them together and would bring a far wider area geographically and a broad.ergauged  program. And people like Bill Couch did a splendid job in working  out the program in answer to issues--drawing up resolutions and so forth on  many areas.  So it was a much broader program than we had ever been able to have in  frightened Alabama alone, or in academic Chapel Hill, and a little less aca.-  demic Richmond and certainly not too academic in the Virginia Peninsula.  (But it was in a way; they were only professional people. We never aroused  anyone except professional people. We had no union organizers; we had no  members of the poorer group of people or the people affected by the causes  that we tried to improve, or to sponsor or to help.) So I felt that it was  I  ]  14  a step away from provincialism. I thought it was less parochial than anything  that had happened before, and I had great hope for it. And both  Tindall and Myrdal, I believe, think that there was a whole decade that was  influenced by the Southern Conference; that it was the most progressive and  by fa..r the most liberal period in the South's history. I believe Tindall  said though it went out of business with the fourth meeting in New Orleans  because of certain circumstances, that the effect of it lasted a decade,  that it was decidedly a &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; &#8226;  in &#8226;  SG: But by the time after that first meeting you had become involved  Stone : In the Groves program on marriage and family. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226;  SG: And some of the research in that .  Stone: But also, by this time &#8226; . . .  SG: Is this about the time that the New Deal ties also began, then?  Stone: The New Deal people were heavily involved in the first meeting,  you know. Judge Louise O. Charlton from Birmingham, Alabama. was the temporary  chairman, but President Frank Graham of U. of N.C. was elected the  permanent chairman after that. And Hugo mack was one of the speakers, Mrs.  Roosevelt was also one of the speakers; as was Mr. Lister Hill (who was  Sena.tor from Alabama at that time). So we had representatives from the  courts, the legislative bodies, and the administration. Incidentally, even  while all of this liberalism was going on, we had, according to my clippings,  this great fear among conservative Southerners--reactionaries--that they had  to "fight FDR and the unions" (is what they were saying) &#8226; And they were  arresting people who had the New Republic or The Nation in their home. And  in one place they arrested somebody because Liberty magazine was there, and  that must be Communistic. You know what Liberty was? [laughter] A veey  '  15  conservative journal. And so there was all this problem.  SG: Because you mentioned that the period in Richmond seemed to focus  on, that the chapter didn't last too much longer and the focus seemed to be  on the poll tax and the anti-lynching group, and then the ties with the New  Deal.  Stone: Yes. What I was going to say, not only did I help in Groves'  campaign with that, but I had my own organization. I was elected president  of the {or chairman, I believe we called it) Virginia Sociological Society.  And I held offices in the social work groups with which I was mainly involved.  I kept my ties with sociology straight through the years; even out here I  went to sociological meetings, because I was appointed liaison between social  work and sociology and kept that up. But I did have m;y professional social  work and social science organizations [laughter] that I had to keep same  tie to.  SG: What was your standing at William and Mary? You went there as an  associate professor?  Stone: I went there as a full professor. I'd been an associate professor  at Huntington College. I'd gone to Huntington as an assistant professor,  which I had been at Montevallo, and I was promoted to associate  professor at Huntington. Then I became a full professor; I was invited as  a f'ull professor, because the assumption was I would have m;y doctorate.  think that was one of the conditions. I didn't get it right away; I had  finished my basic work and had only to complete m;y dissertation. I'm not  a good writer; I get to be much too verbose [laughter].  SG: Now, so those seemed to be the main focuses though during the  Richmond years. With beyond those &#8226;  Stone: Various liberal causes--as a member. For instance, the  I  r  16  sociological group met between sessions of the Virginia conference and  national conferences in Richmond, with Floyd House, the great sociologist  [laughter] from the University of Virginia sort of sitting as the mentor.  And Wilson Gee sitting somewhat in rivalry and enjoying a little quip that  I told him I had heard at the University of Chicago: that sociologists  there when they said anything always crossed themselves "Park, Burgess and  Faris." [laughter] And Gee laughed at that. House was a Ph.D. from the  University of Chicago, but he established a fine department of sociology at  the University of Virginia.  SG: So it seems like there was more of a turning in terms of your  organizational skills--much more closely tied to your professional. and academic  involvement. You were involved in these other things, but weren't the  organizer anymore.  Stone: No. Except I must remind you that social work has throughout  the years, as far as I can recall, been very interested in social reform.  The associations have al.ways bad a legislative chairman. I was the legislative  chairman in the Washington Chapter before I became vice-president and  was offered the presidency. (But that was the time that Jock became ill and  I had to take care of him--that was m:y last fiance.) But we were handicapped  in Washington by the law.  SG: Oh, the Hatch Act.  Stone: Hatch Act. And what we could do is, through a legislative canmittee  we could present issues and pass out postcards and let people take  their own initiative, but not under the name of government employees. A  very large number of people in the huge Washington chapter of the National  Association of Social Workers were working in government, were working in  what is now the HEW, which was then under Social Security--they didn't have  17  the same names.  One had to be very care:fu.l. in the Deep South if you didn't get fired,  or you didn't lose your chance to be useful at all. If I hadn't had that  marvelous president [laughter] at Huntington &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226;  SG: Now at William and Mary did that create a problem?  Stone: No, no, no; there was no problem at all.  SG: Now what were the nature of the New Deal ties when you were still  in Richmond that you talked about?  Stone: I didn't mean that I personally had ties . I was quoting Myrdal  or Tindall who said southern organizations at later stages served mainly as  liaison with New Deal programs. There were many New Deal people who were  active in these organizations . Such as, you know, Will Alexander was head  of AAA first, and then the Farm Security Ad.ministration, which was the best  program the government put on. And Clark Foreman, &#8226;..&#8226;&#8226; what was his job? I  remember that he was an Atlanta sociologist, but he went with one of the  programs in the New Deal, and he was on the Southern Conference for Human  Welfare .  So we had many officials from government [at the SCHW] :from Franklin  Delano Roosevelt's [laughter] government, including the active work of his  wife to further things. So I think that the Southern Conference for Hum.an  Welfare, with all the support it got from government, from the judiciary,  f'rom the legislative branches, and administrative (when I was speaking of  government I meant the administrative branch) that it should have succeeded.  And I guess the reason it didn't is that &#8226;&#8226; &#8226; the conservative forces, and  eventually the reactionary forces, were stronger and people fell away, and  that some of the more radical groups such as the Communists pushed themselves  too far . It 's hard to know, since Myles Horton never gave up his  18  principles. (But he wasn't a Communist; he was a &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; And he did get  beaten and he did get shot at and so forth. But, I mean, Highlander seems  to have survived by the hardest [laughter] &#8226; Of course the Folk  School got burned out and had many difficulties.)  But I was always a reformer sometimes impatient rather than a revolutionary.  And I don't know whether reform is going to get there or not  [laughter]; I get discouraged from period to period, don't you?  SG: Very! Was there anything else during the William and Mary period  that we might not have covered?  stone : No, I think not. I think that just about does it. I did have  to pay some attention to my professional responsibilities and my writing  and research, which I enjoyed .  SG: Was the social life of an academic woman in Virginia any different  than it had been during your Chapel Hill years and in Montgomery? Did you  feel a difference at all? By then women were in the academic world, by the  late thirties, early forties .  Stone: Yes . I enjoyed teaching, going to universities where there  were mixed men and women--both Chicago and Chapel Hill were that--and  teaching in William and .Mary, which had both men and women, of course, both  in the faculty and in the student body, and ever since then working with the  mixed groups . But I did start out, as you pointed out to me [laughter] both  going to a woman's college and teaching in one, at Montevallo and at Huntingdon;  where there was within the structure an opportunity to make one ' s  stand as a human being rather than as just a woman . I had a great opportunity  for leadership when I became a dean. In fact, the reason I went to  Valdosta from William and Mary is that a former dean of mine when I was an  undergraduate at Huntingdon, Dean Lena Hawks, asked if I would come over  19  and consider the vice-presidency of that school.  SG: Now where was it located?  Stone: Valdosta, Georgia, where I would combine what she ca.lled the  double-dean job, which would be tantamount to the vice-presidency. If' I'd  stayed there I'd probably have become president, because the president died  not too long af'ter, and I would have been in a position. But my personal  life was involved with John at this time.  SG: Now you had met him in Washington?  Stone: Yes. Well, there was this long period in which he had his  heart attack and various things that made us postpone marriage. And then  his former wife had become a mental patient. (It wasn't that of course that  she finally died of, but cancer. ) And he didn't seem free to, you know,  take a divorce from a person who was ill like that.  SG: So you had met him in Washington earlier; then went to Valdosta  and then lef't Valdosta. Is that the sequence?  Stone: Yes. I went to Valdosta before Washington. I'd seen John in  Washington while teaching at William and Mary and had met him earlier  through friends before I went to Chapel Hill--you know, the Powells and  Cutlers and those people. {Incidentally, I have some writings and research  by them that a.re not quoted in Tindall and elsewhere that I'm going to call  to their attention; where Webster Powell and Addison Cutler took a trip  through the South and studied farm conditions, being guided by me as to  people whom they might interview and places they should go to see the sharecroppers  and so on. They went in August. I was not there at the time; I  was at Chapel Hill, I guess, but going up to Washington to and fro. It was  with Web that I got into the School on Wheels, you know, that sort of  program.)  r  ....  20  SG~ So your trips to Washington were for research, in other words,  usually?  Stone: Usually. And it was there that I met John (he was called Jock),  long before, you see. But this dragged on out . I left William and Mary  because I just didn't see I decided to cut off this relationship  with John . So I accepted the other position and really seriously thought  of staying on as the double dean. But when the war ca.me along I ca.me up to  Washington. I got a little bored at that small southern town of Valdosta  and the rather provincial attitudes that were there .  SG: So you were again in an administrative position and teaching when  you were in Georgia, in other words?  Stone: Yes . No, I didn ' t have an administrative--well, I was bead of  the Sociology Department, but I didn't accept the . &#8226; . &#8226; I was to consider  the double deanship, you see, and then I finall.y decided to turn it down .  So at the end of my second year I took a leave of absence and went to Washington  and got a position with the HEW. I stayed in Washington for five  years, and then came out here .  SG: At Ve.J.dosta, then, were you a.gain during that period where there  was much more focus on professional activities?  Stone: Yes, the Southern Sociological Association. I'd been elected  to office as chairman of the Virginia Sociological, but then I moved into  the Southern Sociological Association, in which I held some offices, but  not an important one.  academic discussion.  I enjoyed very much meeting with those people for  And I kept up my membership with the social work  group. We did have in the latter a protest period when the head of the  Georgia state public welfare program practically ordered his employees  throughout the state (in which, you know, there was this vast need) to vote  21  as he wanted them to vote. And we called in the League of Women Voters and  put on a campaign to get rid of that kind of action. So there were causes  like that, mostly local. And then when I was in Georgia I did get to know  the people at Atlanta University (you know, the black college there) and at  Tech and Emory and people, some of whom I must have met (laughter] at that  Southern League for People's Rights meeting which I'm trying now to reconstruct.  SG: It sounds like the focus was that the thirties, the mid to late  thirties and early forties was your stage or period of activity in the civil  rights area.  Stone: That's right; that's true.  SG: And then it became &#8226;&#8226;  Stone: Which included race relations, you know, and so forth. But I  never slackened in joining in social work activity or sociological discussion  of these matters afterwards. And when I came out here I was active  in the social work group too. But that, I think, about winds up the eastern  connection.