
Alice Spearman Wright: I was born in Marion in 1902, a very small
conservative town in coastal South Carolina that likes to think of itself
as being aristocratic--and that of course, that would be defining
"aristocratic" in a very narrow, pathetically narrow sense of the word.
My father's family was primarily southern, but he did have a few ancestors
who came from New England to teach in old St. David's Academy, one of
the early academies in South Carolina located at Society Hill in
Darlington County. Such was the case with a Park, one of whose children
married a Wilkins. My father‘s mother was a Wilkins. I was a Norwood,
Alice Buck Norwood. My mother was a Miss Buck, and both of her parents
were born in the state of Maine. My father's father was a pioneer in
the banking business in the South. Earlier he and old Major Goker, who
organized Coker College, were in the gotten brekefage business together
in Charleston for many years.

Jacqueline Hall: This is your father's father?

Wright: My father‘s father.

JH: What was his name?

Wright: His name was George Alexander Norwood, and I have a little
history written about him by a Furman professor, a Dr. Cook. All of
his sons were bank presidents. Their mother was a Miss Wilkins. You
know Josephine Wilkins?

JH: Yes.

Wright: Nell, their mother was a Miss Wilkins whose family had
come from somewhere in the West Indies to Beaufort, South Carolina. The
first to come was a widow known as the Widow Wilkins, probably my

grandmother Norwood's grandmother. Her son or grandson, Samuel Bellinger

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 2 ~ Wright
Wilkins, my grandmother's father, was an attorney and evidently a high
flyer. He was a member of the St. Helena Episcopal Church in Beaufort.
When he was about forty—five, some very high-powered Baptist evangelist
came into Beaufort and eight members (they say that they were the most
prominent families in Beaufort) "hit the sawdust trail“ and joined the
Baptist church. When I used to go to Beaufort in the late fifties and
early sixties, the pastor of that First Baptist Church was very much
interested in the history of his church, and we used to have a gay time
talking about it. I said that man must have put Billy Graham and Billy
Sunday and all the rest of them in the shade to get eight of the top
members of the Episcopal Church to join a Baptist church. You know that
in the South, historically, people from the Baptist, Methodist and other
denominations have been social climbing by joining the Episcopal Church.
It is really a type of petty family pride (and I think we can all be
excused for having a little) that Samuel Bellinger Wilkins would, instead
of going from the Baptist to the Episcopal, go from the Episcopal to the
Baptist-~and later become a Baptist preacher Zieughteg7. You see, this
shows an independence of thought and "to heck'I with what anybody thinks.
This has served me in pretty good stead. Don‘t you think that's a right
cute little clue to itL That is really a little piece of history that I
have always wanted to have time to pick up on, to get things put together,
but there is always something at the moment that is current that you get
so involved in and you cannot pursue it. This is the reason that you can
wish to be a cat with nine lives and be able to live them concurrently,
and why you can easily believe in reincarnation. You can see that, you

know, because you've got to get back to get some of these things followed

through.

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 5 - Wright

JH: Now what was your father's mother's name?

Wright: Her name was Mary Louisa King Wilkins, being named for
her mother no doubt. The King family had roots in New England. The
first president of King‘s College (later Columbia University) was
Charles King. He was a family connection, I think. Eli King was one
of the first presidents of the Indigo Society in Georgetown, South
Carolina. Indigo was an important crop then, and there are very interes—
ting historical records on the Indigo Society in Georgetown.

JH: Eli King?

Wright: Eli King was Mary Louisa King‘s father, I think. There was
another relative, a Benjamin King, there, for whom one of my relatives
(Benjamin King Norwood) in Greenville was named. He was the son of my
uncle John Wilkins Norwood of Greenville, South Carolina, who was a
prominent and wealthy banker. My grandfather Norwood was six feet two
or four, and his wife wasn't quite five feet. She was a beautiful
little brunette. And so they say that she ruined a generation of Nor-
woods, because most of their sons were of small or medium stature. The
father was a tall man and she came up under his arm. He was blond and
she was a brunette: very dark, black hair and sharp eyes. She had a lot
of Josephine's features, until she. . . .

JH: Is Josephine Wilkins related to this Wilkins?

Wright: Oh yes. So anyway, Josephine told me-—her mother, I think,
was kind of a snob, but I'll tell you this, there was nobody snobbish in
my family. We were told that any opportunity or advantage that we've
had put that much more responsibility on us.

JH: Who told you that?

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 4 - Wright

Wright: I don't know. I feel that that came through my Grand-
mother Wilkins and her Baptist preacher father, and we were taught many
things like that. The Norwoods had a somewhat similar philosophy too.
Anyway, my father didn't pretend to be democratic, he was. He loved
people. And mother said that when he would come from the bank she could
tell to whom he had made the last loan, because he had so much empathy
and identified with people to such an extent that if a farmer, some poor
devil, came in there, Daddy came home talking just like him. What was
speech? It was a superficiality. He was not about to let something like
that set him apart from this man. You see, John Donne said, "No man is
an island." I think Marion, my husband, and I have a lot of this
feeling too.

JH: Do you know when your father was born?

Wright: About 1871, I think, something like that.

JH: Where was he educated?

Wright: He was graduated from Furman. He wanted to be a doctor
and went off to . . . what is the medical college in Philadelphia? Any-
way, he came home for Christmas and there was a terrible accident, and
someone was maimed by a train. He saw it and all that blood and decided
that medicine wasn't for him. So he went into banking.

JH: He went into his father's bank?

Wright: No, my father's first job was in a bank in Wadesboro, North
Carolina. I don't mind saying that grandfather and his sons had quite an
outreach. The oldest one, the one that was really the financial wizard,
John Wilkins Norwood, was first president of a bank in Wilmington, North
Carolina, and later of the Norwood National Bank of Greenville, South

Carolina. Another son was president of a bank in Goldsboro, North

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 5 — Wright
Carolina, and still another was president of a bank in Columbia, South
Carolina.
JH: How did all the sons happen to go into the banking business?

Wright: Well, I really don‘t know. The thing about it, I suppose,
was that the oldest son John Wilkins Norwood became a successful banker
like his father, and the younger brothers fell in line. Josephine
Wilkins's father, John Wilkins, was a first cousin and also a bank
president. My Uncle John Wilkins Norwood organized the South Carolina
National Bank, which was one of the first statewide banks. He was the
chairman of the board until he died, I believe.

JH: Which bank was your father in?

Wright: My father was president of several banks. He was president
of the bank in the little town where we lived, and to show you his
values. . . . Now, I consider that the reason that I could work with
such enthusiasm in what I did, where I could easily have reached the
saturation point a whole lot earlier than I did. I don't think that I
really ever did, except that I just physically wore out.

JH: Did you tell me the town you were born in?

Wright: Marion, South Carolina.

JH: Marion, yes.

Wright: He was also president of a little bank in a place called
Centenary, and another in Mullins. My father died at the time of the
Depression. I was in China, and there is a terrifioally, I think, exciting
story about all of that. He was dead a month when I got home. But at
that time I was conducting a tour of students from Stanford University

through the Orient, and I got cablegrams at different thnes telling me

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 6 — Wright
he had suffered a heart attack. But anyway, a Grey Lady met me at
the boat in San Francisco when I got there, and he had been dead a
month. Well, it was a blessing that I had gotten the most encouraging
cablegram last, so I crossed the ocean thinking he was all right. He
died. And his bank, I think, was about the only bank between Richmond
and somewhere else that never closed its doors except by federal edict
when Roosevelt was closing them. Not one stockholder or depositer or
anybody ever lost a penny. But Dad believed in young people, and any
young man that came along with a dream and a vision Dad backed him.
Many of them did not repay their loans. So he was not a good judge of
human nature in the materialistic sense of the word, but he recognized
a dream when he saw it, and he always saw the potential in people. I'm
sure that he would have rather made a mistake underwriting them in con-
fidence than to have withheld from anyone that could have done it.
Anyway, that and the Depression, I think, wiped out almost everything
he had. The newspapers and preachers from the pulpits and others were
all saying about my father that this man, for that time, inherited so
much more than anybody else, that when he died he practically died
without a penny in order that nobody else would lose a penny. Daddy would
not have been the least bit sorry that this happened, because he had
always taught us to be self—reliant. He just made you believe in your-
self. And he also had told us, "Any amount of education that any of you
want, you can count on me to be back there backing you, but I am no
sucker. The minute that I see any of you taking me for granted or playing
on the job, just don‘t come back to me again.‘I So we all knew that.

He felt that all of us should be college graduates, and some of us had

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 7 - Wright
advanced degrees. 80 I know that he would not have worried a minute
about our futures without his money. My youngest brother and I managed
to salvage enough for Mother not to be uncomfortable.

JH: What about your mother and her background?

Wright: Well, this is why I majored in history in college. In the
1850's my mother's grandfather, Henry Buck, came from Maine to South
Carolina. He is listed in that book--what is the book? (I gave it to
my brother who is a doctor in Atlanta.) Anyway, it is written by
Davidson on the largest slaveholders in the South.1 The Buck family
from which my mother's grandfather Henry Buck was descended settled in
Cambridge, afterwards Woburn, Massachusetts in the year 1655. Jonathan
Buck, who was living in Haverhill, Massachusetts and was the first of
his family to go to what is now the state of Maine, did so in 1762 to
survey Township No. 1 on the Penobscot Bay, which was later named Bucks-
port in his honor. He was a prominent figure about whom interesting
legends are told, which I wish there were time to share with you.

But back to Henry Buck, my mother's grandfather, who was born and
raised in Buoksport, Maine. He was married to Mary Clark, who did not
go to South Carolina with him. Her mother was a Delano and a family
connection of Sarah Delano, President Franklin D. Roosevelt's mother.
As a young man Henry Buck went South to prospect for tall timbers for
schooners. The New England states were running low on such timbers.

He must have become enamoured of the country. There are all kinds of
tales told about this venturesome young man and the ingenuity he showed
in purchasing large holdings of timber at very low cost.

JH: Did he come to stay?

 

1 The Last Fbray, the South Carolina Planters BE 1860: A Sociological
Study (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1971).

2 See Genealo of The Buck Famil by Mrs. Elizabeth S. Richards.
Interview number G-Oﬁﬁﬁimfﬁlyﬁgggm mangOMQg,(#ﬁanﬁig’hep§guthem Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 8 — Wright

Wright: No, initially I don‘t think he did. But as his fortunes
grew and he began to make a place for himself, I‘ve heard that he
couldn't persuade his wife Mary Clark Buck of Maine to move to South
Carolina with him. At the time, he was living in a boarding house in
Conway Borough in Harry County, which is now called Conway. E?om there
he made trips throughout that area and into North Carolina as he con-
tinued to purchase land and yellow pines. The boarding house was run
by the llWidow Norman", one of whose daughters he married after a divorce
from my great-grandmother, Mary Clark Buck of Prospect Harbor, Maine.

JH: Now, who was your mother's father?

Wright: His name was William L. Buck, whose mother was Mary Clark
Buck of Prospect Harbor, Maine. He and a young friend had gone out to
St. Louis to work——you know the call of the West for young men at that
time. There were only two children in their family, my grandfather and
his sister, whom mother called "Aunt Mary Jane." But when their father,
Henry Buck, remarried to Frances Norman, the daughter of the “Widow
Norman," and settled permanently in South Carolina, he reared another
family. There were seven children by this marriage, half brothers and
sisters of my grandfather, William L. Buck. How well my mother knew any
of her half uncles and aunts I do not know, but I‘m under the impression
that some of the women may have married New Englanders and lived “down
East.“ We did know the children of Henry Lee Buck, a son, because they
continued to live in Harry County. My father was a fraternity mate, a
Kappa Alpha at Furman, of Henry Lee Buck Jr., whom we called "cousin
Hal;" he was mother's half cousin, you see. Daddy was very fond.of him,

and often stopped to see him on our way from Marion to Murrells Inlet,

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 9 — Wright

where we went for vacations.

JH: Now, what happened to your mother's father in St. Louis?

Wright: Well, his father, Henry Buck, finally persuaded him to come
to Bucksville, South Carolina, to work in the large lumber business he
was developing at three mills on the Waccamaw River.5 He came with the
understanding that his friend would be employed also, which he was. He
built what I believe was the first ocean-going schooner ever launched in
South Carolina at Bucksville. Due to navigational problems of the
Waccamaw River shipbuilding was not continued, but the lumber mills were
operated throughout the lifetime of Henry Buck and of William L. Buck.
You can still see the old mill stacks where the lumber mills were. The
only mill still standing was the lower mill at Bucksport, which was
bought by Mr. Donald V. Richardson at the time of the death of my grand—
father, William L. Buck. Mr. Richardson married a sister of "Cousin Hal'
and a half first cousin of my mother, Miss Jessamyn Buck. The Riohardsons
lived at a charming place at Bucksport called "Journey’s End." Doubt-
1ess that mill is still intact. There is a marina at Bucksport now and
a small community. Besides my grandfather and his friend, Henry Buck
brought many skilled craftsmen from Maine to work in his business enter—
prises. There are numerous interesting descendants of some of these
people still living in South Carolina. My grandfather William L. Buck,
like his father, made his home in South Carolina until his death at the
early age of fifty-two. His first home was in Bucksville, but he later
bought Tip Top plantation on the Waccamaw River from Governor Joseph
Alston, and it was his home at thetime of his death. Governor Alston

married Theodosia Burr, daughter of Aaron Burr, who was lost at sea on a

 

5 Henry Buck built the world's largest lumber and sawmill operation in
the South. He owned 511 slaves.

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 10 - Wright
trip to visit her father. I don‘t know whether you know all of that
exciting story and the legends surrounding it.

JH: Yes.

Wright: All right. So that was Tip Top. I never saw Tip Top
intact. It was a sixteen room mansion and most of it, except the
foundation, had burned. But Mother walked over rice fields with me and
would show me how the flood gates and canals and all worked there; it
was really fascinating. It is owned by Georgia Pacific now, but it was
bought by Mr. Donald Richardson when my grandfather Buck died. Grand-
father was serving in the South Carolina State Senate at the time of his
death in 1880. There is a fascinating Bucks cemetery at Buoksville
(which was the middle mill), and there is hardly a Buck in there who
lived to be sixty. My mother was one of seven. She had two brothers
and four sisters, and not a single one of them lived to be sixty. But
she lived to be eighty-five.

JH: So your great-grandfather Buck brought his New England son
down?

Wright: Yes.

JH: Whoae name was what?

Wright: William L.

JH: William L. Buck. And he settled there in Bucksville, South
Carolina?

Wright: Yes. Now I'll tell you more about Maine--this is where
my mother's maternal side comes in. The little town of Searsport, Maine
has a maritime museum in it that is fascinating. There is a book out on

the Searsport sea captains. The town had-noh, I‘ll just hazard a guess,

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 11 - Wright

80 to 90 percent of all the sea captains in America came from Sears-
port and its environs at one time. My great-grandfather McGilvery . . .
now my mother's mother was a McGilvery from Searsport, who married
William L. Buck, the son. of Henry Buck, the pioneer who came doWn here,
you see. Her grandfather, as far as we know, was the first McGilvery
in America. He came from Scotland about 1757. His name was Robert
McGilvery and he married Elizabeth Chase. Anyway, she was a doll, and
I have a silhouette of her in her little bonnet that is dear. My next-
to-youngest brother Joseph Norwood, who died in July 1975, had just
acquired old oil portraits of Robert McGilvery and of Elizabeth Chase--
and as I say, he was the first McGilvery who came to this country and
settled in New Hampshire. Then his son, William McGilvery (I don't
know if he had a middle name or not) married Harriet Hichborn. And the
interesting thing about that is that she was a descendant of Robert
Hiohborn whose cow pasture is now the Boston Commons. You can see how
I got interested in early American history, can‘t you? And Robert Hich-
born‘s sister Deborah was Paul Revere‘s mother. I have a Robert
Hichborn chair that I am taking to Columbia to have a new seat cover put
on. It is in exactly the same condition it was, and has come down in
my family, that one chair. It is a Queen Anne made of beautiful
mahogany.

JH: Did you hear all these stories when you were growing up?

Wright: Oh yes, yes. Daddy, naturally with all of us children—-
and he had three or four of us in college at one time, and we didn't go
to cheap colleges. . . . He had had typhoid fewer'and had to have three

nurses around the clock (and I had had it at the same time, so that it

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 12 - Wright

kind of gave us a little bond), so the doctor had told him that he would
have to take a month off every year. He died at sixty, but anyway that
was at the time of the Depression, and it was from Paul Revere rides to
help his fellow bankers get money from the Federal Reserve so that they
wouldn‘t fail. Mother said that was what killed him; she never saw
such a thing as his devotion to helping other bankers. People were
losing all of their life's savings and all of that. Anyway . . . I kind
of got lost there now.

JH: Well, I still don't know exactly where your mother emerges.

Wright: Yes. Well, anyway, this is where. William and Harriet
McGilvery lived in Searsport, Maine and were the parents of a large
family. One of their daughters, Desire McGilvery, was my mother's
mother. As a young woman she was engaged to a young sea captain named
Amos Nichols, who died at sea. William McGilvery was wealthy and
indulgent of his family. He had specially hand-loomed in Scotland for
his wife a McGilvery plaid in velvet for a dress. I have a small
piece of this dress, which is trimmed in black lace, has lovely sleeves,
a bustle effect and a slight train. Unusual and stunning! I wish there
were time for me to tell you some of the many interesting things about
the McGilvery and the Hichborn families. But, back to my story.

So anyway, William McGilvery of course had known and loved young
Amos Nichols too, who was to have been his son-in—law, and he saw his
daughter grieving over the death. You see, I guess that the Bucks were
supplying some of the timbers for his shipyards in Brewer, Bangor and
Searsport, Maine. He was going on a business trip to the Henry Buck lumber

and shipbuilding enterprises in Harry County, South Carolina, so he took

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 15 - Wright
his daughter Desire along; and that was where she met my grandfather,
William L. Buck. You see, they both had roots in New England, but
they met down here and they were married. So my mother was reared on
the rice plantation called Tip Top on the Waocamaw River that had
belonged to Governor Joseph Alston who married Theodosia Burr. Mother
always had a New England governess, cousin Faustina Hichborn.

JH: When was your mother born?

Wright: About a year after my father. His was '71 and hers was
‘72, I think. I have all those records, but not with me here.

JH: How many brothers and sisters did she have?

Wright: She had two brothers and four sisters: five girls and two
boys in that family. Cousin Faustina was one of the Hichborn old maids.
0h honey, that is perfectly fascinating! The three sisters were the
most cultured, charming people that I think I've ever known in my life.
And such imaginationl They remind you of Little Women.. In other wards,
they were always putting on plays; and you never saw such costumes and
things in your life. So Mother developed a lot of imagination too,
and a terrific love of beauty. She was a very sensitive person, almost
to the point of being witchy. I never tried to tell her a lie; I could
always kind of embroider things to get by, you know. And that's why I
never really learned the discipline that makes women out of women, or
men out of men. Anyhow, I never tried to tell her a lie, because she
could feel it. My father was a very logical and abstract sort of man,
and very mathematical. Once when they were engaged he was driving her
through some timberland that he had just bought. They were very much

in love. She was sensitive to every little rustle of a tree, little

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 14 - Wright

whisper of a pine, and every bit of light and shadow that filtered
to the ground. She told me that the silence was broken as their love
and the beauty of it all was almost too much for her when Daddy told
her how many board feet of lumber he was estimating to be in the tract
[Taughte:7. Well, you see, you could not have gotten two more different
people together. Oh I know, I was going to tell you a while ago that
we were at the beach, and the doctor had told my father that he should
take a month off and every weekend off during each summer. I thought
that it was rather sad, because we had all the good servants down at
the beach and our parents would have house parties for us and for all of
our young friends. Mother had servants who knew how to prepare all
of that good seafood and see that we were royally entertained. I
just felt that we were cheating Daddy a little bit with all that fun;
and all of the servants who might care for his creature needs in Marion
were there at the beach. He was going back up to the bank and wouldn't
get back until the next weekend, and so I volunteered to go up with him.

JH: You're saying that you had a house in Marion and also had a
house at the beach?

Wright: At the beach, yes.

JH: Where?

ﬁright: At Murrells Inlet. Well, this was a part of the Tip Top
plantation property, because all of those plantations on the Waecamaw
River did not have summer cottages or cabins or shacks the way that they
did in the later period, but they had houses that were very large and
substantial like the plantation houses. So you can see today, if you

know that area, the Grand Strand from Myrtle Beach on down to Pawley‘s

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 15 — Wright

Island and Georgetown, the Tip Top summer home at Murrell's Inlet.
It was called Sunnyside, and it‘s owned by a Mary Smith Walker now; but
I would love to show it to you if you are ever down there. Of course it
is not kept up in the manner that it was. Then my brother William Buck
Norwood-~there's a long story about him, but in short--he bought the last
single piece of my grandmother's estate that had not been sold and was
still in the family, which was 148 acres of sandy land that had been
sublet for many years as a farm. It was owned by my mother's oldest
sister's daughter. He bought it and has a development down there called
Mount Gilead. And you ought to ride in there sometime; I'd like you to
meet Buck and his wife. Anyway, I went up to Marion with Daddy. You
asked me about Mother and all of this early American, New England history.
Well you see, any mother had more time. And Daddy was like me; if I
get on a job I'm like an old mule with blinders on: this one thing I do.
I know what's in the sidelines and I'm dying to get out there, but I‘m
whole hog or nothing, to put it crudely. He was very much like that
about what he did and getting involved with people and all. Well, we
were up to Marion together, and I had never seen Daddy in any kind of a
domestic role or much as a human being, because he had his nose to the
grindstone. Anyway, I went in to wash the dishes after fixing breakfast
for him. As children we were always run out of the kitchen, and never
learned to cook. How he ate what I cooked I don't know.

JH: When did this happen?

Wright: Oh, I was probably about . . . I don't know whether it was
when I was in late high school or early college, something like that.

Anyway, I went in the kitchen and he came to dry the dishes. I thought

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 16 - Wright
that this was the most special thing. I almost had the feeling that
this was my husband helping, you know; and to see my father in this
kind of a role was just overwhelming. But he began talking, and Dad
was not a person. . . . Well, it's like a friend of mine from Alabama
told me once; she said, “Alice, you are the most personal impersonal and
impersonal personal person that I've ever known in my life." He was very
kind of stern. And with my mother, you could wheedle anything out of
her, almost. But he would say, "Daughter. . . " and you know that he
had had enough of your foolishness. So I stood somewhat in awe and
resentment. This is part of why I'm as feministic as I can be and
determined that I would do anything that a man could do, all my life.
You talk about the women‘s movement of the sixties. Well, in the twenties
I was a graduate of the National School of the YWCA when they had one in
New York City. The building, I understand, was given by the Rockefellers.
It was marvelous, and lead by women with the most stunning brains of
that time. The YW was the most cutting edge agency of current social
movements.

JH: I really want to talk to you about that, but finish telling me
this incident.

Wright: I will, I will. Anyway, I was never more shocked because
it had never occurred to me that he felt on the outside looking in with
his family a little bit, because Mother was the kind who spoiled every one
of us as though we were an only child. And also, her whole life was
lived-—as so many women of that period and earlier did, you know--in and
through her children. One of the cutest things she ever said was about

this just a short time before she died. AnyWay, back to Dad. He said,

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 17 - Wright

"Daughter, you know you children know so much about your mother's family,
and there never has seemed any appropriate time for me to tell you
anything about your father's family. Well, your mother's was very. . . ."
BEGIN SIDE II TAPE I

Wright: All my life these things have made kind of a dramatic
impact on me.

JH: So your father then told you about his family? How did you
fell about that?

Wright: Oh, I liked what he told me. It wasn't as romantic or
colorful as Mother's. Dady was very . . . he understated things, you
see. He said, "I don't have any desire for you children to have any
inflated idea about who you are, but I do want you to know that you have
nothing to be ashamed of. And the fact that you know about your mother‘s
family and so little about mine, the natural inplication would be that they
were better. Not that we don‘t have skeletons; but, you know, I don't
think that your mother has ever mentioned any of here, but I imagine
there are some there."

JH: How did your mother and father meet?

Wright: Well, she was a second wife. But anyway, going back, what
he told me interested me very much, you see. The plantation life on the
Waccamaw River was primarily low country, Episcopal aristocracy, and
there were decanters on the Sideboards and wine cellars. . . . Well, I
know that when Mother and I have been down to Top Top, she showed me where
the slave quarters were, and a house where things bought in bulk were
stored. There were these great barrels in which beer in blown glass

bottles with round bottoms from Belfast, Ireland had been shipped. But

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 18 - Wright
now my father, his family lived a much more austere life. My father
didn't smoke, drink; I never heard him say "damn" or a bad word in my
life, anything of that kind. He had very high ideals, but it didn't
seem to inhibit him in any way. He told me, "I'm not suggesting at
all that the Norwoods could not have spent their time in any social
circles that they cared to move in. But I would like you to know that
as far as what I know of your ancestors, most of them have been educators,
and they have been people with a strong sense of social responsibility."
He didn't elaborate or anything else. But now, I have already told you
about a lot of these educators that came down from New England to teach
at St. David's Academy in Darlington County. I have a book called
Darlingtoniana, which is the history of Darlington County and of the
early families such as the Cokers, the Norwoods, the Wilkins, the Lides,
the Edwards and many others. There was a lot of intermarriage. For
example, my father‘s first wife was named Maricn Park. There has been
a recent president of Bryn Mawr, Marion Park, who is of the same Park
family, I think. I have a half brother five years older than I who died
about three weeks ago, and whom I loved dearly, and who lived out in the
San Francisco area. Hie mother's name was Marion Park, and they were
related to the Parks of Park and Burgess, the sociologists at the Uni—
versity of Chicago, I‘ve been told. Dr. Park, who came to South Carolina
from New England and first taught at Saint David's Academy in Society
Hill, South Carolina, started the Department of Classical Languages at
South Carolina College. And he was the first, by virtue of his scholar-
ship, the first librarian there, for which he was paid the munificent

salary of $150. All of this is recorded in Hollis's history of the Uni-

'|nterview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 19 - Wright
versity of South Carolina, which is most interesting. Dr. Park's
portrait is hanging in the Euphratean Society at the University. There
was a lot of trouble with the college president about that time, and some
of the board wanted Dr. Park to replace him as the president. But due
to his age (he was getting old by that time) they felt it would not be
right to ask him to cope with student revolts and the generally tense
situation because of his mild and gentle spirit. So the presidency was
not offered to him.

JH: When would this have been?

Wright: This was when it was the College of South Carolina, and
his name was Thomas Botsworth Park.

JH: And his daughter was your father's first wife?

Wright: No, his grand-daughter, I think she would have been.
Anyway, one of his daughters married a Wilkins, so the Parks were cousins
of Daddy. I have told you that the Wilkins and Norwoods intermarried.
Then, I believe, my Uncle George Norwood, the one who was president of
the bank in Goldsboro, North Carolina, married Miss Louise Stephens
Hart, whose father was Thomas F. Hart Jr., for whose family the town
of Hartsville, South Carolina was named. Coker College is located in
Hartsville. And Mrs. D. R. Goker now owns the old Hart place called
Kalmia. Mr. D. R. Coker and Daddy were born within three days of each
other and were boyhood friends. The second Mrs. Coker was Dan Roper's
daughter, who was Secretary of Commerce under Roosevelt. She is a love,
and I just adore her. She has bought the old Hart place and these original
old oil portraits of its former Hart owners. Aunt Louise was born in

Gutenberg, Germany, where her father was getting his doctorate, and she

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 20 - Wright

and Uncle George had a marvelous family of about six boys and two
girls. Her son Thomas Hart is one of my favorites. She too was a cousin
of the Norwoods. Then my father's first wife Marion Park was his
cousin. My Uncle Joseph Norwood, who was named for his grandfather,
married Fanny Edwards, who (I‘ve been told) was descended from the
New England line of Jonathan Edwards; and she was a cousin. Then
Judge L. D. Lide, whom I admired greatly, was also related to many of
these families, as was Colonel Aaron Kalb, I believe. Darlingtoniana
is a fascinating book put out by the Darlington County Historical
Society.4

JH: When are we ever going to get to you? [Eaughte37

Wright: 4y mother and father were married May 22, 1901. One of
my mother‘s sisters married Mr. Herve Simpson, who had at least two
brothers who were supposedly very much in love with my mother before she
married my father. One of them, Dr. Frank Simpson, who practiced
medicine in Pittsburgh, wrote a lot of beautiful romantic things about
Iother. Evidently she was a lovely dancer, and they called her “Flaxie
Frizzle:" blue eyed, fair skinned, curly hair and petite. She looked
like a Dresden doll. I'm the only one of my sisters who isn't a Ilady."
I have two sisters; they show me up [Taughte57. But mother was always
talking about what ladies they were, and she couldn't make one out of
me. And I'd tell her, "Well, honey, the price just comes too high. I
like all those qualities, but you have to give up so much else that it's
not worth it.“ Mother lived with me a lot after my father died, and she
would just go on as though she was so shocked at everything I said and
did. I said, “Mother, to maintain your self—respect you may have to act

4 Gregg's History 2: the 01d Cheraws and Cook's (?) Rambles la the
Pee Dee should both be read in this connection.

 

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 21 — Wright

shocked, but you are not kidding me. I express every suppressed desire
that you ever had."

JH: What did she say?

Wright: Oh she would say, “Alice, you are a mess, just a mess.“
It was true. You see, her culture closed so much to her.

JH: Would you ever have thought that when you Were younger? When
you were younger and felt that you were very different from your
mother, did it ever occur to you then that you. . . .

Wright: No, I never felt basically terribly different. I had some
of Mother's little witchlike intuition myself, but I also had some of
my father's ability to analyze things, you see. If I had to choose
between the tWo, I rather feel that. . . . I think that my mother had a
superior something that was an emotional quality; although my father was
a highly emotional kind of a person too, but it was different from
Mother's. She was highly intuitive.

JH: How did she express that? What made you so aware of that?

Wright: I don't know. Maybe I can think of something, but just
offhand it doesn‘t occur to me. But now about the black business and
all, Mother was a person with a great sense of what the code was. And
it was pretty restricting, and she really did not associate with blacks
socially. One reason why in all this segregation I had such a feeling
for it is because I remember that even though D. R. Coker lived over
in Hartsville and we lived in Marion and the transportation wasn‘t nearly
as good, he was always dropping in on us and Daddy and Mother on them.
And so little pitchers have big ears, and I always was curious about

adult conversations. So I remember hearing them discuss racial matters;

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 22 - Wright

now this I remember from childhood. I must have been very young, but
it was probably the debate between my mother and father as to whether
I should go to public school. And Mother had never been to a public
school, with her governess and all, so she. . . .

JH: Did your father go to public school?

Wright: I‘m sure he must have. But my mother, you see, insisted
on my going to private schools. So I had two teachers for one pupil
the first two years of my school life. And these two maiden ladies from
Charleston, the Misses Schaeffer, lived straight across the street from
us in a place they called Villa Marie, because they loved Italy and they
used to spend some time in Europe every year. Villa Marie, named for
Miss Minnie Schaeffer, was the home also of Miss Dessie Sohaoffer.
They both taught me, two people for one little girl. So when they finally
were going to spend the winter in Europe and there was nobody else
available with any education to be my governesses. . . . And I‘m sure
geeat efforts were made to replace them, because Mother was a very
determined little piece. You'd never suspect it, but she really stuck
in there with anything she set her mind to do. I have a lot of that
too; don‘t try to push me if I‘ve made up my mind. So anyway, they put
me in the second grade in public school, although the lessons that I had
been having with the Misses Schaeffer were not graded at all. Because
they were delightful, and I guess because fairly early I began something,
I learned at a very early age that I didn't have to be disciplined; I
could manipulate these old ladies and get around to something that
interested me, instead of their teaching me by keeping me sticking my

nose to their assignments. 30 I really was way beyond where the children

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 25 - Wright
in the second grade were, but in other things I wasn't up to them. I
was my parente' first child, and this is related to my masculine protest,
I think. Father's first wife had two children, both of whom were boys,
neither one of whom were named for him. I think that he was dying to
have a son named for him. I just sense this, nobody ever told me this.
I have a feeling that Mother and I teamed up to show him that a girl
could be as good as a boy. Also, my mother's artistic temperament, that
type of temperament that my father didn't understand, the fact that I
had some of this. And she would want him to help me with math or some—
thing, and he would be very impatient with me. He was kind of short-
tempered and high strung and all, and I developed an early admiration,
fear and resentment of my father, very early. Also, my mother made me
very competitive. When I would come home from school she would ask me
how I did; and at that time they taught children to be competitive. For
instance, when we read they would let the class vote on who had read
the best. Well, Mother just worked on me, insisting that I wasn't to be
satisfied unless I was the best reader in that class. Also, the fact
that I hadn‘t been disciplined. . . . And they would march you into
school at that time, and you were supposed to sit with your hands folded
unless they told you to unfold them, and all that kind of thing. Well,
I became friends with a little girl who came from a good family, but her
father was a drunkard and her mother was working as a milliner in a
store. Up to that time I had never, my dear, known anything but a very
sheltered life, with a butler driving you and with a maid with you in
the surry when you left home. I would see other children who would just

run in the streets. I wanted to know what was over the fence, and being

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 24 - Wright
restricted was just killing me. Anyway, in my neighborhood where the
parents of my aunt by marriage, Lula Badger Buck, had lived had been sold
to a horeetrader who had made considerable money and had a lot of child-
ren and large family connection. He bought the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Badger that was three doors down and across the street from us.

JH: Where in Marion did you live?

Wright: On Willeox Avenue. That was the place. All these great
big old Gay Ninties places. Anyway the Badgers, old Dr. and Mrs.
Badger, had been very proper neighbors! Incidentally, Mrs. Badger was
a close relative of William Gilmore Simms, who was the father of May
Simms who wrote a school history of South Carolina (May Simms Oliphant).
Anyway, the children of our new neighbors ran wild playing in a great
big canal that ran under Willcox Avenue. I watched them enviously and
from afar. So very early in life I would run away and get in the canal
("big ditch“) and go under the street, climb trees and jump ditches with
my brothers while my sisters were playing dolls or running to tell on
me. I mean, I was just dying for the freedom of the new neighbors'
children. I felt that it must be a much more interesting life than the
one I was having. I was enjoying the one that I was living, but I felt
that there was a lot over there that I was missing.

JH: You were the firstborn child of your mother and father, and
he already had two sons? Did they live with you?

Wright: One died. Yes, the other one did, and honey, he and I
adored each other. Temperamentally we were entirely different. He was
quiet like Thomas Botsworth Park. He was kind, loving, wonderful sense

of humor, easy-going. And he told me last summer when I visited in

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 25 - Wright
California (well, he had told me before), he said that he never knew
any difference between my mother and his own. She was such a maternal,
sweet thing. And he said, “Alice, I loved her so much better than I
did my father." You see, Daddy was kind of forbidding.

JH: When were you born?

Wright: March 12, 1902.

JR: Then you had two more sisters?

Wright: Two more sisters and then. . . .

JH: When were they born?

Wright: Well, one sister, today is her birthday (and I must phone
her); she lacks twelve days of being a year younger than I am. She and
my other sister, as children, just hated my guts, I think.

JH: Why was there so much difference between you and a sister that
was so close to you in age?

Wright: She says that I took all of her strength, physical and
otherwise. I was always a leader and she was less assertive. She
married a very dominant husband. He and I would just have battles royal,
you know. But if you love somebody as they did each other. . . . I've
never seen such a thing as they had going for them. Anyway she's a
widow now. But she had learned the last ten years of his life to put
him in his place, in a nice way of course, just spicy and cute, and she
has come into her own in a big way.

JHI Do you think that your mother, in Spite of her general lady-
1ike manner, encouraged you in some way to take on this. . . .

Wright: Well, it used to worry her terribly that I sought out

people from the other side of the tracks. I found them much more

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 26 - Wright

interesting, even the family of muletraders. I used to go home with
one of the daughters, a school mate, instead of coming straight home.
And I was always late getting home for dinner, and my father would
punish us for that. But her father, an old man, had been a Confederate
war veteran; he was a young boy when he went into the Confederate Army.
When he drank his soup, he had a long goatee and it would all go down
in it. I had never seen anything like that, and I thought it was the
most exciting thing I'd ever seen in my life Ziaughte57. And another
girl, the one that I told you her father was a drunkard and her mother
a milliner, she sat behind me in school, and I soon began to learn the
ways of the world from her. She would say to me, "Alice, you're a
dunce." Well, I didn't know what a dunes was. I was turning around,
and I was supposed to be looking forward; but I didn‘t understand the
discipline used in the public school. She would call me a jackass and
a fool and a dunoe, and I was flattered to be called all these names.
I didn‘t know what they were Ziaughte57. Then she told me where babies
came from. The cook that we had had been a midwife. She lived with us
for over forty-five years. I asked her before I did my mother where babies
came from, and she said that the doctor brought Sam my brother in his
valise. She found my brother Joe in an old stump, she said, and all the
usual things, you know. So then I sat up at the dinner table and said,
'Olara Gasque told me that babies come out of their mother‘s bellies."

JH: How old were you?

Wright: W611, I was in the second grade. I saw this look between
my father and mother, and I judged that it was something like, 'You

just don't talk about those things." They said, "You know that Mom

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 27 - Wright
Minn told you that Dr. McIntyre brought Sam in his valiee." I wanted
to know why he chose us to give him to, and all this and that. So I
went back and told Clara that my people said what she had told me wasn't
so. And she said, "Well, you come home with me and I'll show it to you
in the Bible." So I went home with her, although I had been threatened
and told that if I was late coming home again my father would take me
out to the barn and beat me with the buggy whip.

JH: Is that how you were punished?

Wright: Well, this was the only time, but they had tried every
way to break my spirit, and they could not do it.

JH: How were you punished?

Wright: Well, just kind of talking to and things like that.

JH: You weren't spanked?

Wright: No, not often. But he took me out there and were me out
with the buggy whip; and my brother, who is the doctor over in Atlanta,
had a similar experience. You see, I was very slow to develop sexually,
and there may be some connection. I had had fun and had a wonderful
rapport with men. But I developed a terrific resentment of my father
on a subconscious level for a long time, I suppose, and also I loved
my mother and her sisters deeply. I would have those same big old ears
when they were downstairs talking; and I got their idea of sex, that it
was a . . . well, it's difficult to express.

JH: That men imposed it on women?

Wright: Yes. And that they should have in any way reduced these
women from the pedestal that I had put them on. . . . They were superior

women and I. . . -

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 28 - Wright

JH: But you think that you heard your mother and her sisters
talking?

Wright: I mean, it was more what I felt about what they were
feeling and sharing, don‘t you see?

JH: Do you think that this was intuition or that you actually. . . .

Wright: I know that I'm sure I heard enough to feel as I did.
And for a long time I was paying men back for the way I felt about my
father, and also I was paying them back for the way they did these
women. Well, I know that about the second place I was teaching school,
I was staying one place and having meals at another place. And a woman
of the old school from Charleston, a Mrs. Mazyok and her mother, Mrs.
Livingston, called me one day and said, "Alice, I think that you are
one of the warmest, most outgoing people that I have ever known, You
love old people too, and I love you. But I just want to tell you (I
wouldn't tell you this if I thought that you knew what you were doing),
Alice, you are driving these men that take their meals here up a tree.
You don't know that you are doing it. You just throw yourself around
with them, and you don't realize what you are doing." I didn't know.
I remember the first fellow that I ever saw show male emotion; oh, he
was such a good-looking thing and was begging me to marry him. Well, I
had no idea of settling down. I had seen enough of a woman‘s role in
marriage that I could have cared less for it. I had no desire for that,
and it wasn't that I wasn't flattered by his attentions. I thought that
he was the best catch in town, but I wasn't the least bit interested.

JH: Did you feel that your father treated your mother badly?

Wright: I didn't think that he fully appreciated her, and I didn't

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 29 - Wright

think that they communicated too well either. I felt that Mother had
a capacity and depth that he didn't have, and he didn't have enough of
it to appreciate what she had. I felt that he underestimated what she
had. She was a “Philadelphia lawyer" that could have held her own with
anybody except for the limitations society imposed on her, don't you
see. And really, if I had to choose between what the two had, I would
have chosen what she had. Now here was much more underdeveloped, but
she was an executive from the word go, the way she operated our home.
We've had as many as thirty—three people in our home as guests at one
time during our houseparties at the beach, and honey, she directed and
managed beautifully. She was a planner and expediter, and, I think, a
much better manager than he was.

JH: Did you feel that he just ignored her?

Wright: No.

JH: Or just oondesoended to her?

Wright: Oh, there was a condescension, but he always called her
a Laplander. We saw a lot of affection and all that in the home; I
mean that I'm not saying there wasn't any. She couldn't come through
a room but what he would pull her down into his lap and kiss her, you
know. He would say, "Some marry Finns and some marry Swedes, but I
married a Laplander.I He thought that was just real cute, you know.
So there was a lot of affection, but there was not in—depth communica-
tion. Of course few marriages have it. But I think that anybody is
silly to settle for less. I mean, why bother?

JH: What gave you the feeling that there was not that real

communication? Did she ever say anything to you that led you to think

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page )0 - Wright

that?

Wright: Well, he once said something to me, kind of like, "Your
mother is a little foolish"--kind of wrote her off. I resented 1t.

JH: He thought that she was a little flighty?

Wright: Well no, but Mother did not have a mathematical mind at
all, and of course he did, and he thought that was a superior thing.
He was the kind who could add columns up by just looking at them and
all that. And he said, "You know, I asked your mother that old gag
about 'If two and one is shoe polish, what is three and one?l and she
said that she didn't know." It was four, you know, and he said, "Your
mother doesn't even know that three and one makes four." But he was
very proud of her looks. He was very proud of her social graces and she
was an ornament, his most prized possession--but a possession no less.
But Mother couldn't he possessed, you see, and maybe this was what. . . .
Well, I always think of Soames Forsythe, the man of property. Have you
read that book, the Fora the Sa ? That's the way that so many men are,
and they don‘t know it.

JH: Did he use those words?

Wright: What?

JH: Did he say that your mother was an ornament?

Wright: No, but he was very proud of her. He would talk about how
young and pretty she was and what good care he took of her, you see.
But now my mother had a sister Mrs. P. M. Homer, "Aunt Gertrude,“ next
door who had two sons, One of them was the Dr. Phillip M. Hamer that I
told you was director of historical commissions in the nation, with his

office in the National Archives. He was a brilliant man; and his wife,

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 31 - Wright
incidentally, was the assistant to the Librarian of Congress. Anyway,
Aunt Gertrude had one daughter, but she died. I used to love to go to
see her, because Mother had so many children and she didn't have time to
read books and things. And Aunt Gertrude was a graduate of the New
England Conservatory of Music. Mother studied at the Conservatory in
Boston, but she was not a graduate and Aunt Gertrude was. She was
highly intellectual and a very deep person. She was hemmed in too by
her society, but she was widely read, very much a student, and right
next door. And I just worshipped the ground that she walked on. My
mother was not really as developed intellectually, but she had the
potential, you see. And as I say, she really was a Philadelphia lawyer,
in the most feminine kind of a way.

JH: Well, until you went to public schools what did you do?

You played indoors, you. . . .

Wright: There was a barn with horses; Daddy loved racehorses and
we used to ride horseback all the time. But when we were little
children we had a man who was the butler and kept the horses. And he
used to churn the ice cream for us and things like that. We would have
to go to ride every afternoon in the surrey, with a Negro nurse along
with us.

JH: What was the difference between your sisters and what you did?

Wright: Well, they played dolls; they liked dolls more. I liked
paper dolls more because of the wider range of age groups, relationships,
life situations (real and imagined) made possible by the many paper
dolls. Also I had a thing that my son has, the most terrific attention

span. I could play paper dolls for hours on end, just as I worked as

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 52 - Wright

state director of the South Carolina Council on Human Relations (SGOHR)
hours on end into the night, maybe eighteen out of the twenty-four
hours at times. I can‘t hold up under that now, but this is the way
I worked and have loved it. If it is something that is important to me
and I'm interested in, I just have no sense of time. Furthermore, you'll
remember I began to get an interest in activities such as jumping
ditches and climbing trees with my younger brothers. So I began to pick
up all that.

JH: Were you not allowed to play out of doors?

Wright: Well, not a great deal unattended. Now we had one of
these swings where two swings faced each other, and joggling boards
and things like that. And we used to go out and swing and watch Arthur
Black, who later became a pullman ear porter, churn the lemon milk
sherbert. It was the most delicious thing. Then also we had horses,
and way back of the house a great barn. We used to go there sometimes
to watch the cows being milked or fed. We had fruit trees and some
chickens. Our lot was tremendous; it went back through most of the
block and was about two hundred feet or more across the front. You
could just be lost wandering around it. As a little child I always
had to have a certain amount of privacy, and still do. I love to
wander without too much meaning, kind of blotting up the music of the
spheres. It's an existentialist sort of thing, reassuring and infilling.
The great cosmic forces, I‘ve always had to feel a part of them, you
know. Right now there is no form of exercise that I enjoy as much as
swimming. And I will get out in the water and just go for several

miles. I might tread water and turn on my back and float, but I like

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 55 - Wright
just the sense of space. When we were kids, Mother was very imaginative
and arranged interesting experiences for us. At Murrells Inlet in
summer other people liked to go fishing in little rowboats. But I
never did, because I would try to jerk the fish in too soon. I couldn't
fool than! I liked something a little more active than fooling fish.
After fishing expeditions by family and friends our servants were rowed
across the Inlet to the ocean strand. There was an old woman named
Sallie Green, whose mother had been a slave in the Buck family. I have
pictures of her and of other family servants. She would make Sally
Luna and old-fashioned ginger cookies, sugar cookies and things. Then
Mom Ninn (she was the one who had been the midwife and was with us for
over forty-five years) and they would come and. . . .

JH: Was she a practicing midwife?

Wright: No. She came to Mother after my oldest full brother, the
one who is a doctor in Atlanta, was born, and she never left us. We
just loved the ground that she walked on. Now, part of my radical
point of view was determined by the respect and acceptance as a person
that was given the servants that were in our home. Now Mom Ninn
traveled with us. You see, just as my mother as a girl left their rice
plantation in Harry County about early May and did not come back until
late October from New England, just as Mother did not want us to have
a summer home down at the beach, because we loved it so that she
thought she would never get us away. So she used to take us up to
upper New York State and places like that in the summer. Mom Ninn
always went with us.

JH: Instead of taking you to the beach?

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 54 — Wright

Wright: Yes, because she felt that we needed to get cut of that
low-country climate. You see, there was a lot of malaria and typhoid
fever there at that time. There was an old theory that you had to
change your climate and get to a more bracing one. Then Mother would
take us to the mountains. I know that as children we have been marooned
by floods up in Waynesville and Saluda and other mountain places in
North Carolina. We would always go to those places for the summer.
And not until about 191&, after the doctor had said that Daddy should
take long summer vacations, did we finally get our place down at the
beach. You see, Grandmother Buck's estate at Murrells Inlet was called
Sunnyside. It was the summer home that was a part of the Tip Top
plantation. When we were children all of that property was called
Little Marion. My Uncle Henry Buck, Mother's youngest brother who never
had any children, died in his forties and was an attorney. And he built
the first place down there, called Curlew Point. And then my father's
sister and her husband, another attorney Henry Mullins, had a place
next door to them. Then the Willcoxes, relatives from Marion, also
built a place down there. Then all of their friends began to have
places, and so we would go for maybe two weeks in a summer and use
Uncle Henry's place or Julia Poterkin's5 cottage. She was a first
cousin of Aunt Lula Badger Buck. That was before Dad had our house
built at the beach, about 1914.

JH: How many brothers and sisters do you have in all?

Wright: There were seven of us. That was with the half brother.
You see the other half brother died in infancy. I was in a friend‘s

home recently (she was giving a little dinner for me), and she said,

 

5 Pulitzer Prize novelist, author of Scarlet Sister Mary, Green
Thursday, Black Agril et a1.

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The LOUIS Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 55 - Wright
"You know Alice, we've always had so much to talk about that I haven't
the foggiest idea about a single member of your family. How many are
there?“ I said, I‘Well, there are seven of us. I'm the next to oldest."
She said, "Are all of them living?" I said, lAbsolutely. All of us
are oldsters now, you see; and I think that is the most remarkable
thing." Well, just three days later my next-to-youngest brother died
in his sleep and was found dead. Then another brother recently fell
on his way to a Rotary Club meeting, and they found him by the side of
his car in a some from which he never recovered. So you see, when it
starts happening it just comes that way. I don't have any great sense
of active family unity since my mother's death in 1958. I miss family
and friends, but I have gotten to the place where I've accepted the
great love and closeness that was built into our family relationship
and the many, many happy memories primarily as a part of the past. We
children have just gone in entirely opposite directions. Then I have
a philosophy about death too. The idea doesn't disturb me greatly. I
think that when people‘s physical faculties begin to wane, then it is
marvelous to be relieved of the limitations of the body, and maybe the
spirit can keep on soaring. At least those things with which it has
been identified will continue to keep on soaring, we‘ll hope. I mean,
I have no real feeling of any great disappointment about whatever happens-~
which reminds me that when my first husband Gene died, so many of the
young preachers who were working with me in the South Carolina Council
on Human Relations at Columbia were simply precious to him. They knew
that I gave all the time I could to him, but it was limited. He was
in the Veterans' Hospital at Columbia with terminal lung cancer. He
was a veteran of the First World War, a good bit older than I was too.

So I think that I‘ve probably been married to father substitutes all my

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The LOUIS Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 56 - Wright
life [Iaughte£7. But anyway, I said, "Are these fellows bothering you,
or do you like to have them come up?" He said, “No, they don't bother
me. Alice, you can have the swellsst young friends that I've ever
seen, and for them to be preachers they don't act like it." Well, of
course the ones who were working with us wouldn't. I said, "Well,
Gene, do they do you any good?" He said, "Not a damn hit." New mind
you, he was very conservatively brought up, but he was as honest. I
told George Mitchell once; I said, I'George, you and my first husband are
entirely alike. You are the two most unpretentious human beings that
I‘ve ever known in my life. To tell you the truth (it's probably a
reflection on me that I'm admitting it), I'm telling you that I would
give anything under the sun if both of you would pretend a few times for
just a little bit.' [Iaughteg7 But neither one of them ever did. They
were as plain as an old shoe. Anyway, Gene was so cute about it. He
said to me about one little fellow who had come from a labor background
and had become an Episcopal rector in the Olympia Mill Village out of
Columbia, John Kibley, who was the secretary of sour SCOHR board; he
said, "Alice, John comes in here and he gets out that prayerbook and
blah-blah-blah, and then says a little prayer. And I think that he
thinks he's done his duty." I said, "Well, that's probably about all
he does for his congregation, I imagine.n He said, “Well, I want to
ask you something. What do you think.. . ." (we had never talked about
this) ". . . happens to people when they die?" I said, "Nobody knows.
But I have been an inveterate optimist all my life. And whatever cosmic
forces there are, you see a terrific amount of waste, of what appears

to be waste in nature. But when you think of the interest some people

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 57 — Wright

have in life, their unanswered questions, the activity of their minds
and the unfinished business in their lives, it would not seem reasonable
for the process not to continue. In what form this may go on, or
whether there is any conscious continuity, none of us knows.‘l
BEGIN SIDE I TAPE II
I said, 1'Look at the breaks that you and I have had. Both of us have
had the opportunities and joys and even sorrows and mistakes. And all
that has meant so much to us, far beyond anything that either one of us
has deserved, if you look at it in that way.II So I said, “With the deal
that I have gotten here, I'll take my chances on any hereafter.“ He
said, "You know, that's exactly what I think.I And it seemed to relax
him. He was just so darling.

JH: Well, tell me a little bit more about your experience in school.
Your mother didn't want you to go to public school?

Wright: No. But after I got in there she was determined that I
was going to be the head of the class.

JH: Did she push the other children like that?

Wright: No, I don't think so. And my two sisters right now. . . .
In fact, I told the daughter of one of my sisters that both of them
had always been more congenial with each other than with me, and that I
didn't blame them because I was an upstart. Just like all other children
that you are a little bit older than, you downplay them. And I said
that I knew that I was an overbearing thing, and any feelings that they
carried into adult life that are different from the way they think
about me are understandable. I think they think better about me than

they feel about me. It is thoroughly understandable. I don't blame

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 58 — Wright
them at all. And I know that I ran roughshod over people until I
began to see and understand. I think that I am very sensitive about
not doing that now. The fact that my mother pushed me, her oldest
child, may have unconsciously been in search for her own fuller self-
realization, and in part a feminist answer to my father too.

JH: How do you know that?

Wright: I'm just positive of it; I just know that. But it did
make me far too competitive. I was always very competitive in sports,
being especially keen about basketball. I would get out there on that
dirt oourt—-Marion High School didn't have a gymnasium—-and older men
in the community. . . . Now, I didn‘t have any feeling that this was
a man and I was a woman, but they would come out there to watch me scrap
on the basketball court. Honey, I would scramble in the dirt to get
that ball! I was captain of the team and played forward. I was presi—
dent of my class and president of the G. A. Woods Literary Society.
Judge 0. A. Woods, the first South Carolinian to become a judge of the
Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, was a relative of my father's.
They joined the South Carolina Huguenot Society in Charleston simultaneously
with a common ancestor, Isaac DuBose. I won the G. A. Woods‘s medal for
debating and also the deolamation medal while in high school. Mother
would get coaches for me for elocution. I loved taking part in plays and
any form of dramatics. At Converse College I continued many extra-
curricular activities, and was president of the student body.

JH: When did you go to college?

Wright: In 1919. I was seventeen.

JH: What was Converse like? Did your mother want to send you

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 59 - Wright

there?
Wright: No. My mother wanted me to go to vassar, Wellesley,

Smith or some other eastern women's college. There was nothing parti-
oularly provincial about either one of my parents, but you see, there
was not the mobility then that there is today. We did not have the
means of transportation or communication that have made the world so
little. Most people continued to live at least in the state in which
they were born. So what my father said was that it was a great
advantage to a person to have his first experience in higher education
in his home state, but that any of us who had the ambition to want
graduate school, he would gladly send us. Well, this was a great oom-
promise. So Mother sent me to the only college in South Carolina that
was accredited by the American Associations of Universities and Colleges,
which was Converse. But while I got a great deal at Converse--and, as
I say, I was very active in student life there and I was president
of the student body--I always had a sense of guilt, as well as a lot
of other forces, that have propelled me. I have a cousin who laughs
and says, “Alice, I don't understand why you are such a driven woman."
Well, I know some of the reasons. I've heard anthropologists talk
about how the South with its static culture has many more roots and much
deeper ruts than most sections of the country, and that anyone who
gets out of the rut here has had to have had some pretty traumatic
experiences and really some emotional problems. Otherwise they never
would have gotten out of the rut. For many Southerners being complacent
and just enjoying the nice comfortable little ruts are an acceptable

pattern. Though I‘ve been a questioning rebel for much of my life,

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 40 — Wright
I‘m also aware of being restricted by my cultural conditioning.

JH: Well, what kind of guilt?

Wright: Well, I‘m not sure. I had a friend, a woman, a brilliant
woman but a physical monstrosity, presumably caused by glandular
problems. She was a rare spirit.

JH: At Converse?

Wright: No. I knew her in the thirties when I was the only women
administrator of county relief in South Carolina. She was serving as
a district supervisor of the South Carolina Emergency Relief Administra-
tion. She used to tell me that while we had much in common by way of
rebelling against the status quo, that we responded in diametrically
opposite ways. She acquiesced because she didn‘t want to hurt her
family and friends. This left her feeling that she was failing to be
true to herself. Thus she felt guilty. Conversely, I acted in accor-
dance to my inner dictates regardless of the price to myself or others
who were dear to me. In order to lessen the friction or hurt I often
tried to conceal my actions or otherwise deceive. This naturally
created a sense of uneasiness and guilt in me.

There have been very few jobs in the social work field held by men
that I haven‘t held, and I have usually been the first woman. You see,
all of this is part of what I'm going to show you. The first assistant
that worked with me in the South Carolina Council on Human Relations,
James T. McCain, came in one day and asked me what was wrong with him.
He was a black. I used to feel like I had had a severe illness after
we'd talked two hours. You see, I empathized to such an extent that I

would just suffer through his suffering. And I am very wasteful of my

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The LOUIS Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page #1 - Wright
emotions, very. I mean, I could have done so much more if I hadn't
felt so deeply about things?

JH: Do you think so, really?

Wright: Yes, I dol

JH: That you could have done more?

Wright: I don't know; I think so. But of course, I wouldn't
want to lack sensitivity. One thing, I don‘t harness my emotions. I
see and feel so much that I am frustrated because I can do so little.
And I have imagination and on creative, and I can do so little about
it. Anyway, it's a frustrating experience. Well, most people in my
life to my face have praised me, and this has given me a sense of guilt
because they have praised me beyond my efforts and harnessing of the
gifts given me. This has made me feel a little cheap and shoddy all
my life.

JH: But you've always been driven, you've always been trying to
do things.

Wright: Yes. But you see, I think that most people have a desire
for perfection. And in order to encompass as much as I have, in order
to be a general practitioner instead of a specialist, I have had to
compromise. I could have done so much better in anything than I've
ever done if I could have disciplined myself better and set priorities.
The last job I held before retirement was as executive director of the
South Carolina Council on Human Relations. It represented thirteen
long, hard years of combatting tradition and the political climate of
the state. Regardless of the demands of the moment (and they were always

pressing and frequently emergencies), regardless of how carefully I had

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 42 - Wright

planned my daily schedule, invariably I was confronted by an individual
or individuals with problems and/or potentialities for growth and
change. These I could never resist! Establishing rapport and helping
to motivate such persons was a source of strength to me. It also helped
to rekindle my faith in people and in the ultimate success of racial
integration, for which we were working. Unscheduled as these encounters
frequently were, they often kept me at the office or sent me back to the
office to work until one, two, or three o‘clock in the morning to
complete the day‘s MUSTS. I have a strong sense of “there but for the
grace of God go I," which really makes a difference. The disadvantaged
and exploited are a part of the life stream to which I belong too.
You see, I can't separate myself from people.

JH: Did you feel this when you were in college, for example?

Wright: Well, you see, I could never do anything with orthodox
religion, and especially this Bible fundamentalist thing. But I've
always had (partly with this guilt and partly with this sense of realizing
how privileged we were and this responsibility that goes along with it),
I took all of that very seriously, but I was always very gay about it.
This is the only way that I could have carried the load. I mean, I
could be very silly and mix it all in with the serious. A lot of people
who have known me only slightly think that I am the most superficial
jackass they've ever met. I always taught Sunday School classes, but I
never did buy this over-the—line business. But finally when I was adol-
escent, the time when most people get these conversions (Saul of Tsrsus
on the road to Damascus), I joined the church through the efforts of a

high-powered evangelist that Daddy was crazy about. The evangelist said

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 45 - Wright
that it was just a line, and if you made up your mind you stepped over
that line and were converted. Well, I had participated in track meets,
high jumping, broad jumping and all that. . . .

JH: Was it common for girls to do all these kinds of sports?

Wright: Well, I was head of track at Converse and won the discus,
the shotput, running broad jump, and had the second strongest leg muscles
of all my college mates. This was from climbing trees and jumping
ditches with my brothers, you know. So I don't know whether it was
common or not, but I loved it and excelled in it.

JH: In public school did girls run track?

Wright: Oh yes. Schools would have “field days“ with competitive
games such as races, etc. Then there were two very masculine women with
an excellent background and highly intelligent who lived near us. They
became physical ed. teachers in colleges. They would play "follow your
leader," and if you couldn't do everything then everybody playing would
line up and you had to run through their spraddled legs. These girls
would catch and hold you between their legs and beat the hell out of
you. Anyway, there was a lot of this tough tomboy sort of thing after
we went to public school. At the beach I would drag shrimp nets with
my father while my sisters went fishing. And we always had creek men,
two or three of them, who got oysters and stopped the creeks with nets.
We would go out and watch all of this. Anyway, I had a lot of outdoor
life. That's why I am having so many skin cancers now. . . . I don't
know how we got on this.

JH: I asked you whether you had always had that kind of emotional

pull toward people, and you started talking about having never really

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page #4 - Wright
been drawn into religion. Were you going to say that that led you
into this devotional energy?

Wright; No. I taught Sunday School, and I loved the little kids
and stirred them up. I was pretty much of a motivator. This evangelist
told us to step over the line, and I thought, "Well, with as many lines
as I've jumped, that ought to be fairly simple." I still felt like
maybe I cheated a little bit. Then I thought that I had been hearing
about it so much and everybody else did it, so I would have to join the
church too. In answer to your question about my emotional pull toward
people I think it was a thing that grew with my ever-widening contacts
and experiences with all kinds of people. Even as a child I felt great
empathy and affection for the household servants, and curiosity and
interest in persons whose lives had been less sheltered than my own
childhood was.

Anyway, I had no intention. . . . You see, I had an aunt who once
told me while I was a college student that I would never amount to
anything. The reason she gave was that I was interested in too many
things, and I would never focus enough ever to amount to anything.
Well, I was afraid that she was right, and it made me mad too. I had
made up my mind to go to Columbia University to get a Master of Arts
degree. But before doing so, I was living in Marion with my parents
my first year after graduation from Converse College. There was a
young medical doctor who had just come to Marion and who was hanging
around me "like Grant hung around Richmond." I had much more interest
in studying than in marriage, which discouraged him. "You'd a damn

sight better become a 'Ma' than get an M.A.," he told me. My upbringing

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 45 - Wright
had been so Puritanical that I was shocked, almost felt compromised,
but I didn't let him know it.

Oh, my mother never called anybody's leg a leg; it was always a
limb. And my father was always indignant that a man should call us
girls "Alice,' “Lib" or ILou.II He said that they should call me IMiss
Alice." Our meals were very formal. I never saw my father in our
house without his coat on as long as he lived. Now at the beach he
would take it off, but not in our home at Marion. We were not per-
mitted to gobble the meal and run. Marion my husband says now, IHow
in the world can you eat so slowly?" I say, llWell, Marion, it didn't
do any good. There was nothing to be gained by eating in a hurry, and
we were told that to eat slowly helped you to digest. And I believe that
to this day.‘ We had to wait until everybody finished. Meal time was
emphasized as a time for family sharing, for discussion, even for
controversy.

JH: But these discussions of yours, would you take different sides
and. . . .

Wright: Yes. And the thing is, I was an avid reader. My sister
Lib just didn't like to read at all. As children we were paid a quarter
a book to read a classic, and so we would try to get rich during the
summer. But Lou, my other sister, never came across a word she didn't
know but what she looked it up. On the contrary, I would just judge
its meaning from the context and pronounced it in my mind. So when I
was talking and something came along where that word would fit, I would
say it. And it was nearly always the wrong pronounciation, and Lou

would challenge me. I would say, INow Daddy, am I right or is Lou

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page #6 - Wright
right?" He would say, "That is for you girls to decide. Have you any
basis for it?I Lou would say, "Well, I'll go and get the dictionary.‘I
She would go and get it, and she was always right and I was always
wrong. Then ideas: we would discuss and debate ideas too. Now this
is not chronological, but it is illustrative of our dinner table
exchanges. I had been working for the YW in Philadelphia after taking
a Masters degree at Columbia University and was due home for Christmas.
But a Hicksite Friend (Quaker) had a dinner party of twelve for Dr.
Alain Locke, who had just written The Egg Egggg, and so I decided to
stay over for it. My escort was a black school principal by the name of
Arthur Faucett, who was a brother, I think, of the poetess Jessie
Faucett. So you see that I was never inhibited about unconventionalities
in race relations, not the least bit. When I got home it came up at
dinner that I had said that I was coming earlier. I was asked why I
hadn't come. I said that I stayed over for this dinner party for Dr.
Alain Locke. Well, my brother Joe, who was about sixteen years old,
asked, I‘Who is he?" I said, "He is a highly cultured, charming Negro
philosopher, the head of the philosophy department at Howard University,
who has just had published a book, The Egg Egggg." Then Joe said,
"What? You ate with a Negro?” I said, "Why certainly. He was brilliant
and had a lot more sense than you or I have, Joe, or ever will have for
that matter." He looked at Daddy and said, "Daddy, I don't want to
eat with Alice if she has been eating with Negroes. May I be excused?"
Daddy replied, “We'll excuse you, Joe." This was Sunday, and coffee
was being served in the library after dinner was over. And Joe came in.

He was a tall, good-looking thing if you ever saw one, and he said,

 

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

 

page 47 - “right
”Now A1, I don't want you to open your mouth; in fact, I don't even
want to speak to you. But Dad, I want to ask you--and don't you answer
it, A1-- have you ever seen (and he mimicked me) 'a charming, cultured,
educated, delightful Negro'?" Well, I had no more idea than Joe did
of what my father was going to say. I had a feeling that he might not
approve, but I was trying to educate the family. That's why I let the
bomb drop; I was trying to find out where they were, and if they
weren't where they ought to be I was trying to educate them. Daddy
said, “Why certainly, son, we have some right here in our own little
town." Well, Joe went out of the room with his balloon punctured. But
anyway, when I came back from three years‘ travel around the world a
number of years later. . . .

JH: When did this incident happen?

Wright: Well, that must have happened in about ‘27. Anyway, he was
sixteen. 80 when I came home in '52 and my father was dead and I was
made the county administrator of relief. I organized the communities
all over the county. And I didn‘t mind going alone, but occasionally
my mother would drive with me. One night Joe volunteered to take me when
I was to make a speech in a school, get the community organized, set up
the committees and all that kind of thing. Well, on the way back he
said, "A1, I don't know anybody in the world that I hate eating my words
to as much as I hate eating them to you." I said, "What in the world
are you talking about?" Everything had been so wonderful since I had
gotten back. The family cohesiveness was very strong because of my
father's recent death, and the Depression had hit everything. He said,

“I just want to tell you (and I don't want to discuss it any further),

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page h8 - Wright

I just want to tell you that you were right and I was wrong about
Negroes."

JH: Amazing.

Wright: So, this kind of thing. Well, there was something else
there that I wanted to tell you, but it will come in later, perhaps.

JH: Could we go back to college?

Wright: Yes.

JH: Did you start getting involved with courting? Did you start
dating?

Wright: Well, I'll tell you. My half brother Park, who was five
years older, went with a group of fellows about two years older than
he. When these boys came home from France two first cousins, both of
whose first names were Dick, just seemed to fall like a ton of bricks
for me. One of them used to say to me (he had a grand sense of humor),
llBefore we went to France you were the most pesky little brat. You were
always around and afraid that you would miss something, and always under-
foot and were just impossible, always wanting us to jump you and all.
But my Lord, now. . . ." It was all different, I guess. I was kind of
a breath of fresh air after the disillusionments of their war experiences,
I suppose. I don't know. Anyway, these boys used to keep me with
American Beauty roses and boxes of candy most of the time. I remember
that I had been at Converse only a week when a girl from Anderson got me
to slip out of the college one night without permission and date some
boys from Wofford. Very soon, however, I became so interested and active
in the eol1ege activities, and I had letters almost every day and visits

about every weekend from the older follows from Marion, so that I really

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page #9 — Wright
never did particularly get in with the Wofford boys nearer my age. These
older boys did so much more for you, you know, and at that age you are
a little bit mercenary. I loved my roses! [jaughteg7 In fact, a
write-up in the college annual said that my college mates wondered
where I got those dozens and dozens of beautiful red roses all the time.
JH: But did you have towards them this kind of rebellious feeling
that you've described?
Wright: No. But they had me on a pedestal, and they wouldn't
have touched me. It was some kind of worship that I guess men have
of women when they kick them upstairs while they are kicking the blacks
downstairs, and keep them both under control. But honey, they didn't
try to hold hands with me or anything. But two very dapper brothers
moved into Marion from Pennsylvania, very much men of affairs and from
the lumber industry. I used to date both of them. One of them was the
best looking thing, and quite a dresser! I heard that he had said . . .
all the girls in Marion were just wild about both of them. You had just
made the social columns in your own mind when one of then asked you for
a date. But this older one who was such a knockout made the boast that
there wasn't a girl in Marion that he couldn't neck hell out of. And oh,
he was pushing me hard, because I think that he had petted most of the
other girls in town. So when he had a date with me he reached over and
held my hands. I said, ITurn my hands loose; I can't talk if I can't
move my hands." I was just trying to be as abnormal as I could be. I
didn't mind his holding my hands and I just didn‘t have any sexual feelings
much. But I was flattered, you see, by the attention of this very

sophisticated guy. These brothers had big cars and good looks, so all

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The LOUIS Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 50 - Wright

the girls were after them. Anyway, to make a long story short, I
remember my date said, "Well Alice, I have never seen a colder fish in
this world." I never even let him put his arm around me or hold my
hands or anything. He said, 'I want to find out something. What kind
of a man could you marry?" So I just layed it out for him, and he said,
“Well, what kind of attributes do you think that you have that would
make that kind of a man happy?" You see, he knew how to dress me down
to size. Well, that stuck in my mind. It had never occurred to me that
I had to have anything to offer [Taughte£7. I was just going to get
something marvelous.

JH: And just present him the gift of yourself. What more could
he want?[§aughte£7

Wright”! Yes. He was a very lucky guy, I thought ﬁaughteg. I
still have a little of that feeling, but anyway. . . . [Ehughteg7

Well, I'll tell you about another fellow who was the first one that
I had ever seen act. . . . Well, I had seen some of them act kind of
trembly and funny, but this guy who was very good looking and trying to
get me to marry him was an outsider too. He said to me, "Well, there is
no chance of your ever marrying me. I'm going to join the Navy, and I
hope to God that I never have to see you again." But he showed so much
passion, although he did not express. . . . I mean, he didn't try. . . .
I was known as one of these upright gals that nobody dared touch.

JH: What about the other girls, your friends?

Wright: No.

JH: This was when Zelda Fitzgerald was over in Montgomery and. . . .

These were the twenties, the flappere and all.

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 51 — Wright

Wright: Well, I think that many of my friends were doing their
share of necking, but I never had any desire to. I was having too much
fun with them. They would invite me to go to races with them and things
like that. Any my father was the funniest thing. About the end of World
War I my brother was gassed and also wounded in Belleau Wood and Chateau
Thierry. We couldn't hear anything from or about him for months on
end. My father was highly emotional about it. My mother was in the
hospital in Richmond, and I had just had an operation up there earlier.
Dad was returning to Marion on the train from a visit with Mother, and met
a wounded Marine on his way home from France. Dad had had the War
Department, Red Cross and others trying to locate my brother, without
success. This fellow had just been dismissed from the same hospital in
France where my brother was. So Daddy invited him to visit us in Marion.
Well, it was cute. With Mother in the hospital I had to be the hostess
"with the mostest." Of course, with Mom Ninn in the kitchen, who knew
how to do everything, we were able to plan swank hospitality for him--
at least good meals. Well, when he arrived I knew that Daddy. . . .
It wasn't so much what he articulated, but I thought that he wouldn't
want a stranger calling us by our first names or being familiar in any
way. So when I met him and shook hands with him and told him how happy
we were and appreciative of his coming to see us, Daddy said, "Why, kiss
him, daughter, kiss him.” He felt so indebted to him that he had located
my brother Park, don‘t you see. But Daddy had been brought up with that
strict Baptist notion that you shouldn’t dance; it was a sins We'd ask
him why it was a sin and he would say, "Well, it is just public hugging.l

So you can imagine my amazement and embarrassment. Later I said, "Now

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 52 - Wright

Daddy, you can never tell me not to let boys hug me in public when you
wanted me to kiss one that I had never seen before." [laughter7 But I
never went to a dance. My sisters slipped away and went. I don't know
what or why it was, I just couldn't let Dad down when it meant so much
to him and worried him. I guess that I was maybe at that stage trying
to reconcile, to make a heterosexual adjustment with him and make him
like me, because I had felt he hadn't liked me because I Was too much
of a rebel. I guess that I was too much like him in some ways.

JH: Did you feel like he liked your sisters better than he did you?

Wright: Oh yes, I definitely did. I guess I was trying to curry
favor with him, but I wanted to dance so much. But I had so much fun
in other ways, what difference did it make? So anyway, he called me
once and very formally and seriously said, "I want you to know that I
know your sisters are slipping off and dancing, and I also know that
you are not. And I want to tell you how deeply your father appreciates
it." So I had scored one victory [Iaughte:7. So you see, I did not do
a lot of that kind of thing. Anyway, at Converse though, I did enjoy a wide
variety of extracurricular activities. I'm not quite sure what I may
have already told you. At that time the YWCA was very avant—garde, and
I was very active in it. I was in charge of the social service committee
for the YW.

JH: For the college?

Wright: For the college YW. And I belonged to a student industrial
commission which was set up by Louise Leonard, later Louise Leonard
MoLaren, the Industrial Secretary for the Southeast, and by Katharine

Lumpkin, who was the regional student secretary. They were great friends

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 55 - Wright
and were both radicals. As I recall, the commission was made up of an
equal number of college students and girls who worked in local textile
mills.

JH: Now Katharine Lumpkin didn't go to Converse College, did she?

Wright: No, I don‘t know where she went, but. . . .

JH: But they came there. Was there already a YWCA chapter there
when you went‘ that you were involved in?

Wright: Oh yes.

JH: But they would come in and . . . how often?

,Wright: Well, I really don‘t know, but probably several times a
year. Every year that I was at Converse I went to Blue Ridge, North
Carolina, elected by the student body as a student representative of
the YW for the southwide students' conference. These conferences were
the cutting edge; relative to the backgrounds from which all of us
southern girls had come. They have us vital experiences, learning
experiences. They had industrial girls attend these summer conferences.
It must have been at the end of my junior year that they first brought
some industrial girls to the Blue Ridge conference. We had set up the
previous year a student-industrial commission. And we met monthly to
exchange ideas about our schedules, and what we thought about public
affairs (if at all), and all that kind of thing. Anyway, they had these
industrial girls there, and they were telling the whole group of southern
girls from about ten or twelve southern states about their lives, their
working conditions. There were fine discussions of what needed to be
done.

JH: How did you locate these women who were working in industry?

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 5h - ”right

How did the groups come together, the college girls and the. . . ?

Wright: I imagine. . . . I can't be sure, by my feeling would be
that Louise McLaren, whose YWCA work was with workers in industry, must
have selected them. And Katharine Lumpkin selected the students, you
see; and then these two 'Y" secretaries met with us when we met jointly-—
not all the time, maybe on or the other or both sometimes. I taught at
the Spartan mill village Sunday School every Sunday. I would always get
into the discussion of the life issues and how they were related to
Christian teaching. But now, you were asking what kinds of things we
discussed. I thought that I had already said that we exchanged something
about our schedules, something about our homes and home life, and any news
that we might have, either their views or questions they wanted to ask
us about what college life was like, anything we wanted to ask them
about what their life was like. In other words, we would just kind of
get acquainted. We had maybe five or six meetings during the nine months
of the school year. When we went to the southwide conference at Blue
Ridge in the summer of 1922 Louise MeLaren had selected some industrial
girls and brought them there. There were some wonderful Negro girls
brought to Blue Ridge too, to educate us about the racial situation.
During the discussions on industrial conditions I expressed strong
convictions about the need for fundamental change. Louise MeLaren had
announced that during that summer students were being given an opportunity
to go into industry and work; it would be the first student-in-industry
experiment. Thergjtz be, I think, either three or five groups in the
nation, one of which was in Atlanta, Georgia, with twelve southern

college students to work there for six weeks beginning early in July.

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 55 — Wright
I worked in the Fulton Bag and Cotton Hill. Well, all of that is a
very interesting story.

JH: Now, did this come up while you were in college?

Wright: I was a junior. I left. . . .

JH: And you volunteered?

Wright: No, they asked me, because my attitude had come through at
the Blue Ridge YWCA conference in the discussions of work in industry
and related problems. I was picked, and there were twelve. . . .

JH: In the summer?

Wright: In the summer. And at the time the project in Atlanta
began I was participating in a marvelous houseparty given by a girl who
had just been made the Palms Festa Queen of South Carolina, a beautiful
girl in whose wedding I later took part. We were having such a gorgeous
time, and it killed me to leave. But after the Fourth of July I left,
in the middle of the houseparty. In Atlanta we lived on what we made.
Because I was frail and a little bit more delicate looking than the
average working girl, I guess, I had a heck of a time getting a job.

JH: They didn‘t find jobs for you, you had to go out and find them?

Wright: We had to get our own, but there was an advisory committee
which was very helpful. We met at a Mrs. Albright's, or Albritton
(something like that), whose home was next door to the Asa Candler home
on Ponce de Leon Avenue. She had a little cottage back by the side of
the Asa Candler mansion, and that's where we held our meetings once a week
with the outstanding Atlanta people on our advisory committee. Well, I
was beginning to get a little bit discouraged about getting a job,

because I had been turned down all the time. I guess that employers

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 56 - Wright
didn't think I looked like a worker, and I never had worked.

JH: Did you tell people that you were a college girl?

Wright: Oh no, we weren't supposed to do that. And we said that
we needed work urgently. Well, we did if we were going to get the
understandings that we were later going to share by speaking in colleges
all over the South, you see, telling of our experiences and trying to
make students aware of industrial problems as we found them. By the
way, it came out in our weekly meeting with the advisory committee
that they were highly suspicious of some of the employment services.

One weakness they feared was that some of the employment agencies might
be participating in the white slave traffic. They thought that others
were exploiting the girls economically. And then, they had already
documented, I think. . . . And we helped to document some of these
things. All the details I don't remember, but we all wrote up full
accounts of our experiences. And I don't know what's ever become of
all that; I would like to get in touch with Katharine Lumpkin again.
But anyway, we. . . .

JH: Now, are you talking about the employers, the owners?

Wright: No, we are talking about the employment agencies. They
were private employment agencies, and they would charge a fee for getting
you a job. And then after you got the job a percentage of what you made
had to be paid to them every week.

JH: And you were going through those employment agencies?

Wright: You see, when I couldn‘t get a job directly the advisory
committee said, “Well, you can investigate and learn a lot of things for

us about the employment agencies.n So that's why. . . .

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 57 - Wright

JH: And did you document it?

Wright: Yes, I documented a lot of things. I don‘t remember the
details, but I helped to weight the suspicions by some of the things I
found out. I‘m sure however that I didn't do conclusive research on
it, not in that brief time. I do remember that one of the things I
definitely found out was that even though an agency's policy was to
charge a flat fee for placing a person on a job, plus a small percentage
of the wages for the first months, some of them continued to collect that
percentage each week as long as the girl worked unless she got wise
and remonetrated. The first job I secured through an agency was in a
plant where they were doing sewing by power machines. I just couldn't
handle them at all; but I had that brief experience, and I saw how
tough and demanding it was physically and psychologically. Then I got
a job at Loew’s Grand Theater on Peachtree ushering. My advisers encouraged
me to go on and take that work because many young girls out of small
villages or the open country of Georgia were working there. They wanted
to know what temptations there were and what exploitation of the girls
there might be. So I worked a: an usher. I never got so many notes
in all the days of my life. You know that animation is a substitute
for looks, and I had it. So I would get these notes, “Hey, you're cute,"
nHow about a date?" and things like that. I would take a note and show
it to one of these little country girls. We were getting real buddy—
buddy, and I would say, "Come on and let's go on dates." They would
say, l'No, no." I was a college girl, you see, and daring. And I would
have done it just to have a new experience, because I felt perfectly

confident that I would hold my own. But they didn't have that kind of

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 58 - Wright
confidence, and their mothers had put the fear of the Lord in them.
They were scared to death of these men who made these passes at them.
So I didn't find any of them. . . . Well, I don't mean that. . . .
END SIDE I TAPE II (no recording on Side II Tape II)
BEGIN SIDE I TAPE III

JH: These girls that you were sort of having these experiences
with, were they other members of the YWCA group?

Wright: No, they were (if I do say so) a highly selected and
handpicked group of college girls.

JH: Well, who were these?

Wright: They were simply country girls whose families needed
them to make money, and they couldn't get jobs in the country. . . .

JH: That the YWCA was helping?

Wright: No, they were the other ushers at Loew‘s Grand Theater.

JH: 0h, other girls that you were working with.

Wright: They were the ushers. And I was supposed to try to use
any method that I could to get acquainted with them and find out what
were their standards, values, and their economic conditions, and what
their social life was like. Well now, another very interesting feature
of this. . . . I went to tell you about a friend of Louise MeLaren's
who has become a lifelong friend of mine, except that I haven't been in
touch with her recently. She was the daughter of an AR? minister from
Winnsboro, South Carolina. She had just gotten her doctorate from the
London School of Economics and has been an economics professor at
New York University.

JH: Who is this?

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The LOUIS Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 59 - Wright

Wright: Lois MacDonald.

JH: Yes.

Wright: Her thesis was on southern mill hills, you know. We
were supposed to investigate textile and related industries. In my
case, where I hadn't immediately been able to get a job, I had investi-
gated briefly a sewing and dressmaking factory, a Vaudeville movie house,
and the private employment agencies. But also we were supposed to live
on what we were able to make, and not accept a penny from anybody. And
also they wanted us to investigate some of the housing and the living
conditions of the poor working girls in Atlanta. Several of us students
in the project went to live in a ohuroh-eupported home near the Georgia
Capitol there in Atlanta. It was a lovely old mansion, but when I got
up to the room to which I had been assigned there was a woman in bed,
no screen in the window, up on the third floor . . . With dirty disheS.
They had already had supper. Anyway, she was coughing and spitting and
carrying on, and the flies were all over her tray. Nobody had removed
it. Well you know me, when I see something like that I move into
action. I went and found some people and made them move the tray and
clean up a little. But they were very indifferent and not too appreciative.
I guess that women and girls who lived there were too happy to have a
cheap home to stay in and were not too self-assertive. They had probably
come from fly kingdom anyway with lack of screens, and so they weren't
as sensitive. Lois MacDonald had a room to herself in the church home,
because I guess that she was going to do some scientific research. She
had a glass eye, and she had gotten a job on the night shift at the

Fulton Bag and Cotton Mill. So I went down to her room. I am not too

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 60 - Wright
much of a cry baby, but I put my head on Lois's shoulder and I started
crying. I said, llLois, nobody is going to get me off this experiment,
but I cannot take TB for it.' She said. “Well. Alice, no one is going
to let you get TB;" I said, ”Well, I can't stay in that room.“ So she
got that straightened out. She said, I'I want you to room with me."
There were two beds in her room . . . no, I guess that we were in the
same bed, for neither one of us could sleep that night. The bed was full
of bedbugs. So the next morning she said. "Alice, have you ever seen
bedbugs?“ I said, "No, I don't even know what one looks like." We were
just miserable; we felt as though we were eaten alive. So she got some
kind of kerosene or something, and we went down all the little folds
in the mattress with it. We killed all the bedbugs, and such a time
as we had! I still indulge in the luxury of too much revolt against any
experience that is not esthetic, end a bedbug chase is not: [Ieughter7
But anyway, Lois was my heroine. She worked on a night shift in the
operation of making cloths. When she would come in in the morning with
cotton all in her hair and tell me about what had gone on during the night,
all that, I was determined that I was going to work at that Fulton Bag
and Cotton Mill too. So the last three weeks (I told you how my first
three weeks were spent) I worked on the day shift at the Fulton Bag
and Cotton Hill as a turner. The second day that I was there I made a
bonus. It was all piece work, and if you did not turn a certain number
of sacks (and some of them were these great big heavy “crocus' sacks)
you didn't make a bonus. Now I have arthritis in my hands, but I come
from a generation of people who didn't make their living with their

hands. And I do "love" to use mine now by digging in the dirt to make

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 61 - Wright
flowers grow. That is part of why I've wrecked them. It just runs in
the family, this arthritis. But anyway, after I made that bonus there
was so much that I learned of insights. These women that worked there
thought that I was a foreigner. You see, they were so isolated, the
mill villages and all. . . . I didn't know that much about Atlanta at
that time because I just came and went to and from that work. Because
the hours were so terribly long I was almost dead at the end of my work
day. But I saw these other pitiful, thin, underfed, anemic—looking women,
mostly in the twenties, my fellow workers, and agonized over them. I
had my hair all teased in the current hair-do. You see, Converse was a
school where people liked to dress well, and I had learned and gotten a
little flair for that kind of a thing. It didn't occur to me that. . . .

JH: So you went to the cotton mill dressed like. . . .

Wright: With my hair combed as usual, and I guess that they had
never seen that style. I mean. we had no TV or movies, and they didn't
get out of the mill village. Most of the workers just looked like a
bunch of hags. They just grabbed up their hair and stuck a hairpin
through it, don't you see. Then some of them came early, worked part
of the half hour or twenty minutes or whatever we had off for lunch,
ate and then just went right back to work in order to make that bonus.
I think that it was an eleven hour day, as I remember; but if you made
a bonus for ten out of those eleven hours and didn’t make it the last
hour, you didn't get your bonus for the day. The most I ever got inrmy
envelope was seven dollars and some cents. I was living off of that:

I would go down to the Peachtree Arcade where there was a little cafe-

teria. But I was eating so little that when I got home at the end of

 

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 62 - Wright

the second week I began breaking out not with boils, but what are they
called when they are worse? What do you call a terrible boil? People
have them on their fannies; you know what I‘m talking about . . . oar-
buneles. Well, I had just run down that much. Fifty cents a day was
big for me to pay for my food the whole time that I was there. Well,
I never weighed over ninety-five pounds in my life before I went to
college, so I was very slender and very frail. Lois MacDonald with her
left hand wrote the letter that finally broke down the personnel director
to give me work in the mill. She signed the letter as my mother; I don‘t
know, somewhere I may still have a copy of that letter. But she wrote,
I'I would rather have you work in some good factory where they have good
overseers," and things like that. "I just want you to get out of that
mevie theatre. The men in cities are terrible,“ et oetera. The letter
helped to give authenticity to my application for work.

JH: And you went and showed this to the. . . .

Wright: Oh yes. And that's what got me my job. And Lois wrote
it with her left hand; it was a humdinger. My employer had said, “Alice,
you don't look like you can put out much work.ll Well, anyhow, that was
why I was determined to make it, that plus the fact that I saw these
frail little women knocking themselves out. And I felt like I would
not understand their feelings until I knocked myself out. The second
day I made a bonus. My fingers were so stiff. The process was: they
would bring you a raft on little wheels with stacks of bags that had
been sewed on the wrong side, and you were supposed to turn them right
side out. You had something like a big V frame on which you turned the

bags. Whoever kept you supplied with bags had the open end placed toward

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

 

page 65 - Wright

you on the raft. You ran your finger through that Opening with your
index fingers, you flipped it over with your thumbs a couple of inches
to give you a start on turning it. You pulled it down on the frame,
and then you hit it in the middle to pull the corners out. Then with
the last three fingers you pulled it off the frame and held it until you
had turned five sacks. You folded the tops of all five sacks and put
them down on a raft so that they could be counted. The people checking
up on you could see how many bags you turned each hour and if you were
making bonuses. You see, holding the bags with a few fingers while you
were going through the turning of five bags was really something. The
next winter I loved telling college girls about my experiences.

Please indulge me in a detour which will show how and why. While
I got a lot out of Converse and Converse was good to me. . . . I have
a beautiful loving cup that the student body gave me, and received many
honors, and had wonderful friends and loved some of the faculty very
much. We got a student-faculty committee going to help pull the dean
down to size and to update rules and regulations——a11 on the positive
side. But there was so much phoniness too, you see, of money and dress
and the symbols of status that because of my basic training from my
father I held almost in contempt. Dad always said that he liked a
Cadillac not for the display, but because there were so many of us in
our family that we had to have a seven-passenger car. It was good
value for the money, and he didn't care how long he drove it, don't you
see. At the same time, we had friends who were buying less desirable
ears and changing them every year. We children put pressure on Dad to

buy a new car more often, but he always said, "Well, I'm in a position

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

 

page 6& - Wright

to know and you are not. The people who change care every year often
haven't gotten the first ?nepaid for before they are buying the second
one.’I We were taught: don't you buy anything unless you can put the
money down flat. You were not to do anything to keep up with the Joneses
or to be better or holier than thou, or anything of that kind. So I
saw that phoninees at Converse, and I hated it. I couldn't stand it.
Some of my best friends were. . . . They didn't have sororities, but
they had clubs, and I resisted going into a club until my junior year
because of the way I saw the club girls treat the non—club girls. And
some of the most brilliant ones that I used to sit on the back steps
with and talk about I'how many angels could stand on the point of a
needle" had sharp kinds of brains but were not in clubs. So I was
ambivalent about joining a club, but finally did. So I loved putting
salt on the wound when I spoke at colleges the next winter. And I asked,
I‘How many of us, when it was a matter of bread in our children's mouths,
would stop to help somebody who we thought was a foreigner?" The mill
girls had left their work, in spite of struggling to make a bonus, to
show me how to get the skill of turning bags. By two o'clock in the
afternoon—-honey, there was no air conditioning; this was humid Atlanta,
Georgia weather, July and August for six weeke--and yet the poll that
would come over that place at two o‘clock is like no cemetery that you
have ever seen in your life. Well, you see, I identified with those
people. They were finer, basically, than we college girls were, who were
skimming the cream off of life.

When I see people who are excessively eelf—indulgent and extravagant

I recoil sharply. I found myself reacting negatively to some of the

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 65 — Wright
practices of state councils on human relations and of the Southern
Regional Council (SEC). Furthermore, I've hoped to find exgreseed 22
EEEEEE a philosophy for producing fundamental changes with which goals,
priorities, personnel and procedures were consistent. I figured that
we should be trying to reach people in need who would feel more at home
if we had simple headquarters, less costly annual meetings and practiced
economies. We should do more to help people to organize against
exploitation and poverty and to change an economy that grinds down so
many victims. That we have remained relatively superficial and
expensive just breaks my heart.

JH: I nearly went crazy when I was working there.

Wright: I don't see how you fitted in.

JH: Well, I didn't. I just stayed for five months. You expect,

the way
with/they spend their money and their style and so on. . . . If I had
been a secretary for a bank or a business or something I would have
expected that, but I had different kinds of expectations when I went
into this place.

Wright: Well, I think that it has always been based on the wrong
philosophy: the trickle-down theory, that they were just going to
persuade opinion formers at the top and this, that and the other. Well,
I want to see status quo opinion formers pushed out of the thing and to
substitute collective caring and action for it. I just don‘t like the
idea of leaders, but I believe in the development of the leadership
potential that all people have, a pooled effort, myself.

JH: Did this experience with the YWCA student-in—induetry project,

do you see that as having had a lot of influence on you? Were you

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 66 - Wright
already moving in this direction anyway?

Wright: I think I had already begun to question and move in new
directions. I majored in history, but I took all the economics and
sociology that the college provided. And, as I said, I worked at the
Spartan mill village every Sunday of my college life with the mill
people. Then, you see, when I went to Columbia University I knew I
wanted. . . . I didn‘t know specifically what I wanted to. . . .

JH: Tell me: Louise MacDonald lived there. Was she in charge
of this?

Wright: Oh, you're asking about the student-in-industry experiment
again? No, she was just working there. She was just attached to our
student group.

JH: Is she older than you?

Wright: Oh yes.

JH: How much older?

Wright: I don't know, but a lot. She already had her PhD in
economics from the London School of Economics, and I was a junior in
college.

JH: But she wasn't in any kind of supervisory position?

Wright: No, she wasn't. Of course, she was older and experienced,
and knew the score. I still had great areas of euperficiality.

JH: What was Louise MacDonald like?

Wright: I admired her so.

JH: Why did you admire her?

Wright: Oh, my dear. . . . Well, she had both feet on the ground,

and she called it like it was. As you see, I like people not only for

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 67 - Wright
what they are, but‘alse for their genuineness, and there was absolutely
nothing phony about her. She was totally fearless, but she was no fool.
In other words, she didn't go and tell the lion to open his mouth and
let her jump into it, don't you see. She had an overall philosophy, which
at that time I had not develoPed. But I was learning from new
experience and realizing that there was another world than the one I had
known. You see, when I saw Lois coming in from the cotton mill in the
mornings, here was a new world, a new experience. Do you know Hilda
Smith? I don't know if you've ever heard of her.

JH: Yes.

Wright: Well, I had known her when she was with the Women‘s Trade
Union League and I was a student at Columbia University. She asked the
NFL administration in South Carolina to relieve me of conducting a state-
wide survey under George Mitchell. That's where I probably first not
George, in that rural resettlement program. I was conducting a statewide
survey to select the persons from the relief rolls who were going to be
transferred to the rural resettlement administration program. So Hilde
Smith asked them to appoint me as state director of workers education in
South Carolina. So this was when I began to appreciate Lois‘s overall
patterns more fully, but I have never asked her philosophy at all. It
is just like my sister's daughter, who was a brilliant girl, debater at
vassar and all. She asked me once, "Alice, I have never heard my mother
discuss the race issue. Everything I know and feel in here I got from
her. I want to give that to my children. How did she give it to me?“
And that's like Lois, you see: she gave it to us.

JH: And how did she do that? It wasn't what she said. . . .

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 68 — Wright

Wright: Not a thing that she said, no. And she didn't spin out
any highly philosophical theories, but I'm positive that she was a
left-wing Sooialist-—may have been a eard-oarrying Communist, I don't
know. I know that was what she stood for, and that's why she knew her
goals. She knew what she needed to find out, and she knew what she had
to know in order to help change what needed to be changed.

JH: What about Louise McLaren and Katharine Lumpkin? What were
they like?

Wright: Oh, well Katharine Lumpkin . . . she was a highly motivated,
rather masculine but attractive, well groomed and tailored person, as a
lot of the women of the YWCA were at that time. She and Louise McLaren
had a lot going between them . . . totally psychological, I'm sure. I
don't mean to imply anything else; and if it were, so what? I felt that
she was a deeply committed person to whatever had meaning for her, and
that she, as I say, was a very attractive person who motivated young
people well. But to say that I knew any of her philosophy, I can't. I
think that ole Louise MoLaren was a good, cold, calculating person who
knew the score and worked hard to get other people to know it. And yet
I don't think that she did it overtly.

JH: Why do you describe her as being cold and calculating?

Wright: Well, I think that she was emotionally motivated, but I
mean that she was a good intellectual, objective thinker. And she had
come out knowing what needed to be changed and why, and I guess like a
lot of the rest of us she wasn't too sure how.

JH: Do you see all three of those women as being more motivated

by their intellectual perceptions than by their emotions, in comparison

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 69 - Wright
to the way that you describe yourself?

Wright: Well, I think all of them paid more of a price to be a
student than I ever have, but I doubt seriously if any of them had the
capacity to get down where as many different kinds of people are and
identify with them as I do.

JH: Why do you suppose that is true?

Wright: I don‘t know.

JH: They were austere?

Wright: Well no, I don‘t think that Katharine Lumpkin was. But,
you see, she was older, and I think that she would have been more hide-
bound. Now in her book, I don't. . . . The Lumpkins were Baptists who
joined Trinity Episcopal Church when they got to Columbia from Georgia,
you see. So I guess that was the generation before her, but by that
time there was not only what a lot of women had to fight, the role in
which they are cast as women, but also the role in which the class
society easts them. I have definitely been determined, "to hell with it."
And yet. . . .

This is interesting. My own son, who is no fool but who has had
some pretty bad physical and psychological scarring, and not too good a
mother (who didn't know how to do her best and was too unfulfilled
herself . . . I mean, still seeking new experiences, action, causes and
so forth to really give him all the love and care he needed). . . . I
still see outcroppinge that are sort of funny and also heartening. I'm
like old soldiers that die hard, but I think that he will come around and
already has a lot to offer. He doesn‘t have to be what I want him to be.

Anyway, he said to me once, "Mother. . . ." Well. he felt neglected by

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. ‘

page 70 - Wright

my racial work; and you see. I was not married when I was doing workers'
education, so he didn‘t know about that. The main thing that he had
ever seen me give any life to was bi-raeial activity, and he wanted me
to give all my attention to him. So he said, "Mother, you love 'niggers'
better than you do me.“ I had that to cope with. Anyway he said to me
one day, "Mother, to give acceptance to all blacks the way you do, you
know how to pigeonhole all whites all right." I said, "Gene, that's a
scar that I bring from my early environment, and I‘m not proud of it.
After I have pigeonholed people, this isn't to say that I don't try to
find their human worth. But I do see almost immediately how much cultural
input a person has had." Of course I'm also interested in cultural input
in a very broad sense, but I also like the nioeties and the aesthetic.
And when people are lacking that, even though I am deeply impressed and
on the same wave length and thrilled and excited over the discovery of
this person who is on the quest and has gotten to certain mileposts,
when they offend me aesthetically I hurt.

JH: But you don‘t feel that way toward black people? Is that what
you are saying?

Wright: No, that was what Gene said. Well, you see, he doesn't
see me too much in relation to blacks, because it was a very painful
thing for him at that time; He was very insecure, crippled by a rheumatic
heart when he was quite young and couldn't do what other children did when
he was a teenager, and his need to identify. And not to have a mother
that didn't consider whether people approved or didn't approve, but just
went right ahead: this was all he had at the age when he was trying so

hard to. . . .

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

page 71 — Wright

JH: To be accepted.

Wright: Yes. It was terribly hard for him. And I guess that
like my sisters, he hated my guts in a lot of ways. But anyhow, be
that as it may I can't help it. Marion, my husband, said, "If you had
it to do over again, I think you would do the same.“ I said, 'Well,

I think that I would do a better job of it." But I guess that I. . . .

JH: If you could do things over, you always think that you would
do better.

Wright: Well anyway, be that as it may Gene's a darling guy, and
coming along well.

JR: Well, you are just faced with the incredible tension between
being a mother, that role, and doing something else that you like. It
often tears people apart.

Wright: Hell, I think that we wouldn't have so much Momism if more
mothers continued to grow as persons instead of trying to lead their
children's lives. On the other hand, many women would make better
mothers if they could better reconcile the many roles they're called upon
to play.

When Gene was a child we had a neighbor, a woman who had had much
broader contact than many people who lived in rural Newberry County.
And one day she asked, “Alice, instead of our driving our children to
school separately, why don‘t you take them one day and I the next?"

50 her husband had a job somewhere, traveled I guess, and she had had
some early roots in rural life. And they had a poultry farm, and a lot
of the feed came in these very gaily patterned sacks. She knew how to

sew and all. I've never learned how to do well in anything like domestic

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 72 - Wright

work; I mean that I can if I have to, but there's not too much satie-
faotion that accompanies it because there is not much success for me.
Anyway, she made a lot of shirts for her son out of very gay but cheap
sacks that the chicken feed came in. So Gene came home one day, and I
could tell that he was upset. And he said, 'Mother, you've never loved
me." I said, "Now Gene, what makes you say that?‘ “Well, George's
mother makes hhm shirts all the time, and you never have made me one."
I said, “Well, Gene, look at all the gorgeous things your aunts and
uncles buy for you.“ He was about the only child in the family then;

I mean that the aunts and uncles didn't have children. I said, "I think
that you would feel mighty dressed up in all the good-looking things
that you have. Do you pick your friends out because of what they wear
or because you like what they do?“ All that sort of thing, you know.
Gene and I have really plumbed the depths in the discussions that we
have had from his childhood. Anyway he said, “Well, I don't like them
as well as I do George's. His are so much prettier." I said, “Well,
Ifll tell you what let's do.’I (I had never sewn a seam in my life.)
"Let's go down to a fabric shop and you just pick out the materials that
you think are pretty; I don't have any feed sacks." So we went down
there, and he picked out the most goeh-awful, loudest things that you
have ever seen. I managed to sew them to look very tailored and nice,
but the first buttonholes that I made looked like hog eyes. But by the
time that I got to the sixth shirt they looked better. So Mamie, Gene's
friend's mother, called me up and said, "Alice, what you have done for
Gene, Jr.!l He is absolutely the happiest little boy that I have ever

seen in my life. You know, he is rather retiring, but he just comes up

Interview number G- 0065- 1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round Wlson Special Collections Library UNC- C—hapel Hill.

page 75 - Wright

and says, 'My mother made this shirt'.ll 0h honey, it was a victory.
You see, I loved it Ziaughte£7 Well, do you have any children?

JH: No.

Wright: Well, anyway. . . .

JH: What did you do then, after you graduated from college?

Wright: Well, my father said that he was accustomed to having his
girls sit around his table, and that he had missed me for four years
and that he thought I ought to spend the next year at home. So I
started off in the fall by geing down to Florida on a nice trip, but returned
to Marion as Dad wanted me to do. You see, ladies weren't really supposed
to have to work. And my father didn't think that I should have to go
out and support myself; he could still support me. This was what was
involved.

JH: Were you thinking at this time of what you wanted to do or be?

Wright: Well, you see, I had always wanted to do the kinds of
things that I did. But I also had a great impulse to see the world,
you know. Women at that time didn't seriously think in terms of any
career. I knew that I wanted to do socially helpful, responsible
things, but just what I didn‘t know. So anyway, I did finish out a
school year for a teacher who became sick that year, but I remained at
home. I liked my fun and kicking up and all that too, you see. At
college when I studied I studied hard, and I was carrying campus respon-
sibilities and speaking at various conferences. I got the student
government association for the first time in its history into the National
as well as the Southern Association. And all of those things took time,

don‘t you know. Plus during my senior year I spoke at a great many

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 74 - Wright
southern colleges about my experience the summer before as a student—
in-industry.

JH: You traveled around?

Wright: Yes. And I tried to maintain decent grades, because I had
always prided myself on that. I remember my history professor called me
one day and she said, "Well, Alice, your grades have suffered this year.
But you've already shown what you can do in your undergraduate work,
and I think that your decisions have been wiser. You know, a person
can't anymore do everything than be everything.‘1 She just meant that I
couldn't do that with all the other leadership things that I was doing.
But you see, I loved athletics. I loved group sports and . . . I mean,
beyond that, game and recreational leadership. I liked all sorts of
things. So when I went to Columbia University I knew that I wanted to
make some selection, and I went to the physical education department,
thinking that I might get a masters in that. Well, when I saw how
technical the required courses were I thought, "I don't want to go into
it in that depth, because I would be going into greater depth into
something that didn't interest me when there were so many other things
that I wanted to know more about that did interest me." I wasn't willing
to sacrifice those things for something that didn't seem as interesting.
And I was more interested at that time in the game, group activity
aspect of it than I was in physiology and health, you know. So I
decided that I didn't want that, and I looked into the possibility of
getting a masters degree in dramatics or recreational leadership. But
anyway, in discussion with whoever was advising I said, "I would rather

know something about all these things to use with groups and be kind of a

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 75 — Wright
group action leader than I would be to specializing." Anyway, I wanted
to work with people, you see. And also I had lurking back in my mind
and heart just enough of what I had gotten in economics and sociology
and YW conferences to prod me. We not only had a student-industrial
but also a bi-racial commission at Converse, which had made an impact
too.

Now Marion belonged to a bi—racial group at the University of South
Carolina, which was long ago, about 1912-15.

JH: Was this a YMCA interracial group that he was in?

Wright: No. It was under Dr. Samuel Ohilds Mitchell's presidency
that a Jewish professor, Dr. Josiah Moss, the head of the philosophy
department, organized and motivated it. He selected Marion as one of
the people to participate. They met with the blacks from Benedict and
Allen for understanding exchanges. Anyway, Marion's experience was in
strange contrast to Mr. Dabbs's. In 1948, because Governor Olin
Johnson was saying ungentlemanly things about Negroes in the white
primary—~we11, maybe a little before '48, but around that time-Mr.
Dabbs just felt that it was time for gentlemen to say something more
gentlemanly. Well, I mean thank God he got into the racial struggle.
But that always baffled me, the reason that he did it. I'd tell him
so; I'd say, “Mr. Dabbs, I just praise the Lord, but. . . ." I know
that he wired me once; he was going to help at one of our student con-
ferences at Penn Center in Beaufort County, and he said, “Alice, don't
take a load of students down to Penn, but pick me up at the Columbia
airport.“ So the whole way down there I told him, "If you knew half as

much emotionally as you do intellectually you would just contribute so

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 76 - Wright
much more that is needed here in South Carolina. Furthermore, if you
would move out of the past . . .
BEGIN SIDE II TAPE III
. . . into the present and future we would get somewhere." And I said,
|'All of this energy that you are using could help us roll up some of the
things that need to be rolled up." He just laughed and said, I‘You don‘t
think much of me.‘I I said, “I do, and that's one reason that I want
you to get off of all these hinges about the South. I'm not greatly
concerned about what it is to be a southerner, of the making or the
remaking of a aoutherner and all that. I just would think that a person
who has as much on the ball as you would settle for being a human being
and a citizen of the world." [Iaughteg7 But I loved him to death, and
I‘ll tell you, he had a marvelous quality of spirit. He used to come
from his home up to Algene Acres, our place in Newberry County, and
spend the night, he and Miss Rebecoa Reid, and we would drive over to
Atlanta together for SRO meetings. Sometimes Mr. Dabbs, my mother and I
would drive over. Mother, who couldn't hear too well, would sit in the
back seat. Later she would say to me, "Alice, that man can beat you
talking. What was he talking about the whole way to Atlanta?" Well, I
loved talking With him, because he was a person who had a tremendous need
to search out life's meaning. Mr. Dabbs really had a real quest of the
human spirit, there is no doubt about that. Not many people. . . . I
mean that he was a little bit on the pompous side and impressed people
so much that not many people would just tell it to him like it was.

But if I could survive my own father, I could stand up and tell anybody.

Ziaughte£7

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 77 - Wright

Back to my search for myself through training at Columbia University
after this digression about how Marion and James Dabbs were initiated
into concern for race relations in the South. 80 I fould out at
Columbia University that the only department where I could get what I
wanted and do group social work with these skills was in the Department
of Religious Education. Well, I was going in there, and I was going to
take everything that they would give me: recreational leadership,
camping, storytelling, play production, athletics, and social games
indoor and outdoor, and all this kind of thing, to work with groups.

And also I wanted to get some group discussion techniques. So I was
able to take Dewey and Kilpatriok philosophy of education and learn much
about the democratic process, participatory involvement and all that
kind of thing.

JH: Were you in the teachers' college?

Wright: Yes.

JH: Columbia Teachers‘ College?

Wright: Yes, right.

JH: When did you go?

Wright: I went in 1926. And I also did all this graduate work at
the YWCA school that the Rockefeller Foundation put up. They don't have
any such school now, and they had. . . .

JH: Tell me about that.

Wright: Well, it was fabulous. The Rookefellers built these mar-
velous international student houses at Columbia and Chicago and Berkeley,
but also in New York adjoining the national board of the YW at 600

Lexington Avenue. [Ehterruptiog7 They built a resident YWCA National

Interview number G-0065-1 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

page 78 - Wright
Training School at 155 East 52nd Street. I lived there from February
to May 1926, and took such excellent courses as "The Women's Movement,‘l
"Techniques for Working with Industrial Women," etc. You can imagine
my enthusiasm for gaining more knowledge and insight into these subjects
about which I'd already thought and had many unanswered questions. I
commuted to Columbia University by subway all that spring, but moved
nearer the University to concentrate upon working for my Masters degree
that summer and fall. It would be impossible to overrate the impact
of living those months at the National School of the YWCA. I must have
been the youngest person studying there. My classmates were a remarkable
group of women, most of whom had served a number of years as "Y“
secretaries in many parts of the world, primarily in South America and
Asia. Need I tell you that my desire to be an enlightened world citizen
grew by leaps and bounds through daily contact with them.

Courses at the University and Union Theological Seminary matured
my educational and professional aspirations so that my priorities shifted
from group work skills to adult educational techniques, community
organization and so forth. I feel eternally grateful to Ir. George
Albert God in religious education and to Dr. William Heard Kilpatriok
in the modern philosophy of education. I received my M.A. degree and
began experimental educational and community work with the Germantown
YWCA in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in March 1927.
