
Jacquelyn Hall: So after college, what happened?

Alice Spearman Wright: Well, after a full summer with family and
friends, primarily spent at the beach, I dreaded the coming of the fall
because I knew that my father wanted me to stay at home, and naturally I
wanted to do what he wanted me to do. But it ended by teaching at a little
rural school about eight miles from my home. I commuted each day with
some delightful, merry widows, and an indelible impression was made upon
me by the conditions of rural education. I also was deeply impressed by
the quality/-;:::;cial, cultural, educational level of the people. Naturally
I saw a lot of human worth and potential that compensated for the derth
of opportunities that were there.

I: How long did you teach at the school?

Wright: Just that one year. The next year I taught at a school in
Gaffney, South Carolina, which is not too far from Spartanburg, South
Carolina (where I went to Converse). This was a typical mill village,
and there again I had a lot of rude awakenings to the level of educationel
opportunity that was available to these students. I did have a lot of fun,
however, coaching the senior class play and coaching basketball. Some of my
observations of the older teachers were far from flattering. It seemed that
many of them were in the profession for what they get out of it. They seemed
to resent the enthusiasm with which I identified with the students for fear
it Would show them up, you see. They were always telling me that I wasn't
expected to do all these things; and after all,

I wnen't doing them because I was expected to, but I was getting a big kick

out of it.

But that summer I attended the University of Virginia Summer School, and

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 2
just audited classes and had a social whir1—-among other things. But I
thoroughly enjoyed a course in current history,and the course on modern
British literature, and public speaking, under some people from the Curry
School of Speech and Dramatics in Boston.

JH: Alice, excuse me. When did you graduate from college?

Wright: '25. So this was the summer of ‘24 that I went to this summer
school. I've never been a scholar by any means, never paid the price
in discipline or anything else , but I always, always had
an avid, avid interest in learning. And I never have learned enough, never
will live long enough Ziaughte£7 to know enough. So I did enjoy these
courses there very much.

Then the next winter I went to Columbia; I went to New York City, and I

or student
had very stimulating work/contaets with the national YWGA/level-you see,
when it was ‘ very cutting edge . I lived at the national student
YW, and I took a number of courses.
[ihterruptiog7

JH: So you went to the national YWCA graduate school in New York and
took some courses from them?

Wright: Right. Oh, well, there's so much I'd love to tell about that,
really ( the Rockefellers and all), but I won't. But
anyway, while I was there I did take a course in the women's movement.

JH: The history of the women‘s movement?

Wright: Yes: feminism just straight frem the horse's mouth, because
those women really. . . .

JH: And was that the first that you had really known about that?

Wright: Well, in depth. Then, some of my mother's sisters and my own

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 5
mother, you know, they were kind of feminist in their feelings, and I had
heard them discuss it. I had never heard them discuss it before men, but
[ieughte57 I had heard them discuss it. But anyway, also I had a fascinating
class in the industrial movement. You see, the YW at that time had an
excellent department at the national level, at the student 1eve1—-no, not
at the student level, but at the local association level for girls in
industry. They made pretty much in—depth studies of industrialization and
its concommitante, so that this was rather revealing. It put a lot that I
had done in the summer of 1922 as a participant in that Student in Industry
experiment in a much broader perspective than just what I did.

And I will digress to say that when I was given a federal government
scholarship to the University of Chicago School of Social Service I wrangled
my way out of the School of Social Service into some other courses, one of
Which was with the senator from Illinois, Senator Paul Douglas. And that
was a Eggléy exciting course. (That was just an aside.)

Now, immediately I tried to matriculate at Columbia, and found it
extremely difficult because I knew that what I wanted was group work, you
see, of some form. But I had liked dramatics, I had liked athletics; but
none of these courses seemed to focus at all on group participation in
recreational activities and so on. So I was at a loss. Well, finally same-
one told me that in the Department of Religious Education they had a course
for group social workers: that I would have to take a unit in case work,
but that they trained people to work in settlements in New York City. So
that's what I finally signed up for.

Well, I had never been exposed religiously to anything but southern

fundamentalism._you know, religious fundamentalism. So while I did get

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright #
story-telling and camping and recreational leadership and play production
and you name it, I just was excited to death over all this religious
field. And there was a professor, I guess, who was head of the depart-
ment by the name of George Albert Coats. He has a book, by the way,

The Motives of Men and Methods of Private Religious Living. I took a
course with him on the psychology of religion, which meant a great deal
to me. There's people like my husband, who says he is agnostic if not
atheist, who says he's not at all religious. And I said, "You're so much
more religious than the people who think theyhre religious that I don't
know whether to laugh or cry over it. But you are." Well, I got this
interpretation from him, from Dr. Coats, you see. there are people who
are on quests, who see life as a quest either for purpose and for meaning
and for wholeness and all of that. I wouldn't take anything for what
that meant to me.

JR: Do you think of yourself as a religious person in that sense?

Wright: I certainly do.

JH: Do you think of yourself as a Christian?

Wright: Yes. No, I‘m afraid I don't. I think of many of the teachings
of Jesus as being the setting for a spiritual law that I think works just
as effectively as all these scientific, physical laWS work, you see. But
I don‘t think Jesus was the only one who laid hold of them, and I don't
think he thought he was either, don‘t you see. So all of this theology
that has been built up that‘s called Christianity, I buy very little if any
of it.

JH: Now were you raised as a Methodist?

Wright: A Baptist, Southern Baptist--with apologies to Carter. But

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wr ight 5
again, I have read a few things that say that he's attracted by people
that he's read a lot,
likeNiebuhr, / all of the German theologians and this, that and the
other. So I doubt seriously . . . I mean, when he goes on about that
"born again" he-loses me.p

JH: Did you take some courses at Union Theological Seminary there?

Wright: Yes, yes I did. I had one under Dr. Harry Emerson Fbsdick
in the modern use of the Bible; that I enjoyed very much, because he showed
of course how the fundamentalist takes a strict, literal interpretation of
the Bible. And he had a great many men in the class who were going to be
ministers. Well, then he explained that if you didn't want to alienate
people you painted as generous a picture of what the fundamentalist's strict
translation Would lead one to believe. But then you moved on and say there.
are others who, in the light of certain research and findings or experience,
have this and that point of view ; and then you leave it to people to find
out where they fall in their sort of faith. I thought that was very good.

JH: Did you get a degree at GolumbiaTeachers College?

Wright: Yes, a masters.

JH: In what?

Wright: Well, it was called, and there was some sort of certificate in,
social. . . . I don't know what that thing was, but it was in the religious
education department. But the certificate enabled me to work in social,
religious backgrounds. I could have been a religious education director in
a church, but I wouldn't want to; that was not my cup of tea.

So the IN (the fact that I had been living there), they had had a Miss
Madeline Erskin doing some experimental work in Philadelphia at the Germantown

YWCA along the line of not breaking and discontinuing the classes that the YW

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 6
who want

has offered, you know, for the people/either/to add to their knowledge
or maybe to substitute for more formal education. That type of education
department has been very common over the nation; it was at that time,
andjiarticular the one in the Germantown area was really excellent.
But they wanted someone--you see, I had had courses at Columbia with Deway
and Kilpatrick and all that in the philosophy of education, and group
dynamics and group discussion. All of that they very much wanted to be
put into practice, you see. And anything that I'veever learned, I might
not know much about it but I cat use it [Eaughter7z So they put me there
to conduct an experiment in breaking down this little compartmentalized,
fragmented approach to people in the education department that wanted to
learn more. The business girls would discuss their problems and maybe have
fun and fellowship and so forth and so on, and then the industrial girls,
and here was the board over here. There were all these fragmented things——
the very thing that our culture has done pretty much to everything and
everybody, this alienation and fragmentation. So what I was supposed to
do was to prevent that and build membership, but build a membership that
expressed itself across these fragmentations, and to work with the resources
in the community to carry what we had to them and to bring what they had to
us in such fields as international education, industrial economics (you
see, industrial education or economics), racial. I was on the city—wide
race relations committee, and every year we brought outstanding people
like Roland Hayes and singers and people in literature: the Negro artists.
I remember we brought the Fish Jubilee Singers, and that was I guess

the most primitive and least understood by a Philadelphia audience at the

Philadelphia Academy of Music. But I sat there and was simply astounded,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 7
because I saw the spiritual beauty and identified with this beautiful
rendition of the spirituals that the Fisk Jubilee Singers gave.

On the other hand, here were highly sophisticated people, friends of
mine who didn't miss a thing at the Academy of Music 2325, you know,
(all these marvelous singers and orchestras and so forth and so on)
sitting there 1aughing-—I mean, just sticking daggers in them.

But anyway, this is the type thing I did there for three years, and
it was very exciting.

JH: Now was it right after this that you took your trip?

Wright: Yes, right. I began to think, nWell, who am I?" Now I had
worked with councils and all kinds of people to develop these programs
that were community-wide. They were held at the “Y“; they had never had
anything like that there before. And we'd get a real flavor and involve
everybody in it. But I thought, 'Even so, this isn't enough. I'm just
half-baked, so I am going to go and see for myself.II So I was asked if
I would like to be an observer of an international students' conference
in Oxford. Well, I just jumped at it. Already the woman with whom I had
an apartment at that time and I had sent in our little deposit to travel
with a group called Pocono Study Toﬁrs---it was later called Assist.
But they put on very inexpensive trips to the Scandinavian countries.

The participants in the tours lived in the folk schools of Finland and
Denmark. And we had a trip into the Stockholm Exposition (that was 1950)
when it was being held; and the Olympics, I think, were held in Stockholm

that year too. And we had already decided to do that for three months.

And I had already signed up with a group from Columbia University to spend

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 8
Six weeks in Russia. So when this opportunity to go to this international
students' conference came I just left and went there, and attended that and
had a very stimulating time there,because I had been a student who was an
involved student. When subjects would come up I never have [Ehughteg7 been
hesitant about saying what I thought, and I did participate some. $0 I
think I told you this (I believe I have), on the World Student christian
Federation staff were a Dr. and Mrs. Butter. Mrs. Butter was a Scottish
nobleweman who had been the national director of the YWCA in
India, and who had married the Dr. Dutter who, at the time they were married,
was the national director of the YMCA in India. He--I don't know whether
he personally or his forebears--had come from Persia to India. But they
were Parsees, and he did not have any dark blood [ﬁsughte57 running through
his veins. They thought that the fact that they were both as highly regarded
as they were in India meant that they could have this marriage and it would
work. But it did not; it fell on its face. I think this says a good bit
about English rule in India and the class distinctions, and no doubt is a
commentary as well on the outcasts in the caste system of India. However
they were not able to function effectively after that marriage. Being the
brilliant people that they were, they were both taken on the staff of the
World Christian Student Federation in Geneva. And they asked me if I would
like to attend two women's conferences in Indie; they'd like to have someone
from the World Student Christian Federation attend them. Well you know me:
I hadn't planned to go there, but I didn't hesitate at all [jaughte57 at
this new experience. So they gave me marvelous introductions, and I made
my plans to leave and get there sometime at least by mid~January of the

next year. After that conference I did do a little bit of American Boy

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 9
Scout (not even Girl Scout) traveling in Scotland and Ireland. But I did
take a freighter from London through the Kiel Canal and came to the Baltic
See all around to the free city of Danzig. My roommate was a woman from
Danzig who'd been studying English in Oxford--there goes a little aside
I shouldn't tell. But anyway, there was a delightful history professor
from the University of Edinborough. There was just a handful of us, the
choppiest seas, and we were all just as sick as we could be. Anyway, we
got to Danzig. Well, of course it has its currency. I had to get some
currency changed because my plan was to cross Poland-—which I'm sure took
at least thirty-six hours (I've forgotten how long now)——and get into
Russia in the Ukraine. Well, unfortunately I‘ve never taken the Greek
alphabet too seriously. I did have an outline of the road from Cooks or
American Express or somewhere about my route. But that whole way across
Poland I could not read a single sign on a single railway station. When
I got to Warsaw I had to change oars-—and there are more cute little anec-
dotes I could tell you about that, and how I did grab up my fUrniture and
finally find somebody to direct me a little bit. (Oh, it was wild; I wish
I could tell you about them.) Anyway, I went on down and did finally get
on the right train. I don't know how I knew where to get off, but I got
off at the Ukraine. Well, crossing that border was simply fascinating.
People used a kind of a marcel wawe in their hair at that time, and the
way I got mine was by all these combs; we'd pull one back and then pull
the next one doWn and push one back, you know. So I had all these combs.
Well, these Russians were just jabbering up a storm, and just counting these
combs and calling numbers--and how one woman could use so many combs [Ehughteg7.

I mean, there were just a lot of cute things like that.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 10

Well, finelly I did get on into . . . Kiev. I was supposed to have
been met at the border by this group from Columbia University, but not
hide nor hair of them. I got into Kiev and finally through all the little
grotskys I was taken to this magnificent (if someWhat rundown) hotel. And
I was put on the ground floor, in what must have been this elegant (it was
still elegant) drawing room, with my little bed sitting over there, these
French windows that were open. No way to lock the door, no way to look the
windows, everything totally strange. I shall never forget the sounds of
that night. Any time you get the feel of people and their energy being
unleashed you have the thrill of a lifetime. And the thrill of the noises
of people,alive, free people rushing around outside. . . . I forgot to be
afraid; I forgot that I couldn't lock the door; I forgot I couldn't pull
down the window. I couldn't sleep because I was so excited. It was really
a thrilling thing.

JH: Now how long were you in Russia?

Wright: Six weeks. The group from Columbia arrived the next day. We
did many interesting things there. There was a lot of anti-religious
propaganda. Anyone with any intelligence would buy it: not only the
exploitation on the part of the nobility, but of the church of the peasants
was documented in these extremely fascinating monasteries and cathedrals
and catacombs. There was a perfect saint factory where they kept these
stuffed figures down in this semi—dark catacombs in little alcoves with
these very dim lights and all, and of course the peasants were greatly
impressed about this. And then the bookkeeping on what their standard of
living was what they could afford and couldn't afford, and the wealth

of these religious institutions. You felt that they couldn't possibly

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 11
build anything that had any meaning when they were so enslaved by the
superstition and exploitation. Well, it was a beautiful and an interesting
city.

JR: What did you learn on that visit to Russia that had the most
effect on you?

Wright: Well, I had already for a long time felt that production for
profits instead of fer the use of the majority of the people was the wrong
track, but I was greatly reinforced in it there. You knew, Dewey had a
great deal of influence on their kindergarten system and student system.

And naturally in a period of transition this couldn't be wholesale all over

the nation, but there were some of the most fascinating experiments I've

seen anywhere in the world. And all of that was extremely fascinating;

the dzar's "village, for example, the contrast of that palace in which the

our and emins had lived and all of these icons plastered all over and all

that and its present use as a children's village. The friezes and the murals
and they

you see, where they took the ehildren/at a very early age were learning

respect for other people and learning methods of cooperation instead of com-

petition, just made an indellible impression on me. One of the little

instances I remember most vividly was in a playground seeing this enormous

firm wagon and the children playing around it and with it and in it. And I

said, 'Well for heaven's sakes, in the United states they give children little

wagons for Christmas and all that. I don't think it's wrong for them. Are you

haviggli; 21611-1821“ playground, to identify them with things rural! And of course

you can play in a big wagon that way. But just what is the idea?“ And they

said, 'Well, don't little children when they get a wagon say 'This is mine

and I'm not going to let you play with it' in your eountry?’ I said, '0?

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 12
course.‘' Well," they said, I'here they have to cooperate before they can
do much with this wagon, and pull together.‘ So everything like that
seemed to have been taught to them. Of course we were being introduced
to the Cutting edge . The young student from the University of
Moscow who was our guide and a young boy from New York University, I believe,
who had participated in the Olympics in Stockholm, the three of us were just
like this. Well, I was twenty-sight years old by this time, but I don't
guess you'd have ever known it. You see, I'd had four brothers, and I was
very much at ease with fellows. But we enjoyed and we inquired, and it was
all right to do it. So once we were waiting to go in to see some plenipoten-
tiary who was going to explain some system to us, and we were being delayed
so everybody started laughing about passport pictures, and took them out and
started looking at them. So this student saw mine; and there was nothing
special about it (it was horrid, like most other people's are ), but he saw
this about my being twenty-eight. He said, 'Big mistake here!ll And I said,
Why” Well," he said, “about your age.I I said, 'No. I don't even mind
telling you what size shoe I wear, and I am twenty—eight years old.“ Hell,
I guess he was about twenty-one, maybe twenty-two, and this other boy was
probably about that age, but they hadn't thought of my being any different
than them. So I told them yes. Well, of course so many of the Russian
women, particularly the peasants, after beginning working very early they
married early, they had large families and they do go to pot, and they get
very ﬂat and big and so on. So after I talked long enough he finally took
it in. He said, 'But my god, you are well-preserved.ll [Taughteﬂ

J‘H: For twenty-eight you were well-preserved [laughter].

Wright: I was well-preserved. You know, on some of the trips we did

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 15
see Ruesian women, just beaets of burden. But it didn't seem to violate
them any . . . doing out of door things that anyone would
enjoy doing. There were great rafts on the rivers that were just loaded
with grain and all that, and they were just maneuvering it all around.

J'H: Did you go to China on the same trip?

Wright: Yes.

JH: Tell me about that.

Wright: Well now, I joined this group and we were in the folk schools.
And then we were in Germany, and had a wonderml time with the youth movement
in Germany. Some of this was the Friends of Nature, and it was before Hitler
had taken them over. But we had discussions. And the group that I joined
was biracial; some of the members of the group were on that Pocono Study
Tour, you see. I told you that I had already arranged to do that, but I had
not arranged about the Oxford thing. But I had arranged about the trip to
Ruaeia, and I joined them in Finland. But the youth groups that we met,
that was very, very exciting. And a lot or the other things we did in
Europe for the three month period were more or less the typical tourist
types of things. I dearly loved Italy3and the aeethetica of Italy, I think,
just hit you more deeply than any part of Europe—I mean, in that particular
way. We lived in the homes of the German working class, too, and that was
quite a rich experience.

Then a nurae who was going to end up visiting in Spain, she knew of
course that I was heading toward India, and she wanted to join me for a
Mediterranean cruise. So we got an Italian freighter from Brindesi, at the
heel of Italy, and stopped at Albania and tries and Athens, you see, and

and Smyrna in Asia Minor, and then on down to Alexandria

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 1h
a few days and Egypt, and across the Suez and the desert and on to Jeru-
salem. Then I went from Jerusalem to Haifa, where I had almost a white
slave traffic incident that was absolutely fascinating, but it had no bearing
in particular on this except that it did throw me. Well, in order to be
secure I was advised to go to this hospice that was run by Belgian nuns.
And while there I encountered a crusty old German doctor who had never
married and just cussed me out for traveling by myself in that part of the
world. And even though there was in our presence at the table the head of
the department of antiquities, a young Arab, he was talking about what
animals they were and this, that and the other. And I just gave him a fit.
I told him I'd trust them just as quickly as I would him. So the next day
this young Arab with great apology and defbrenee thanked me; he wouldn't
have dared do it, but he was so glad I had let him have it. So he said he
was going to Balbee. He was a graduate of the American University in
Beiruit. So we traveled on the bus together up to Beiruit, where he had a
person heading the economic department who had gotten his doctorate from
Columbia. Then we went on to Balbee. (And that was on TV last night, and
it was the most fascinating ruins.) But being the head of the department
of antiquities, the whole time on the bus he was giving me the whole history
of the Near East, and the British ruling it and all that. I never have been
so excited over anything in my life.

Then I went on to Damascus, and crossed the Arabian desert with the
main transport company. And at Rutba Hells, which is in an oasis roughly
halfway between Damascus and Baghdad in Iraq, were representatives of all the
oil companies
./ already having an economic war. And I eat there and drank it all in.

So I may not be able to dot all the 'i's and cross the 't‘e, but I have had

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 15

portance of

.,.

a good feeling for anything about the Near East and! the

oil, you see, and the foreign policy implications. All the ceutttries—;
Ihéhric‘efand the United States [—2123 interested in that oil. It was
just fascinating.

On that trip across the desert there were some interesting you;
areheologists, and also some people in the British forces who'd stayed at
a British hotel. So not knowing anything, and they had been there before
and they knew the hotel, I went to that hotel. And I was having dinner
with one of them. well, that was my first taste—I won‘t say it was my
first taste, but it was my first bitter taste—of the British class structure
and what a few whiskers and sabres can do to people who think they're the
lords of the universe, namely the British. These handsome Arabs who were
waiting on table, these Britishers would just get a few whiskey-eodas,
'ggz'.‘ and they'd come scurrying, you know. And this was Christmas Eve.
Well, I had no intention of staying at a place with that type human
relations being flung in your fies for Ohristmas. So I got up bright and
early, didn't say yea or nay to anybody, and took off on this little
Badhdad-to-eomething Iraqi railway (goverment—owned railway), and went
down to and Babylon and all that and had just a grand time.
Then I had my ticket on a boat that was to leave from Basra, which is at
the head of the Persian Gulf, heading for Bombay. I was planning, of course,
fromoBombay to go to my conferences. All that part of the world is just
fascinating. The largest date exporting port in the world is there at
Basra. And on this beat (it was a freighter toouyou can see by this time
that this is why I could go as far as I went; I always traveled Boy Scout

or Girl Scout, call it what you want, but with very little) was an American

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 16
woman who was a history professor at Columbia and a YWCA secretary from
Columbus, Chio, Alfred Bingham (the son of Congressman Binghom of Connec-
ticut); as I've forgotten what this young British Royal British Air Force
fellow was, but his brother-in-law was an admiral in the British Navy
and when we got to Karachi the admiral and part of the Navy was there.
That was our first stop. So we were entertained royally—and by this time
there were just the five of us, you see. And I was the only one there
these two boys' age, and these two old maids were cute as they could be
but they were along to ehaperone them. I still had the hangovers that
you were chaperoned,‘ you know. But we were entertained royally.

The minute we got to Bombay I went to the IV to stay. And Alfred and
this fellow called me, and the, governor ‘of Bombay province was having a
big dinner party.
BEGIN SIDE I TAPE II

Wright: . . . with an invitation to the garden party. Well, in order
to cross the desert I had done away with most of my clothes. I had had so
many pretty clothes in Europe; you know, I always did like pretty clothes
[faughteg]. So I thought, “How in the world can I go?‘ Well, I did have
one pretty dress, but I had nothing to wear on my head and of course every-
body over there wears a hat. So I went down to the market and found the
most beautiful little chiffon tieadyed scarf. I made myself a turban
[Taughteﬂ out of it, and it just matched my blue chiffon gown. So that
was one of' the most elegant things; if you want tesee elegance,
just see how the British do it, you know. But I didn't want to get mixed
up in anything like that, because I had too much else I wanted to do.

So I struck out for Lahore, which is now in Pakistan but

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 17

it was the capital of the Punjab. And I traveled not first class, not
second class, not third class. I'm not sure whether there was a fourth
class or not, but what I traveled was , and that is for
women only. And that's the cheapest, as low down as you can get, so
that' s the way I traveled. Well, those women with their set marks and
their beetle nut, you know, and their teeth all decayed from lack of‘
attention. . . . But they did pull off their clothes at night to rest,
and I knew what they were from the skin out. Also, every province we
went through has a different type of clothing. One of the provinces, the
women had the—-I don‘t see how they could have but one ekirh-skirte with
more material than anything I've ever seen. When you looked out ofthe
window you'd see these enormous splotehes of' color, and it was a skirt
drying in that almoet-deoert air: just beautiful. Well, it took me
considerably longer to get to Lahore because, you know, I was taking in
everything between Bombay and Lahore. But when these two women who were
on the boat from Basra to Bombay arrived, that's where they were headed
to, to Lahore. So then I began telling them everything about all the
words I'd learned and the different provinces and how they dressed and
this, that and the other. We'd been there exactly the same time; they'd
been staying in a ritzy British hotel and hadn't learned a thing that
they didn't know before [laughter]. They were so mad with themselves
they didn't know what to do.

well now, that conference was very exciting, and I could tell you a
lot of things about that but I won't. It was the Fifth All-Indian Women' s
Conference on Educational and Social Reform. Women were coming out of

purdah every day. And just as at one of our conferences somebody

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 18
might be talking about someone who'd gotten a divorce or somebody who'd
taken up with somebody else's husband, the whole conversation before and
between the sessions was about the women who were coming out of purdah.

A Japanese general appeared on the scene. They put him in purdah behind
a screen to speak to them because it was so hot they didn't want to put
their . . . voile and all back on their heads. And so they decided to
let him speak if he would be willing to get behind the screen and speak.
So they permitted this. And his whole theme song was that he had been a
Chinese general and that he felt he knew the horrors of war, and that he
felt that we would never have peace until women decided whether we would
have war or not. It really was a very exciting, striking sort of an
episode.

This conference of all Indian women was followed fairly shortly there-
after by the First All-Asian Women's Conference. And there were people
from Ceylon and Burma, China, Japan, all over. It was not a large eon-
ferenee, since it was the first they'd ever had, but it was quite exciting.
I made some good friends, and when I went to Delhi a lawyer‘ a wife (she was
a very black Indian woman, but her husband was very -she was
very ) entertained me in her home. And all of this thing of
eating with your fingers or with dripping off your elbow before you can
get it to your mouth, you know. And I think at that time I might have had
some reluctance to have visited a black women. And of course in the South

there weren't any black women similarly placed. The first ones who were

prominent national judges

But any little squeemishnees I might have had about as much intimacy as

you would have in visiting people, sleeping as they slept and eating as

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

nuance Hue.— oﬁ. 95o Hahn. ea 8qu H .ebuenemue e3. as: a..." 23 he: .33».
wages husouHs one: no.3?" 0305an oossoon :33 v3? vueaHs p.83 .35:
we soada hp?— nnesﬁwlvHuoa 23 3.5 ow ea .3593 23 uo>eeH one 9.2.?
uﬁuﬁsH .- ad to .«ew H .33: on» «o vase ass». So uoﬂuoeou on 5% «5m
425:3. he no yam: us: .3" none: 05 .35. ea vswao Hy cg 053s Meon
3.5.39: n33: v.35 unseen as: H .\ as: H 035 23 as 32 £95m
hvugsuuH 23 an exam: :5 huge ueoummgwoﬁ. hogan .333 .e as Eons
ea 9!? Joe» H huHsune: aPC 33 $33.3: o» m: 593 23 soon H coo»
tam 89C Ens gueoundm o... £3: 35 52.570 89C veon e :25 H uoaea
33538
3 us 3.3: es... 5 euenahne hangom no 53% 23 he unewwoa he
.3!- od noes ueoon obs: H .35: 2...... 5 5 goes nope 3—H 3.3.» made
Ioeumou anon on» no: Auaasonso op Moon mnaaoov ivaSoHdo we th0 on¢ van
.euoa 5o» HHov eon coon HIIuehHsaam onu
usoo o3.— §u 23 son on oueﬁ Inn econ H was .oHpsHHgs o?! .33 0.3.»:
e .3 .335 .33 no use.“ usons vonoxdse no: H wnanuea axon 63H. .9355
2:. 5 833 vow H .wcuHoonhen own.“ no oouuvﬁ‘o eeoﬁ. me .3: £9.35.
0.5: H :3" unaov one: .35 n3. ev v.50 coast 95... ea .33. v.93 om
ocaovnaoa 05 A5 5. “Ewan Sons aesn ovsow 35.52.. 33: £3 vex“ was
no hose: one: .233 oxﬁﬁv one vc- nmsua 2.3. es 289 3th Jason
5.3.52: 0.5.9.3 v.5" o2. nose: .Ho eHon on... ones» 23 4302 A983... 35
3:.“ a: pact H .3»:ng nob. 3.55070 :23. £93..“ ego: HHetlloaaaoHso
ea m: «.25 :05. 638393 2:. as #2: vs... H 915 noao: 3.... «o 033 use
«.5 aeHhoo ova... gov no anew .553 on» 9H :26 co an»: H 935 ion.»

. .3. v.3 6:.-

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,

The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

 

Wright 20
in the quantity that they had been before. But there we passed through
the jungle, you see: rode in a dilapidated sort of a bus from this
landing on the Irrawaddy River to . And I had a fascinating
time there. The Buddhist priests in their yellow robes at Tao
and all, they reminded you or just swarms of yellow butterflies. And I
saw some funerals. And of course this is a time of great rejoicing, and
I thought, Well, this is more intelligent Li: you have the belief in the
afterlife that many people seem to have.‘ Then why wouldn't it be a time
of rejoicing? And with the Buddhists it was a great time of rejoicing.
II'his was quite an exciting thing to see; and of esurse the little bazaars
and markets are always hssinating.

I'11 backtrack a little bit to this bazaar steamer. This was the
only. . . . They had these little bazaars all along, and the people from
the interior every two weeks came down to purchase things from this steamer.
See, this was the only boat on the water, on the Irrawaddy River, the only
place they had to purchase amrthing. And to see these bush people really,
people coming out of the bushes or the jungles of upper Burna—with
apologies to the Burns surgeon. . . . They'd come down there in their
earongs (you lmow, the way they'd twist these little hips of theirs to get
it tight and folded in there), and then they were smoking these great big
sheriffs. Well, it was so colorful and so dramatic; it's the type of
thing tint everybody ought to get the feel of.

JR: Did you go from India to China?

Wright: No, no. So then I went to the Federated Malay states and
up into Thailand, and into Cambodia and all of that (saw Ankh:- Hat and

Saigon). Fran Saigon I took a bench steamer down to Singapore. From

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 21
Singapore I got a Rotterdam Lloyd steamer over to a port city in Java
and went on into Batavia, the capital, and from there down into Bali.
This was shortly after the little island of Bali had been opened to any
westerners at all, so you would want to elaborate on that. But anyway,
from there I sailed through all of these islands (Borneo and Smtm—Moll,
Sumatra of course is up above Bali but I had come by Sumatra)-I can't
remember the names of all these islands. Then I got into all that
Philippine group, by Mindamo, where the Arab and Mohamdan influence
is so strong. We stopped at a lot of‘ those islands: Palawan, which is
that string bean island there, and on to Manila. Well, in Manila the
director of the '2' where I had conducted that experiment in education
had been made the first executive director of the Philippine Islands.
So she had a nice apartment there, and I went to live with her. But I
wanted to stay longer and my hmds were getting low. (Incidentally, I was
taking this trip entirely on what I had saved in the last two years that I
was in Philadelphia, and I was living fairly high when I was there too, you
know. So I didn't have all that much; and I had cabled my father once, I
think, for five hundred dollars. So anyway, this is why I was taking
things eheaply'.‘ I had some pride in doing it on my own'.) 01‘ course the
Philippines were part of the United States at that time; they called it part
of the United States. Anyway, I lived with her. And they wanted me to
teach French at the university, but I didn't want to stay quite that long
(that whole year, you see). Of course I was dying to get to China. I
loved China frm all my New England knowledge of China from childhood, you
see, so much, and things Ghinese so much. So finally I ended by teaching

for about five months in the central high school in Manila. There were

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 22
many Philippine students, but there would be many Americans too (Army and
civil servants and so on). Incidentally, one of my good friends in New
York had been president of the Philippine Student Club at the International
Students' House at Columbia. She was the daughter of a judge there in
Manila, and she was married to an editor of one of the biggest daily news-
papers there, the Ree Press. So she introduced me to President Martins,
I believe. Anyway, whatever his name was, he was Spanish mestiso—I may
not be using that word correctly. Then the viee-president Amania loved
to bowl, and I used to bowl with him ﬂaughteﬂ all the time there. She
introduced me to all of the fascinating Philippine people. Except for the
swimming pool at the Amy—Navy Club I would not have bothered with any
of the other people. But I did like to swim, so I did go to the Army—lhvy
Club a lot. And at the university I knew the president quite well, and
the dean of the School of Education. His wife gave me the loveliest
Philippine wanan's outfit. I bought one; she gave me one; One was very
dressy; then I happened to have another one of the poor people, too, the way
they dressed. But it was still all that Spanish inﬂuence and all, you
know, .

Well, in , the southern capital there, and up in the highlands. . .
I had some ﬂaseinating trips all up through the highlands—and these little
narrow roads that you'd have to phone ahead to know if anyone had been let
in to spy down the other end before you could go; got up there with stem
signals all out-—and saw all of these varied types. Now there's not history
to know all the various racial types and all that are there (the little
pigmy negritos that would come and all work together in 12113011 to roll the

rocks from the landslides from the storm that we were in or down the mountain,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 25

you know, all in cooperation) but I tried to learn everything I could.
But even that was just hypotheses as to how these different people were
there. But there was a very fascinating, very timid, shy Harvard man
who went over there; and he, I think, lived with a Philippine woman so
he was very reticent and shy about making any contacts (I think he felt
as though he had maybe misbehved or something, I don't know). But he
was a brain, and he was quite an anthropologist and areheologist and
everything else. And Miss Boyd, with whom I was sharing the apartment
when shame the national 'Y' secretary said, 'Aliee, I would rather pick
his brains because he's lived all up in the mountains there, you know,
and knows all these different tribes and everything} She said, 'I-Ie
just is a , because I would no more approach him than any-
thing.‘ So she didn‘t have to sick me on him much. So we got him over
there for dinner one night. And oh, the theories that he had about those
Arabs way down there in Mindanao and all, and where that might have tied
in with any expansion of the Islamic world and all that; and then his
ideas aboutinrrorigin of the species [faughteﬂ and all that sort of thing.
Oh, it was very, very exciting. Of course I think people are still guessing
about a lot of that. But the Philippines is a fascinating place to study
this, in light of the many, many types particularly up in those mountains.
And of course with each successive wave of invaders these people who were
there would be pushed back.

Well, suffice it to say that I could not stay in the Philippines when
I found out that the Institute for Pacific Relations conference was going
to be held in China, with representatives from all of the countries in and

around the Pacific Ocean. So President Palmer appointed me an official

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 21;
delegate free the Philippine Islands to attend the Institute of Pacific
Relations conference. I was the only woman in the delegation, but that
didn't bother me a bit. And that conference was very, very exciting.

It was scheduled for Siehang, which was a southern capital. All the way
from Hong Kong and Canton, which we visited, and then Siehsng, which I
visited before the conference started. But the Manchurian incident had
already occurred; 1'): not sure of the sequence of the undeclared war in
Shangl'ni. But anyway, they felt that since there would be Japanese
delegates it would be ill-advised to hold it in Siohang, so it was held
in Shanghai. There were in the secretariat marvelous people. I think a
lot of this was funded by the Field Fomdation and Rockefeller and so on,
and you could write a book on the people who were connected with that.
There was one cute little girl that was a good, good friend of Pearl Buck.
And Pearl Buck was writing her to cone to visit her and to bring anybody
she wanted to bring with her. Well, at the end of the conference the
Chinese government gave all of the delegates to the Institute free passes
on the Ghinese railways for three weeks. So this Lucy Kotts, a Texas girl,
and I took off for Pearl Buck's. Well, of course Pearl Buck had married
a person that I think is in the Buck genealogy, Jay Lassen Buck. And he
was the most boring thing; I certainly don't blame a bright, sharp woman
like her. Now he was a brain, don't misunderstand that, but dull, so dull
you couldn't stand it. And I guess she couldn‘t either. So we were there
for a day or two. We didn't stay anywhere long, because we Were making
our three weeks, you know. And we went up to Gonﬁmius' s—what ie that!—
anyway, those provinces, I knew them like a book. Anyway, it's the one
where Confucius is buried, and it's not too fur from Peking. Then on into

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 25
Peking. We lived at the Maude Ohanner Newman laxguage School. Well,
that was a fascinating place to be. Of course there were a lot of
people of all denominations and hiths that were missionaries that were
there learning the language; but in addition to that there were people
from Demark who were interested in buying soybeans from Manehuria, and
they were learning the language. And there were professors on sabbatical
leaves, some of whom were studying what was recognized as a growing
possibility in Ohina of a Oommist revolution. The person when I just
absolutely stuck around (he couldn't shake me) was Dr. Russell stow,
who was head of the department of political science at the University of
Illinois. But he was teaching at Pomona College, inalaremont. I believe"
(I'm not quite sure where it is), but he was on sabbatical leave. And
from the First World War he had been a newspaper man, and he had been
assigned to Russia; So he really knew what he was looking for. 5nd he
kept going out on trips to the interior seeing what was going on. And so
he'd talk about it . He knew I was very
enthusiastic about a lot of it, and I was. So he never did see anything
other than what he thought was a very understandable outgrowth of the
emuml life that Ohim had historically. But a masher of years later
I was attending a meeting of the Association of Adult
Education, and a man from the State Department was talking about adult
education in China and what Jenny Lind had tried to do. Well, I was aware
of all that when I was there, and I thought that he was not telling too
much. So I got with him and I said, 'Now listen, . . '.' He mentioned
that Jenny Lind was in this country. I said, 'Now, as dedicated as Jenny

Lind was to what he was doing this is no place for him to be‘. Why is he

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 26
not there?‘ And he said, 'Wellfm;ans Kai-Shek is such a damned fascist
that he just absolutely made it impossible for Jenny Lind to function.
And so no doubt he is here just waiting for a boat'.‘ Chiang Kai-ehek's
wife went to college in Georgia and all that, and she was of‘the famous
Song family '. Well, her brother, I don't know whether he was president
or whether he was treasurer or what, of Oberland in . lnd I
did go way out into and visited some students out there in
China. So I could see that China had its class structure, but I've never
seen greater democracy among people in my life, and a greater sense of
humor or an acceptance of life. I mean, those eoolies were just battered.
And we went on Buddhist pilgrimages way out in Shanshi, you know where the
railroad took you as far as you could go, a bus took you mireould go,
you'd get an oxeart and Peking cart that'd nearly turn you out the ruts
were so deep; and spend the night in these little inns and all that, and
then get with the pilgrims and hike for the rest of it. I mean, you really
got the feel of the whole thing, don't you see.

JR: Coming back to South Carolina must have been sort of difficult.

Wright: Well no, because I had never looked at my own home town with
the kind of eyes that I could now look at it. And I got back at the
height of the Depression.

JH: You came back in '52, and your father had died.

Wright: I sane back in April '52.

JH: You did talk about that?

Wright: Yes, at the end of '52. And so I was first undo the head of
the social service work. And I got that organized.

JH: Now what was your job exactly!

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 27

Wright: Hell, I was the director of the Social Service Department of
the Marion County Emergency Relief Administration. But they soon made me
the director, which put not only the Social Service under me. . . . I have
some letters in here that you will find signed 'Becky;' she is the person
who had worked with the IV with no in Philadelphia, and she traveled those
three months on the Pocono Student Tour, the folk school tour, but she had
not done the other things. But when my position was made vacant when I was
made the administrator I got her down ﬁes Philadelphia ( they were on the
soup line) and she became the director. And in one of these places she
tells about meeting on a cable car (she lives 1; Sat; Francisco now) Tom
Pettigrow, whom I love and adore. Did he-take acttgo‘nﬂ Allport's place (I
know that he was being groused for that) at Harvard as a social scientist?
But he used to come down and work with us some. And Becky just happened to
bump into him and his wifeq-ho was a psychiatrist and a delightful person-
on the cable cars in San Promises. So she said the minute that they found
out she was from North Oarslina they said, I‘Well, do you know Alice Nerwood
8pearnan?‘ And so they got together, and she told me some lovely things
they said in the letter. But she said she was so glad that these papers
were being put in the Carolina library. And then she comments on 'How you
have studied all these yoars.‘ and she said those three years she was here
it was. . . . Well, you know, there are certain temperaments simply can't
stand , and she was one of the kind that just couldn't.

JH: How did you got this job exactly, this social service job?

"right: Well, you see my father had just died, and he was worshiped,

just literally worshiped. Also, when I was in school there I had been an
outstanding student.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 28

m: It was an unusual position for a woman to have though, wasn't it?

Wright: Well, the social service part wasn't so much.

J8: But the administration. . . .

Wright: Well, there really wasn'...t another one in South Oarolina. But
inediately they became interested. I didn't know about this technique of
getting upstairs; they saw the hold I was getting on the people and how I
was encouraging them--I didn't know So they didn't leave me there too
long; I was getting too much political inﬂuence, you see. So they pushed
me up to supervisor of eight districts. Then s neighbor of mine who had
been a grsduate social worker at the University of South Dsrolins—-whether
they had a small sohool of social work I don't knowf—but she was the head
of all that social work program and we‘d sons in there. Well, already I
had attended a meeting, the National Convention of the Socialist Party, in
Detroit. Also Maynard Kruger, who had run with Norman Thomas, (he had run
as vioe—president and Thomas as president) and I had been friends in Phila-
delphia, and also Andrew Biemiller. And Andrew Biemiller was one :of the signees.
with Hubert Humphrey of“ that Minority Report, and he was later in the House
of Representatives from Wisconsin. But Maynard was still teaching at the
University of Chicago. Anyway, of course Maynard was very left-wing and
Socialist. So when I got back from that convention and I was at one of the
district supervisors's meetings in the Oolmnbie. ofﬁce the director of the
South Osrolins Emergency Relief Administration called me into his office.
Well, one of my father's brothers had been president of the bank there in
Columbia, Mr'. Joseph Norwood; and this Mr. Halcolm Miller had worked with him
and he stood in some awe and deterrence of Uncle Joe. But he called me in.

And I didn't know what it was—I mean, he had always been very pleasant and

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 29
nice with no. But he began saying that he understood I wee the secretary
of the Socialist party. And I said, Well, Mr. Miller, I thought you
called me in something about our work here.’ And he said, Well, I tell
you, Alice, you know Harris Tillman, don't yout' Well, Harris Tillman was
s. nervelous nan, and he had been on my board in Marion County.

And I'd really like to get in a record souewhere of sue of the atti-
tudes that fine people who had been very much a part of the system but had
watched this break—down, and there was almost a transformation in their
own attitudes. I'd like to get some of that in here.

But anyway, Mr. Tillman was a sun of e great heart and a very fine
hmn being. So Mr. Miller said, 'You know, I'hﬂ‘is Tillmn asked me if I
would help him be appointed to the State Forestry Omission, and I assured
him I would. But,‘ he said, |‘I was playing golf with him the other day,
and I had to toll him that I made it a point to live up to my omittnents
but that I was going to have to renbge.‘ And I said, Well, why in the
world would anybody renoge at getting Mr. Tillman armlhere, because they're
doing more for wherever'll get him than they're doing for Mr. 'I'illmamI
And he said, 'Aliso, do you know that that man voted Republican in the
last presidential electiom' I said, 'This is a very interesting story
you are telling me.‘ I said, 'it wouldn't have anything to do with this
being s Democratic administration, that Harris is emergency relief sdninistrs-
tion, and the met that you've heard I'm the secretary of the Seoialist
party, would it Mr. Miller?’ I said, 'I would like you to know you're
donned lucky to have me on this job.“ I said, 'I‘m about the only person
that keeps at least the counties I work over from using all of the jobs as

political footballs.“ And I said, 'If you would like me to stop out there's

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright so
nothing more that I would like to do than to tell this entire story to
South Carolina and the nation for that mttar.‘ I said, "I eould take
off for Washington at any neaent.‘ 'weu,‘ he said, 'Alioe, why did you
jusp to such a oonolusion?‘ I said, 'Beoause I'm not dumb.I Well, I went
back in the place and Lela Johnson was there; she was a notherly sort of
embody, and absolutely sincere as far as she went, you know. But I
told her about that. And I said, 'I think I will do that. I think I
really owe it to the people of South Carolina. I owo it to people like
Audrey Hillilns and . . . Harry Hopkins.‘ She said, 'Aliee, you are
straightening out that p.d. district and getting these political leeches
off those rolls and getting the poor people in there.‘ She said, 'For
heaven's sakes, let us have one little spot in the state where we see that
somebody understands this and is willing to put their neck on the line
what you can do." And I got a black staff member in Marion County; I got
a black staff member in Florence County. When all of that thing folded
there wasn‘t but one, but it was that one in Florence County that I put on,
don't you see. And we got the oemunity to organize people behind it. We
were getting recreation (now this was separate but equal, but now honey.
when you stop and think about how long ago that was) in Florence, play-
grounds for the blacks and all kinds of things that were getting people
real excited that we were doing decent, you know.

So by that time they offered me this scholarship to go to chicago.
Well, I went. But it was supposed to be for six months, but they got in
dutch in some changes I'd been advocating. Washington some down and told
them I had to make it, so they wired no I had to ease home. But I'd rather

some home and get that straightened out than get more up there, though I

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 51

wanted to get the whole six months.

Anyway, then that's when they were having a horrible time. There was
a new program on, the Rural Rehabilitation Program. They wanted to put on
a state-wide survey of all of the people in rural areas who were on the
relief that they thought had any potential whatever for home ownership.
So I became the director of that etate-wide survey, and also worked with
them in mung ease of these changes which we felt we needed anyway but
people sitting in an office in Columbia wouldn't know about, don't you see.
So we got these things straightened out
Well, Hilda Smith, who workers'
education, Iiilda Smith, who had an estate on the Hudson ajoining Hyde Park
named Vineyard ﬂiers, had left that (she was very much interested in workers'
education) for use to some of the workers' education groups, I think. Just
as the University of Wisconsin and Bryn Mawr Summer School for Workers,
there had been this Vineyard Shore Workers' Education school too, I think,
on her place. But anyway, she was very wealthy and a very close his“ of
Mrs. Roosevelt. So when I was at Columbia, just on account of wanting to
understand things and with that work I had and the industrial movement with
the Wig: course the Women' a Trade Union League had come up, " I had
gone down there the first time to visit and to learn and had met and talked
with Hilda asith‘.‘ So the mimte she started, was appointed to the mtional
director she requested that I head it up in South Carolina;

JH: Now she was national director of what?

Wright: Workers' education, under the “PA.

J‘H: Oh, I see'.

Wright: By that time the Emergency Relief Administration had undergone

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright )2

some change, and among the changes was the change of name to works
Progress Administration. And she had a brilliant woman who had also
been a I! secretary prior to by the name of Ernestine Freed-
man that was really wonderful. And the materials we gotl I hope I can
put my hands on some of these materials: they‘d be new and vital today
because nobody's ever caught up with a lot of this, don't you see. So
anyway, then Hilda Smith used to shoot down the first year (I think I saw
the date somewhere.) But I went on that job and I wrapped up that rural
rehabilitation survey as fist as I could, about in May. And that summer
she asked me to direct a school for the workers' education teachers from
part of the southern states. It was at that time that some writer who was
on the Byrd line had been given a job by the Republican party, and he cane
and interviewed me. And of course you remember, I was

So he said, “I understand you've been to Ruesia.‘ I said,
'Yee.’ He said, What do you think of 11:7' I said, Well, I wish we could
get a few things like that started here." Of course I‘d been speaking to
women's clubs and church groups and men's clubs and anybody that'd listen
to no and telling them all anyhow, telling them how behind the times we
were and all this, that and the other-and getting by with it. People were
hesitated by it.‘ or course I always embroidered it and [faughteg] ends it
real glamorous and exciting. Then he did make this series of articles
for the Hearstpapers, and they were syndicated all over the nation. One of
the letters I got from Chicago I think was the worst I get, but I heard from
California and all over the nation. People who were reading these articles
were writing me letters; And this woman from Chicago said that there were

just two people that she would like to see deported to Russia, and it was

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 5}

Elana Davieman and me.

JH: You were in good company.

Wright: Yes. She didn't know whether she'd want to see me deported
or dripping in blood. Wasn't that blood-eurdling?

J'H: Hm.

Wright: But anyway, that was a long, drawn-out fight. And, you see,
this is when I decided that who wants to use their energies this way

am Now you don't know whom this was?

Wright: Oh yes, I know whom it was.

JH: When was it?

Wright: I think it was about '51}. That was the stunner, because it was
in May when she got me to direct this thing along the way'.‘

JH: How did Hilda Elmith react to this publicity?

Wright: Well, she kept her soul on it. She know well enough to keep
her 0001'. And I was learning fast too about mine. But I was so amused; oh,
this just went on all the time. But you see, fortumtely having worked
with labor leaders and taught them all the labor soienoﬁl/lftﬁey hadn't taught
me (ways to roughhouse and all that), we really built quite an incisive
movement. And quite a good many of the Piedmont counties‘ delegations to
the General Assembly, the House, were primarily labor‘domimted. So they
just raised hell that any outsider would come into South Carolina and they
weren't moved to have him investigated. And they attacked the best people
in the state ﬁsughteﬂ—I mean that was the twist that tools.

Then my brother, the one that was in Wilmington, his wife's brother was

the only liberal editore-we've never had many liberal editors in the state»—

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 54
and at that time he edited the Columbia Record. You know, he's one of
these liberal people who stop . But amay he wrote
marvelous editorials. And he said that the only thing he could see that
anyone could criticize was that it had been a long time since he'd met
anybody that took the Bill of Rights and all of that as seriously as I
did, and was making the desperate efforts I was to implement them. So
anyway I had no trouble with that. But Mr. Burns was all in this, and
this is whereuexoept that I empathize with the old boy because I think he
just did the best he could; it just wasn't good enough. ‘. '. '. But I saw all
the double-dealing with him and the manufacturers and with labor. He had
labor just eating out of his hand until I helped to disillusion them about
him;

JH: Go back a little bit and tell me what you did emotly in your
position as director of workers' education in South Carolina;

Wright: Hell honey, so much of it, you see just started. I don't
know whether it was June or July that we started this; we started almost
as soon as I got there. And besides that there was a henchoan in the
State Department of Education, and he had the Textile Manufacturers
Association write a letter to Mr. Holt. My department was a joint depart-
ment between the State Department of Education, of which a Mr. Holt (

) was the state superintendent, a
joint department by him and the HPA. So I was really under Mr. Holt and
Lawrence Pinekney, who was an illegitimate Pinokney from Charleston who
was a henchman of Jimmy Burns'e. And Jimy Burns could not stand my Uncle
Whit who called him a liar on a political platform in Greenville once.

And that' s why this letter that Mrs. Staokhouee wrote Burns about appointing

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 55
me to the Pardon and Parole Board is so phoney, you know, because he knew
that and he wasn't about to even touch me with a
ten foot pole, because this same streak of independence. . . .

BEGIN SIDE I TAPE II

Wright: . . . and they were very much upset because they knew that
this was Republican polities, you see. And here was Pinokney going along
with Burns trying to get me ousted, you see. So I told him I had to go up
there, and I'd already gotten my scrapbook assembled and everything. But

so I didn't do it.
he sneaked away and went up there by himself, /Bo when Audrey Hillians
found out I was with him he refused to see Mr. Pinckney: kept him up there
a day and a half until I could get up there. And I went fortified with my
scrapbook and all. So by the time we'd had our little joint session Audrey
looked Pinckney in the eyes and he says, “Well now, Pinckney, I don't know
what this says to us about what kind of an administrator we have in this
state program.‘ He says, 'It looks to me as though you're about the only
person in South Carolina that isn't our program in the state, and
we're paying you to do all that.'
and I

So that night Mr. Pinckney/here in the same hotel. And Mr. Pinckney,
I guess he was trying to make peace with me. So he asked me to have dinner
with him, and I didn't refuse him. You know, he was a heavy drinker, and
I was a total abetainer in those days. So I just let him drink all he
wanted to, and I just pumped him for all he was worth about Burns. I have
forgotten all the details new-I ought to have written it up at the time-
but really it just confirmed everything I had been suspecting, that he was
playing both ends against the middle, don't you see; the manufhoturere'

association, the financial interests and also labor. Labor just thought

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 56
he was their boy. So I just had my fill of him.

Well, I went ahead and got married, and the first shot
first thing I knew I was pregnant—-you know me with complete abandon
[Ihughte57L So the key part about it was my husband, I met him when I
was with the Rural Rehabilitation. And he kept pressuring me to get married,
and I kind of thought I wanted to get married. But as I used to tell him,

I said, 'I don't want any chain in my nose. I just don‘t know whether I
can stay . Now you're a mighty slippery guy marrying somebody like
me, I'll tell you right now.I But anyway there was so much exciting going
on in the program I said, 'I can't possibly take maternity leave.' He says,
maternity leave
“Well, I'll take a leave of absence.’ [Eaughte57 So he took / and I
didn't [ﬁaughte573 I was conducting this school. But then they had me to go
out to Morristown or somewhere in Tennessee, and they had eight other states
coming together. I had to be the person to record the whole thing; they
wanted somebody that was familiar with it all. And I had that coming up;
there wasn't any time we could get married and we really did have to get
married, so he did.

So now then Mr. Pinckney had me. I don't know whether there are any
letters in here about that under that Workers Ed or not, but just saying that
it was entire up to us. See, my husband had been with the State Employment
Service and the Rural Rehabilitation, so he said we couldn't both be employed
and that we'd have to choose. So that's why. Let's see, what time was this.-
November '55, I guess (some time like that anyway)-—-so I wasn't in it too
long. But we were called into Washington, and all of our meetings wereTheld

in the White House and Eleanor was there for all of them-I thought I told you
about that.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 57

JH: No.

Wright: And she was undoubtedly the most knowledgable person. But
she was just a regular porter at the gate. She was trying to learn to
tell Franklin how much;;c1>:]erment there was among people, and of working
people . And she'd ask us all around the room. There
weren't but twenty-one of us; they never did get more than twenty-one states.
And she'd get this picture. Then she'd just make some silly little remark,
and she had this silly little giggle, and just giggle. Well, we knew that
she had gotten past, she had gotten the answer without smarizing and
saying, IWell, this is it, isn't zit,I don't you see. But it was a perfect
porter at the gate technique, you know, that Shakespeare used to break the
tension. And some of them would say, 'Well, wasn't she dumb not to as]: so-
and-so', you know. Well, she was too smart to ask so-and-so, don't you see.
She had gotten it'.

JH: What was your relationship with the labor unions and organized
labor while you were doing this work?

Wright: Well, you see, this was still the American Federation of
Labor. There was the State nederation of Labor; we were buddy-buddy, and
that was fine. But of course the state Federation of labor was much more
conservative than the Textile Mamihoturers' Association; And we did a whole
lot more with the Textile Manufacturers than the State. At their conventions
they‘d have me bring the. . . .

JH: You mean the Textile Workers' Union?

Wright: Yes. It was an American Association of Textile Workers—I've
forgotten what it was called, the exact title (I probably have it somewhere).
But anyway, it was an international union.

JH: Yes, the Textile Workers' Union. Well, the '51} general strike was

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 58
going on, wasn't it?

"right: Well, I'll tell you: the whole Cross Creek Valley, which is
where the textile industry started (there was a Gray who was one of the
early manufacturers in the Cross Creek Valley, between Aiken and Augusta),
they were all out on strike. And I was a district supervisor by that time
and was called into Columbia; a lot of times they would oall in any one of
us that they thought had any expertise to apply to any problem. So, I don't
know why, but they called me in and they sent me to the Cross Creek Valley.
Well, I wasn't rubbing their fur down; I was trying to keep it standing up
ﬂaughteﬂ. And of ooutse I got reported back, and obviously they called
me out of the

JH: Now do you mean that your WPA supervisors wanted you to. . . ?

Wright: They called me in to go down there to help set up—I was
fairly good at organizationnthe relief that was being given to them, don't
you see'. 392 the whole time I was finding out what their grievances were,
and I was egging them on [Taughtex], you see. Who was spying on me I couldn't
tell you, but it got back and so they recalled me .

Now another thing: I don't know what I was doing at this time (it
must have been that same suing;inIH:;:a* Path, which is a little town
either in Greenville or Anderson counties (it's up in that part of the
state). You see, the educational authorities in a lot of these areas had
worked hand in glove with the Textile Manufacturers' Association and the
imediate mill ownership to keep them company unions or no union or whatever.
Greenville has had very little organization. I know people like Franz
Daniel-z-(who, incidentally, was a Congregationiart preacher and probably at

Union Theological Seminary )‘,- I've known a lot of these boys who went into

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 59
labor and other things like that instead of the church. But anyway, I
know Franz tried so hard to organize Greenville.

But going back to this Hones Path incident, we heard that the presi-
dent of the union had been killed. So I thought that it was up to me to
get up there and find out the circumstances surrounding it. And by some
effort I was thrown with this little blue-eyed whisp of a manp-ohl-and he
just in the most direct way told about the way they'd been gunning for them,
and he was sure he was shot down in cold blood—-
all of these details that I can't remember. But anyway, I have never been
more moved: and the frailness of his body and that glint in his steely-blue
eye. I was just moved beyond words. And I thought: if I could get this
man before people, you see. You can‘t wonder that people make such stupid
choices when they’ve had so little exposure. So I said to him, I said, 'I
don't know how and I don't know when, but I would like to know: would you
be willing to tell this before a group of people?" He was such a shy little
thing. And he looked me just straight in the eye. He says, 'Lady, I'll
stand on the toes of the pres-y-dent and tell this.I I never forgot that:
stand on the toes of the pres-y-dent and tell that. Well, there's much that,
while you're disillusioned on the one hand, restores your faith in people.

JH: I wanted to ask you a little bit about the Southern Summer School
for Women Workers. You were on the board at that time?

Wright: Yes I was, but for a very, very short time. And I really know
very little about it. I did know Louise McLaren. She worked very closely
with Katharine Lumpkin, as I told you, and we saw a great deal of her when
we were on that experiment, that student in industry experiment, in Atlanta.

She was a dear, close personal friend of Lois MacDonald. And incidentally,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 40
that letter was written by Lois MacDonald in 1922, and I have it in a little
bag with a piece of cardboard at the back of it and it should be in those
things. I want to make sure that it is. But I'd like you to have that
laminated or something done to it for us to preserve it; it was written in
1922. I told you about how she wrote that; that's what got me my job.

JH: Well, did you ever go to the Summer School?

Wright: I have visited it. Also I visited that Black Mountain eon—
ferenoe that was here. And my friend Becky Harrison (I was out there this
summer) took me to visit a Japanese soulptrees. And she is so committed
to working people. She was leaving San Francisco in a few days to go up to
work with the Eskimos and all. And Becky said, 'Aliee, you took me to
Black Mountain .' I said, 'Beoky, when was it?“ She said, IWell,
it was after I met you .' And she said, "You were the one that
first told me and charged me all up.on it." But you know, if you don't have
some little light. . . . Now that ‘ ' : . ”f :2 ‘
that kept that alive. But, I mean, I was going over what I saw it like, and
I was forever telling people and sending people there and taking them there
and so forth and so on, but I didn't remember

Southern
about it. And the/Summer School for Workers, I know that I went and observed
there (I remember they met at Weaverville some time ago), and then I remember
how I was put on the board. But I was on the board, and it seems to no this
was about the time that I was having to conduct all these workers' education. . . .

JH: What about Highlander? Were you more closely involved with

Highlander?

Wright: I never was as closely involved with Highlander as I would like

to have been.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 41
BEGIN SIDE I TAPE III (nothing recorded on Side II Tape II)
Wright: Oh yes, oh yes. I know that
working in international relations with John Oonnelly, who is the son of a
judge up in Cooke County (LaGrange, Illinois, out from Chicago). And he is
a brilliant person. He had been very active in some workers programs
earlier that had been based at Chapel Hill, and I think that was shut down

partly from criticism with regard to

But John was an extremely knowledgeable and effective person.

JH: You sought him, then, as a speaker at this conference?

Wright: Well, we had usually some internal presentations, but a 1st
of it was that had some real skills in it, you
see: like talk to people and find out what little light was

, or get them to tell this and magnify it, and then that
keeps the union growing, you know, and then wakes up something in somebody
else.

JH: What kinds of things did the women begin to say in these workshops?

Wright: Well, I don't know, I couldn't be specific about that.

JH: But that indicated the kind of dissatisfactions with their roles
and their growing?

Wright: Well also, I think that they . . . had an experience, probably

first time in a long time
some of them for the first time or for the / , of feeling there is this
whole world of inquiry out there that they were startled by, you:eee. I'm
sure that it allowed them to give vent some of their pretty deep—seated—~

and maybe hidden to themselves—-hostilities. But it was quite an exciting

thing, and it's one of the most rewarding things in working with people, you

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 42

see, because this is really experiencing life as it should be with us all,
and goes far beyond your own little life and little travel. It‘s just a
part of all the surge and rush that ought to be present everywhere at all
times to all persons. So it's very exciting.

Now, I have known the time in the Council on Human Relations, for
example, when I was absolutely so burned and I'd get a phone call. . . .
I remember this specific case, so I'll just relate the specific case. Some
ministers from Newberry said they wanted to get some bedside programs going,
and wanted to come down and talk to me and see if I could work with them.
Well, I didn't see how I could, but I knew I couldn't help but do it so they
came. Well, I was so tired that when, in talking it over, we began to search
this idea of why we have children get turned off before they are really very
much turned on. . . . And I knew enough about childhood education and the
methods that they use. I think this was the expression I used: I said,

(that their heads are)

I‘You see, our schools assume that these children come with/little empty
kitchens and that the teacher's trying to fill these. And she's doing all
of the work; the children are completely passive, so no wonder they don't
get on the ball." But I said, 'Now let‘s think a little while about the
way
It chooses from its environment the things it needs for its own good, and
who knows better than the little what it needs.‘ But I could see
them there shocked, you know; oh, I could just see them. They were so
negative: they'd never get it, these school people how they are. They'd
say, 'You know how they are.I 'Well, of course I know how they are. But,"
I said, "they're going to stay how they are. Somebody‘e got to help get

them started." And I said. . . . They got their part of it, don't you see.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright #5
Well, we stayed up there two or three o'clock in the morning. And here's
a young little old white woman sitting up there with about three or four
black ministers ‘til three or four o'clock in the morning down in the heart
of the town and all. But we , and a lot of people
would think that was terrible, you know. But I never thought about anything
like that. I told you, I was so invigorated‘when they were in there, when I
saw how they could change from completely negative. . . . They went out; I
knew they were going to put it over, don't you see. And they would. Well,
when you see this happen in people, honey, if you weren't that
you'd have to pay for the privilege of being where you could see it [laughte57.
So this is the kind of thing that the circumstances under which I had to work
didn't give me the chance to do all as much of it.

JH: What about other women's organizations of the time, like the
state and local YWOA's, for example? Here they either more progressive or
open than the churches?

”right: Ies, yes, yes.

JH: Where did you see in the women's organizations. . . ?

Wright: In the IN at the time when I was a social director
I was on the public affairs committee of the Y" and the state Public Affairs
Committee. They were pretty dynamic, and there were some very good people
in Columbia on the Public Affairs Committee. The first meeting after I
became the director of the Council on Human Relations we planned to have the
members of the Public Affairs Committee interview people and invite people
from the various other women's organizations of which we were all members
(you know, each person belonged to maybe several groups) to come and have

this Supreme Court decision aired in a big way, pro and con and in every

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 4#

sort of a way. And it would involve a great many women there in Columbia.
The executive director and the president got cold feet and afraid, and they
just called the whole thing off. Well, I didn't have time to work with
anything that the other members of the committee were not willing to take
it up to the board.

JH: I know that in the twenties the YWCA was a major advocate for
women to begin to get involved in everything, in the South and in the nation.

Wright: Oh yes.

JR: But by the fifties and sixties, was that at all true also for
the civil rights movement, that out of the YWCA came. . . ?

Wright: No. The YWCA in South Carolina got on the bandwagon when it
was safe to get on the bandwagon. There was a national project on race-—

something on raoe--at that time. I guess the woman who is new president

, Dorothy Height, I guess Dorothy may have been the person
directing that in that way. But anyway it didn't get to first base; and
the Charleston I“ would not integrate, and at Sumter they would not. But
an interesting there: the national IW refused to
acknowledge that the IN in Sumter for whites was a I“. They just threw
them out of the national IN, and they set up a YW under one of the most
personable, charming and able black women. She was a white black, you know-
you know what I mean--and she was the woman
So I don't know just exactly how that continued, but anyway I know that the
national YW gig do.that. The Columbia YW

but well, oh,
let's face it: it's safe, save it for whites.

JH: What about among church women: Where did you find your strongest

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright #5

allies?

Wright: Well now, I didn't find allies for a time.t now let me say
that when we first started, you see, in the Federation of Women's Clubs I
had been having quite an outreach. And many women's groups had had their
headquarters used as the state headquarters. We were a repository of infor—
nation about anything that was happening in South Carolina, so I was in
touch with them and knew them all personally and that kind of thing. But,
now Mrs. James McBride Dabbs was president at that time of the church
women, and I had always been active on the labor committee and various things
in the social action committee of the state and so on. Well, immediately
we did have an excellent bi-raoial meeting. As soon as Mrs. Dabbs
went out of office, which was right at the end of the first year after the
Supreme Court ruling, and Mrs. Davis from Charleston became state president
and the Waring paper began putting all kinds of terrible stories in the
paper of all persons that could possibly , and
they completely oapitulated. And here, as active as I had been, I wasn't
even sent a notice that they were meeting; I guess they were afraid I'd
bring blacks.

JH: Were there any blacks in the United Church Women?

Wright: Oh my, yes. We had officers from theirs, black officers; Mrs.
Rubin the president and Marge Collins was the secretary, state secretary.

JHI But after this attack were the black women full staff?

Wright: They just had little quiet board meetings instead of annual
meetings of members. And they went along pussy—footing that way for years;
it was just pathetic, and it just broke my heart.

JH: What about from the Methodist. . . ?

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 46

Wright: Well no; now the Methodists, all they ever do is once a year
they'd ask me to talk at their training program out at College
and speak to the group, and then go around to the little small groups. And
it was quite a while before they let me speak in the auditorium before the
whole group, but they'd move me from all those small groups.

JH: I know that on a regional level, at least in the twenties and
thirties, in the Methodist Church the Bureau of Christian Social Relations
was run by some very progressive women that did good work earlier. I don't
know whether by now they have. . . .

Oh yes, oh yes.

Wright:/ Oh no, no. No, I never did find a single Methodist woman who
was very advanced. Well, my contact was quite superficial (it was going to
those meetings). But they did every year send in membership dues for five
state officers, the whole time I was with the Council. And I would call and
try to cover it on the phone. But their limits (you know, when you have
smaller resources, staff—wise and financial-wise and all that). . . . Actually,
I would like to say that I have very little-snd have today--eonfidence that
people who are in favored positions, or positions which they consider
favored (and part of this is social prestige, acceptance) are going to
jeopardize this. I think there are very few people who hold any committments
that are strong enough to offset what is required by their conformity to meet
what they see as their personal, individual needs. Now that may be a very
cynical idea, but I think it is confirmed.

JH: When did you get involved in the old Commission of Interracial
Cooperation?

Wright: The minute I got back from China, after my ﬂather's death.

And I was there with a great many people; all of them were much older, and

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 47
they had established, you know, state-wide connections and so on. But I
did go there . We used to meet in the tower of
Trinity Episcopal Church, quite near the State House there in Columbia.
And I would be there a little bit early (you know, it was time fir lunch),

. So we'd get them all in and eat our
luncheon first. So invariably when the program was just getting so interes-
ting I'd say, “Well now, I know that some of the people here have come from
great distances
[Interruption]

Wright: There's just so much you could say about her. She was born
in Sumter County, but in a section of large plantation owners. And her mother
was a Mrs. Wilson, whose brother, Dr. Ben Wilson, was for a short time presi-
dent of Converse. And Miss Reid went to Converse; she served somewhat as his
secretary and I guess more or less worked her way through there. But she
taught in some college in Mississippi; but she was very soon recognized for
the brain and spirit that she was, so she was made a national student YWCA
secretary before the national board of the IN divided its work and had
regional headquarters. All of their national staff just served the nation.
And she was extremely popular in the student conferences that are held at
the various conference centers over the country. But she was extremely. . . .
Her people (I don't think her father was a bishop, but anyway . . .), they
came from a line of religiously—oriented people, clerics. So she had a
strong overtone. But she did join the Oongregationalist Church instead of
the Presbyterian in which she'd been reared. I never heard her expound on
that, but she felt more at home than she did in the southern Presbyterian.

But in a program she could put on one of the most meaningful worship services

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright #8
of anybody I have ever known. And it was not just a poetic sort of quota-
tions from the King James version, you know, where some of it is sheer
poetry (Ecclesiastes, for instance). But she just picked up; she knew all
the world's great literature, and it was just these truths that she
developed. But it always had the upmoet relevance to life and meetings.
Mr. Beverly Herbert, who at one time——but he was an attorney originally
from Virginia—-was president of (I think it must have been) the South Caro-
lina Committee on Interracial Cooperation, he wrote no once,
or wrote her, or told me; I don't remember, but I know what he said. He
said that he had never known a female St. Francis of Assisi until he knew
Rebeeoa Reid.

Now, she had, I guess, a brilliant career with the student movement;
and what brought her back to Sumter I don't know, but she taught in the
schools there. And she was run out of the schools because she was teaching
all of these brilliant young students Socialism. So that more or less hung
as a stigma around. A lot of people in Sumter were horribly conservative;
as I say, the plantation mentality has not yet been last. So we had one of
our student speed-up groups based there. And I just turned over the report
of the boy who was the team leader; he was studying at the University of
South Carolina. Tate, somebody Tate. But his father, I think, was dean
of the law school at the University of Georgia. AnVWEY» his descriptions of
Sumter. . . . And I‘ll also tell you some things that some of these conser-
vative students did that had bearing on domestic servants at the airfield
there, Charleston Air Farce Base—-but that‘s another story. But anyway,
Miss Reid was pretty much persecuted there. But she loved people. But she

just didn't let the fact that almost her whole family, for whom she had done

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 49

so much, they worshiped her in a way but they'd try to sweep her under the
rug when people came along, you know, or some of their backgrounds. . . .
So she, I'm sure that she missed all of that, but she spent her life going
around visiting all these poor people and getting them grouped together,
and pushing them to get playgrounds--out in rural areas. And then with the
limited income she had, I remember she gave an area out from Sumter I don't
know how many miles on the road to Lee Gaunty playgrounds and ball fields.

JH: New you knew her in the Interracial Commission?

Wright: Oh yes. And she was absolutely fearless in what she said.
And when she got into these meetings and her mind was just flashing, she
made, oh, just tremendous contributions.

JH: Would you tell me abeut some of the other wsmen in the old
Commission? For example, I was curious about. . . .

Wright: Mrs. Charles Davis, you said you wanted to know something
about her. Well, you know she was from Quaker background. She was Kate
Teas, I think, and she was married to a Baptist minister. And the whole
time I knew her, and in fact I imagine that most of her husband's pastorate
was in Orangeburg, which is also highly conservative. There's a lot of
plantation mentality there too. But Mrs. Davis worked at—-I mean, she was
regular in attendance at the board meetings, and I‘m sure that she would
work to get signatures for this that you said. . . .

JH: The Anti-Lynching Association?

Wright: Yes, I know she was active in that, but . . . the petitions
and all that you said that Mrs. Ames had circulate. I'm sure she would have
been effective in that. And I‘m sure she went with Mrs. Ames &. this Glelia

McGowan from Charleston; I think she went with Mrs. McGowan some to organize

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 50

a few local chapters in South Carolina, so that she would be active. But
she served as the state chairman of what the Baptists call the community
missions; and it was just that. Well, I'm overstating this, because my
emotional reaction is an overstated one. The things that they did were non-
eontroversial. Anybody that5;?asomebody in an old people's home knows that
an occasional visit or taking a little stationery or going in to write a
letter for them, that all of this is something that is good to do. But I
never saw her (I saw none of her work with anti-lynching, )
do anything that looked more deeply at 'what kind.of society can we structure
that will keep people, so many people, from coming to the type of old age
where they don't have enough to even think,ll you see. Dr I never heard her
raise any questions or go more deeply into anything else about anything.
And she was always so afraid that she'd lose that job, the statewide job
which for sure had a lot of prestige, of a kind, in the denomination, and
it gave her entree in a lot of places and she knew a lot of people.

JH: So that was a job with a salary? I mean, she was hired by them?

Wright: No, no, no. But, you know, there are a lot of people that
just enjoy playing in power and telling other people what to do, you see.
She would talk down at these district meetings of the Baptist Women's society.
She would go and tell all the little children what to do-very patronizing
and all that. And I guess she got considerable feed—baek. But she was not
a warm or particularly attractive person to me at all. And I just thought
that she should have had enough sense--now who am I to say how much sense
somebody should have had. . . . But I never knew whether she didn't have
the mentality to raise any questions of why do all these social problems

arise, out of what do they arise or anything of that kind, or should we do

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 51
anything curative. It was always the remedial and repariative, and I just
lost patience with her. But she was always just kind of like Dr. W11 Lou
Gray, of whom I am fond, but who really sickens me too in that the whole
thing is, you knew, you've been such a martyr and such a sob-sister to
these pitiful people and so on, but would never ruff anybody's feathers
for anything under the sun. I think Iyziarted telling you
that I'd always suggest and say, 'Well now, you folk are making such fine
contributions here. And I'll listen and I hate to miss anything, but I will
skip long enough to go and phone.‘I I said, “Why don't we have some sandwiches
and coffee because the discussion is so involved and I would like to see us
carry it forward, and I'm sure we could spend the afternoon fruitfully here,
and so en.I My dear, it always, always broke up the meeting. They would
not eat. . . .

JH: They wouldn't eat together. How long did that go on, that the
Interracial Commission would not eat together?

Wright: My dear, it went to '5h. Let's see, I began working there
in October, I would say, and we organized the Council on Human Relations in
December. We did not have an annual meeting, I guess, until . . . it couldn't
have been the next spring, it must have been the next fa11-perhaps earlier
than December. But, by that time-I want to give a little fill-in, or come
back and fill in—-the group had never eaten together anywhere. Now I knew
of a number of people on the board, one social worker in particular (a black
woman, a very fine woman by the name of Mrs. Hattie Duckett) who had told
me when I had questioned her that she had to get up around five o'clock to
get (maybe five thirty or something like that) a bus from Greenville to

Columbia; she had no transportation other than using the bus. And, you see,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 52
if you break for lunch and people have to go and get public facilities, at
that time none of the less expensive or quicker places for getting food
(other than some drive—in or something like that that would not be near any
of the black colleges where we had our meetings)-—now this is after '5h and
the SOGHR, to answer your question about the eating, when did we start
eating. . . . So I thought it would take so long, and I knew a lot of people
there without transportation and they'd have to get taxis to take them to the
bus even, so I just didn't say anything to anybody. I just arranged with
Benedict College to serve lunch. Our chairman was the second chairman that
we had had after the SGOHR-and that is a problem I'll fill you in on or
Modjeska Simkins fills in on (she comes in there). So I don't know how
(maybe he saw the letter in which I said something about it), but he himself
had lost a job for preaching a sermon on race relations--—and they‘d put him
up with the students up at Clemson, where he could do no harm to the adult
population-and he said, IAlice, who told you to arrange this?I I said,
"Common sense. I know people have to eat." And then I told him the song
and dance about how long people were separated from food and how much time
we would waste, and how much we wanted to cover and all that. So he said,
"Well, I can see W.D. working in his plus fours with a Kodak, and just taking
pictures of it all, and it all will be spread across the papers tomorrow,' and
all about how it was awful that white people could eat with blacks and all.
And he said, uYou'll absolutely exert no influence in the state whatsoever.“
Well I said, "New Olaude--he edited at that time the Methodist Advocate-—
you can have your press break down, you can have your children develop
measles or have an emergency call or anything, and you do not have to stay.

But,“ I said, "I am not going to change this, knowing the situation of the

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 55
people, so many that come. Just let the ones who want to eat. I'm sure
Benedict will have no trouble of using any food that's left over for dinner
that night'-~you know, with the students and all. So I guess he saw I was
determined and he didn't say another word. And in the middle of the meal--
I never gave it another thought-—I looked and here he was surrounded by all
these black preachers, and they were just eating and having a gorgeous time.
But he was the most fearful thing, and there were other things in which he
showed this fear. Well, they say the burned child dreads fire, don't you
see.

JH: Well, what about Olelia McGowan?

Wright: I didn't see her at all. She was kind of an hour-glass
figure that looked as though she belonged to the gay ninties more than anyb
thing else. But she must have had a mind of her own; she must have had time,
because I think she was the moving force in getting these local chapters
organized. And I believe that Bishop Finlay, Kirkman G. Finlay, was the
first president or chairman of that state group. I, of course, was not in
the country at that time, or among the legion either.

JH: Well, I noticed that she was something like chairman emeritus,
or something of that kind.

Wright: Oh yes.

JH: She was still. . . .

Wright: Well, when I came on in the early to mid thirties (somewhere
in there) she still was coming to meetings. But I got no . . . very much
impression of her one way or the other, except that she was a woman of
write, and that she was committed to doing that and she was doing it. She

had done what she could.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 5h
JH: Do you know what her husband did?
Wright: I think he was an attorney there. I think the MeGowans

in Charleston and the MoGowane in Columbia are persons of some social and
professional prominence. And a friend of mine, Mrs. Albert Simone, who
was a Stoneym-and I think at least one Stoney (maybe her father or something)
had been a prominent mayor of Charlestonubut Mrs. Simone, Mrs. Albert
Simone who was Harriet Stoney, told me that her mother was very active
with Mrs. McGowan in organizing and maintaining and operating the Charleston
chapter. But you see, all of" that at best you can't help but feel that many,
many persons who've been the beneficiaries of the contributions that blacks
have made and in situations (whether they were intended to be exploited or
not is another question) in which at least the Negroes were exploited, as
you know, have some sense of guilt and "What can I do ‘ to compensate for
all of“ this:' So I've never known but I‘ve wondered a great deal about many
of the people in that early group. They really took it very, very seriously,
and they seemed to have a very good rapport with the blacks. And the blacks
were quite open and frank to tell them the situations that existed, the
circumstances and conditions that needed changing. And they were very quick
to do this to change it. But it was always just shifting gears, or going
on a person-to-person basis,as someone would say now 'Don't do that.“ But
there was nothing and no sense of movement or social organization. There
was nothing of this kind. And it did not relate to anything rather than
just black and white.

Now when George Mitchell came in (of course this was in the South Garo-
1ina Division of the Southern Regional Council; I've forgotten, but I don't

think Guy Johnson stayed on too 1ong-maybo a couple of years, it might

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 55
have been more), having his PhD in economics from Johns Hopkins, he
immediately was putting everything in the same . . . that I guess some
of those early studies at Chapel Hill: you know, Odum and Cash and who
was the man in “Human Factors in Cotton Culture' and 'Kuman Geography of
the South"?

JH: Rupert Vance.

Wright: Rupert Vance and all that. Well, George immediately began
doing that. Well, of course in the state of South Carolina people who had
not known or been affected by George Mitchell's father knew that Blease more
or less ran out of the state, you see. It was well known that he did not
stay long, and he was thought of as kind of a radical or some sort of a
college president. So now, this same Mr. Dedham was a man who was president
of the Bar Association, and he had always done things for and with blacks,
enmery sincere: a very sweet, loveable, attractive person. I could tell
you many worthwhile things he did, but he could not face up to any of the
economic ramifications at all, you see. His emotions completely blacked
them out. And I would say they even went further than that, that he probably
developed some antagonism . I remember a meeting we were
having at the U.S.O. And George was doing a wonderful thing in trying to
attend to the rural economy of the South, and tying this in both politically
and economically, you see, with the race issue. And Mr. Herbert left. And
I thought he was such a Virginia gentleman that it shocked me that he would
leave. And he was very lukewarm. And then of course when the NAACP began
making demands, which was not at all like the subservient, appreciative,
ingratiating sort of blacks with whom he could deal effectively. . . .

JH: Well, what kind of role had, for example, a black woman“

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 56

like Marion Wilkinson played in the

Wright: Hell, I wish I knew more. All I know is that she also like
Mrs. McGowan was an hourglass figure of the gay ninties, always with large
hats and with her white gloves on, end she sat there with great presence.
Now my father's yeungest-sieter married an attorney who was the chairman
of the board of State College. And my aunt told me that Mrs. Wilkinson was
the only black she hsd ever known that she had never heard anyone call by
her first name. So in this plantation economy in Orangeburg she said she
wls always Mrs. Wilkinson. And she deserved to be that. She was every
inch a lady, and so she served her own people with the total community in
any way that she was permitted to do or saw that she could. And she said
no one ever questioned how level-headed and honest and dedicated and committed
to service Mrs. Wilkinson was. So, I mean
that will just about tell you all. And she, of course, was informed and
able to answer questions about the college and any leeks or indignities or

injustices or inequities that they might be feeling, or something she did
know about.

J

/.‘,. (5
JH: Now how did you know Jesse Daniel Ames?

Wright: Well, it was because we brought her there to speak, and took
her and went around. I don't know whether I took her or whether. . .

JH: Who was 'we', the Interracial Council?

Wright: . . . it was the Interracial Commission or whether it was
the Southern Regional Council. I mean, I don't know how early she retired,
whether it was the South Carolina Division.

JH: She retired when SRG was created.

Wright: 80 it must have been in the old days of the other group.

And we took her around. And, you see, she was talking things and she was

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 57
able to muster her facts and make a most effective presentation. I know
that a lot of people would not have liked her, and Miss Reid had even
questioned whether or not we should have her. Miss Reid had heard her,
and I think she was the ome who suggested that we have her. Now she used

Mrs. Sinkins

to do the same thing always, like Modjeska Simkins. She said, ll/ may be
embittered.“ A good many people that they could hear from someone who wasn‘t
so vitriolic, you know, the things that Mrs. Simkins had to say, but they
felt that she didn't reach people. Well, she reached them with a different
kind of message that she wasn't going to make it kind for them, don't you
see. I mean, she was introducing a new type, which had its value. But I
do remember how nervous some of the members of the board were when Miss Reid
and I nearly always worked up the programs. And I'd say they had good ones.
And we always put Modjeska on. So the old Miss Minahan, who really was a
pioneer and I love her still, she was a Roman Catholic from Charleston and
she worked hard in the Interracial. She was the treasurer for many years
and did a good job digging up the membership fees and all that sort of thing.
And she also was the director of the South Carolina Conference on Social
Work, and that brought in speakers and created ripples in South Carolina
that few organizations ever did. So I admired her. She was always so
nervous when Modjeska got up to speak. And she was the one that had me just
fit to be killed because I am like Miss Reid;
When I made my first tour, a number of us decided that before calling
the few members (we didn't have but seventy-eight members in the old SRO;
you know, it was a membership organisation when the state councils were set

up and we get the fund for the dependent clients) . that perhaps

the thought was that the Piedmont section would be less entrenched in the

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright.58
old plantation mentality, you see, and that it might be well to see
whether we could get any movement in accommodating to the Supreme Court
ruling in that area (Greenville, Spartanburg, Rock Hill). That looked
like the best. So I spent a good bit of time traveling and staying in
those areas, and trying to make a study into people who might be willing
to move with that kind of thing. So the minute I hit Greenville I went to
see a fellow, quite a young fellow who was there by the name of Wayne
Freeman, who was the editor of the Greenville News. And I might say that
our first chairman, he had already been nade the chairman before I was on
the or elected to be the director. He was a judge of the juvenile
court by the name of Richard (Dick) Foster. Well, he was associated with
a sort of a flamboyant or fire—eating sort of an attorney by the name of
John Bolt Oulberson. And John Bolt had been at Carolina with a good many
people who knew him, and they all thought that he was a confirmed and very
effective and sincere sort of a liberal. I never heard the term radical,
except in the manner or the methods that he used; but I never heard about
his philosophy, whether he was particularly radical. But he was supposed
to be ultra-liberal. So John Bolt was very much in disfavor and disreputed
in Greenville—nand we could talk about him, now, if there's any interest.
But anyway Dick was associated withyimlis firm.

As I say, when I was talking with Wayne Freeman he said, "Well now,
Alice, I don't know of one person from the point of view of thinking in
terms of the middle class nominative eulture—-whioh loomedxweryllagge, you
ses-that could influence anybody else to move.‘ And this was the type of
people that the Council had always had in it: your lawyers and your preachers

and your educators, and maybe an occasional social worker. So he said, 'I

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 59

don't think anybody will move as long as Dick Foster is the chairman."
He said, “I think they're very fond of Dick and think he‘s a fine fellow,
but this other one's just an anathema.” He said, 'Nobody's going to be
willing to move.ll Well, everywhere I went up there people would bring it
up. They'd ask you if he was the chairman, and I would say he was.
Then they began asking about the NAACP,
and thought it was so Gommunistie and very, very dangerous. And this Mr.
Herbert I was telling you about and D.W. Robinson in Columbia, who had been
called by Floyd Hunter as the top of the power structure in Richmond County
and at the state level, why he had been one of the chairmen of this old
Interracial Relations. And he and Mr. Herbert, that was the thing: nobody
could say anything to keep them from feeling that they wouldn't touch this
with a ten foot pole because all of these Communists from the NAACP were in
there. Of course the state legislature passed. . . .
BEGIN SIDE II TAPE III

Wright: . . . were members of this, but that's another whole story.

JR: I talked to Septima Clark about that; I got that story.

Wright: Oh yes, I'll bet she filled you in pretty much on that time.
But anyway, and then this Gharles Davis, he worked with American Friends
Service Committee on the principals in the Elorse schools. And I went down
to some of those hearings, and all of that was just fascinating. But
anyway, coming back to this, that was where
And I know Mr. Herbert and Mr. Robinson quite well enough that I would just
talk back in kind of a perrogative way. And I said, I'You know, there are a
great many people who think that the Communist idea of service to people is

much more Christian than this idea of the resources of this country being

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 60

rolled up for the benefits of it to go into the hands of a few people."
And I said, 'Blacke who haven't had much would be much more aware of these
economic inequities than the otherw.‘l 'Oh no, that's not It, Alice: they're
just teaching bloodshed and violence and this, that and the other." So you
juet couldn't handle them. But they always dragged in Mr. J. N. Hinton,
who was retired, and Modjeeka Simkins.

So anyway, when I got back they wanted to know what I thought of it.
I had turned over every leaf to look under it, and I said, INow if you can't
have people who are committed and who are going to work at this, I think it's
up to the executive committee for you to decide whether it's worth trying to
have an organization.” And certainly as a hired hand of the Council I had
made that decision. I don't know what we could do without those people; I
thought that they were two of the most effective people in South Carolina.
Well, it was the unanimous vote of the group: they felt that both of them
if they were told that people were saying that no whites would come in. . . .
Well, they were all very anxious; especially Mr. Hinton (he was more articulate
about thie than Modjeeka--ond I have never really known how Modjeeka felt
about it, and would be interested to know) said that ”We need white people
in this struggle, and that plenty of white people would come along.ll He
said, 'I will give just as much assistance from the sidelines as I ever did,
and maybe it'll give me more time to give more.‘ But he said, "I think it
would be highly important. . . .'

JH: Now wait. The Council voted unanimously what: to ask James
Hinton and Modjeska to resign?

Wright: No, no. To tell them, to give them the findings, the things

that I had found. And I had not had anybody who could say that they would

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

wright 61
try to organize the Council. See, Greenville had never had one under the
old Commission; Spartanburg had had one, but it had died¢ and Rock Hill
had a mayor's committee at that time. So they simply told them that I hadn't
been able to find anybody who would. And of course I couldn't sit up there
and organize.

JH: You were trying to organize local interracial councils?

Wright: Local interracial councils that could give some backing to
the blacks. Already in a great many places they had already petitioned
the school boards, and they had suffered all kinds of economic reprisale.

JH: And you were trying to find what allies and what people in those
communities would support the blacks?

Wright: Yes, yes. And also I was trying to find out if there was more
chance of movement in that section.

JH: And when you could not. . . .

Wright: I could not find one, not one person. And the people who had,
their pulse on the feeling of people and all too, all of them said, 'Yeu'll
never do it with Dick Foeter.‘ Dick Foster was told that too. So I did not
know whether it'd be better not to try to have anything. But Mr. Hinton said
that that was the thing they needed most, because nobody knew. And he was
there before these others.

So of course while Mrs. Sinking is very outspoken she's also a very
sophisticated person, and knows how to play with her hands close to her chest.
So I never knew what she felt, but there was no doubt with Mr. Hinton. And
he was the president and she worked with him as the secretary. I imagine
she did as much work or more than he did, I don't know, but both of them

were very effective workers. And there was also the editor of the black

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 62
newspaper there, John MoOrae, who's a very hard and effective worker.

JH: So was the question whether or not to disband this planned
addition of SEC and whether on not to ask Dick to resign, or what?

Wright: No, they were not asked to resign. They were simply told
that after about three months' intensive work that this was the excuse (if
not the reason) that everybody gave, and that no whites would come out and
help. And they said that if there were not people who. . . 0 You see,
already I think Timmerman (I believe by that time) had publically talked
about Mrs. Simkins as a Communist and so on. But as she said, he didn't
keep it up 'eauee he was sitting right on the hot seat. So the decision was
how they would respond to it. And Mr. Hinton says, 'There's nothing that we
can contribute to sitting on this board that we can't contribute to other-
wise."

JH: So did they leave the board?

Wright: Yes, they just left the board. But I always had a little bit
of feeling that Mrs. Simkins. . . . I think I‘ve seen her character in the
fire too many times too many places, but that's the only thing that I ever
felt. . . . I guess I just didn't want her to get out, you see. But then
my whole thought on this is that people that won't work with other people who're
dedicated to the same goals for fear that a little dirt'll get on them, are
they going to do you any good anyhow? And as I told you, I always liked
the very forthright early Southern Conference on Human Welfare and

. I always liked the materials from
there, and I learned a whole lot there that I never did with the Southern
concerned.
Regional. for both of us, as fhr as that‘s /
But either Jhm would invite me,or Modjeska would call me or Hope that he was

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 65

going to be in town. Well, the only person I was ever able to get to
come to those meetings was Reid. She‘d always come, and she liked the
program and Jim and Modjeska and all just like I did. But after a while
I began to say that if we can't move anybody else, and we couldn't find
anybody in South Carolina, you know} to move with us, and certainly not
in the and not structured with this idea of people
who are 'window dressing'I that impress other people that will come following
after them because they're supposed to be the bigwigs of the community
(your preachers and your lawyers and what have you), this of course is not
in any way building the kind of equalitarian sooial—-much less eoenomie-—
outcome that we needed anyway. And this is one of the things that has always
grieved me so with the Southern Regional Council, is having those annual
meetings, spending all that money in that Biltmore and then the Biltmore-
Sheraton and all that. And the people who came, well any number of them
that I've expressed myself to, I'd say to them, "I'd just so much rather
take this money and take me back to South Carolina and see if I couldn't get
myself some more welfare organizations or tenant organizations or something
like that going, don't you see, or coops or credit unions and stuff. But
you'd be surprised at the people
who felt the same way, like Ben Reeves from Richmond,

Virginia.“ I mean, he was a very personable person and his wife seemed
to be nice and all. But I mean, I had no idea

But he told me, he said, “I just hate using all

the money for the expense of this trip.‘ And he always brought his wife,
which he didn't have to do, you knew, and that was another expense. He

expressed that to me several different times.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 64

JH: You were involved, then, in the old Interracial Commission and
then on into Southern Regional Council.

Wright: I was on the board of the old Interracial Commission as well
as the South Carolina. . . .

JH: It seems to me like there would really be little difference
between the old Interracial Oammission and the South Carolina Division of
the Southern Regional Council.

Wright: Well, in the Southern Regional Council and the old South
Carolina Interracial Commission there wasn't too much because, you see, they
kept the same people. And these people‘s interests and their relationship
had always been that of a more or less. And there
were not in the staff or in the personne1--you know, it's been a membership
organization at one time.and then just I guess it's still a members' group;
but other times it's been called the board and the executive directors and
so forth. So anyway, whatever the lay involvement was, the membership was,
there had not been people who in the main had had social science orientation
and insights. And this whole science of change, I think that not too much
has been known about that. But generally I think people are groping to
find out more and get access now. And personally if I were near some univer-
sity where research was going on at any level

, because this interests me tremendously. And
I told you that in Newberry I tried to see what you could do. If there were
time I could tell you one or two little stories of things that proved to be
very effective in getting people to move where they’d never moved before.
Their emotions were just creeping and immobile, you know.

JH: How would you compare Jesse Daniel Owens to the other regional

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 65

staff people that you knew?

Wright: Well, she was about the only one I saw that seemed to be
wide awake. But now what she knewl Well, of course she built that move-
ment of the denominational women across the entire South. But now what she
would do in a given community because she was so far ahead! And this is
always a problem, you see. And also if you are tremendously aware of the
need for change and the immediacy, I mean it's very hard not to be extremely
impatient and to accept substitutes, you see. New I was just too busy and
hit down those thirteen years I was working with the Council to worry too
much about this. And yet there were times that I would not take a move until
I had just worked and worked and worked and worked in my own mind. And Miss
Elizabeth Ledeen who worked with the student group, we‘d hash things over to
see EEEES any little thing we could bring to bear would be most telling in
building new value systems and building new ways of operating, you see, and
of involving people who hadn't been involved and helping them to build a
strong arm to get into the mainstream and all this kind of thing. And we'd
be very careful to try to weigh that as much as we could every step of the
way.

JH: What was Mrs. Ames's style and presence like: her speaking style?

Wright: Well she was very dynamic, extremely dynamic. I would say
she was kind of a fervent person, but that she did not have (you see she was
from Texas) at all any warmth in the sense of southern femininity; she did
not have that. But she had almost a compelling drive that took people along
with her. I think she really could stir them up and get them to move. She
must havel But of course I just saw her making presentations. And there

were places in which I hoped that she would be a little bit more specific

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 66
and articulate than she was.

JH: Like in what?

Wright: I mean, because I didn't think she was doing this for the
same reason, but I have heard preachers that I thought knew better and
all they do is just beat around the bush. And as I told my minister
at home, I said, "You know, nearly every Sunday I slide up closer to the
edge of the bench and all hoping that you are really going to say something
that somebody will understand, something that I know that m understand.
But,“ I said, 'I invariably have to sit back in my seat because you never
say it."

J’H: And Mrs. Amos was somewhat that way?

Wright: No, no, but she did not make things as explicit as I wished
she would. Now whether she felt that it would alienate, in other words
that we were about to bring
She probably knew that there weren't many people who were there who would
interpret what she was saying in a way that it would be a truth to them too.

JH: How would you compare her to someone like Mrs. Tilly?

Wright: 011 my, my, Mrs. Tilly turned me off.

JH: Really?

Wright: Oh yes. She just made me sick.

JH: How?

Wright: Well, Mrs. Tilly, I thought, was kind of mushy and sentimental.
She was , I thought, very . And Mrs. Amos, well you
would just want to listen to her by virtue of her animation and dynamism.

I didn't think Mrs. Tilly had a bit. And then I thought there was something

almost snooty and self—righteous and holier-than-thou. Now I'm not trying to

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 67
be terrifioally judgmental; I mean, I didn't know Mrs. Tilly that well.
I was thrown with her quite a number of times. But I thought too that
Mrs. Tilly did not. . . . You know, a lot of people think they involve
people when they are merely in a paternalistic way doing things for them,
while the other people are sitting there like little receptive robots or
something. But I thought that Mrs. Tilly had some of the techniques of
program giving down pretty well: she could make a very good little bro-
chure and that sort of thing. But I didn't feel that except with a lot
of sentimentality that she really touched them. She touched me, but I
don't know what she did to other people. I know that Miss Reid took up
with her on it too.

JH: How did you become executive director of the South Carolina
Council on Human Relations?

Wright: Well, Mr. Dabbs and Howard McClain and I‘ve forgotten who the
third one was, they sent me an application blank and asked me to fill it
out. And that's in the things there.

JH: This is while you were working for the FEderation of Women's
Clubs.

Wright: Yes. And I couldn't even go to one or two of the meetings
because of some committments I had previously made with the Federation-—

I mean, some professional appointments I had to keep. But anyway Mr. Dabbs
and Howard McClain came to see me. Well, the interesting part about it was
that Howard McGlain's father-in—law who was up here in North Carolina had
applied for the job, and Howard wanted htm to be. But I understood that

it was a 100 percent agreement to ask me first. So Howard said, 'Alioel'

He was the funniest thing. Mr. Dabbs felt that I was the one, you know,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

wright 68
but Howard says, nWell, Alice, I think so too. But,I he said, (and I
didn't know at that time about his father-in-law) "I'll tell you this:
if you take this job, you know it's only set up for three years.I And
the funds were funded by . And he said, 'This is
such a controversial issue and emotions are running so high. I know

what Mr. Spearman's health situation is and that you have responsibilities

But,ll he said, 'I'll tell you this: you'll never get another job in
South Carolina as long as you live. I can promise you that.II Well, he

is very conservative and easy to frighten in a situation like

So I just told him, I said, "Howard, if the state is right there I' 11 be
glad to move. I'll tell you the truth, I have a lot of troubles there
at the moment.“ So I just didn't pay any attention, don't you see. So
that was the way.

JH: Now what had happened in '5#? The Fund for the Republic had
given the Southern Regional Council a large grant, and they had made a
committment to try to set up these state councils.

Wright: Yes. George Mitchell had done that.

JH: Which would be the membership phase of the Council, and they were
to be funded for three years by the Society for the Republic and that hope-
fully it would become self—sufficient.

Wright: Oh, the way George had it by that time we would have sold
the buildings and they would have, you see, these governmental commissions,
state commissions. That was supposed to be part of our

We were going to take for three years. Well, you see, I told you that in

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 69
the Federation--I think we talked a little along these lines yesterday-—
we had really become the hub and sort of the coordinating group for most
of the women's organizations and some men's groups. 80 I had had a lot of
experience and people would come when we'd call these meetings. And of
course you involve them so that they saw when it touched there, when you
called them on the phone, whether it touched their interests or not. I
mean, you just didn't say |‘Gome to the meeting.I So I had I think about
forty members that not out in Orangeburg who had Worked with the American
Friends' Service Committee in desegregating the schools in Washington, D.C.
And she was later written up as one of the ten most influential women in
the United States. Well, she really was good, but all she had done was
what she knew about democratic involvement; and she had rolled up represen-
tatives from all these organizations to give support for their little
union. I mean, I knew how to do these things so I arranged
Well, about that time the Committee of One Hundred was founded, which was
the beginning of the resistance movement, you see, and it was the most

people. And also I've forgotten who was head

of them (I guess it was Senator George Bell Timmerman), but some of our best
people had been professionals in the State Department and so on, so all of
them were immediately put in deep freeze, you see-I mean, they just
couldn't come out. And Dott Rosman,that was president of the

and fearless and from New Jersey and nearly always had right
attitudes and on the right side of things,ca11ed me and said thatﬁtth
pressures—-we had a professor fired--that we had in South Carolina that

we might travel some. And we were having ministers, like the Baptist

minister Nathan Gaitsburg who was the pastor of Gold Town and his father

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 70
who was a federal judge, he had been fired. I mean, all of this was just
coming so fast that after that one meeting they were just all ready to go
in the old spirit that always attacked any problem in the state, you know.
And it all just fell apart.

JH: This is the Federation of Women's Clubs?

Wright: No, honey; I told you that the Federation of Women's Clubs
was a hub for these other organizations like United Church Women, the
Federation of Business and Professional Women, the League of Women voters,
the YWCA.

JH: But what fell apart?

Wright: The group that we had gotten together that could have moved
anything under Irene Osbourne, who told how she had done things in Washing-
ton. And I was going to count on this group, you see, to be a nucleus to
get things moving. And I told you, it was about that same time as a member
of the Public Affairs Committee of the IV we had gotten that group to move
ahead to call in people too. So it wouldn't be just I who was the executive
director getting these people together.

JH: So it was to be a coalition of women's groups that would try for
this?

Wright: Yes. And we were going to expand it. This was a nucleus,
but we were going to try getting the men's service clubs and all this kind
of thing.

JH: Who would push for compliance to the Supreme Court decision.

Wright: Yes, yes. And give support to any school people who would

move ahead, don't you see.

JH: And it just fell apart?

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 71

 

Wright: It just completely fell apart. And I had built up in these
few short months from about eeventy-eight people to maybe, I don't know,
around five hundred or something like that. But low and behold, when
this resistance membership fell to a hundred. . . .

JH: And this is five hundred members of the South Carolina Council?

Wright: South Carolina Division.

JH: South Carolina Division.

Wright: I think that almost as soon as the fUnds became available to
the states that the executive committee of Southern Regional Council
decided that it would not continue as a membership organization. I know
they sent me seventy-eight cards. I might say that back
around (oh I don't know) as far as Truman's Civil Rights Commission Report-—
that of course backfired a lot and caused a lot of emotion and more heat
than light in South Carolina.. they asked me if I would visit all
these communities and try to strengthen (I was on the board and at one time
was the membership secretary of the South Carolina Division of Southern
Regional Council) and build up the membership and get some support in
these areas where the Klan was rising, and just try to get a little more
stability and more positive orientation as far as the press and that kind
of thing were concerned. I wasn't offered any salary, but my expenses would
be paid. Well, I covered the state in a big hurry and in a short time. But
by that time my son, who had rheumatic fever, he started just going on. He
said, 'You know, other boys' mothers don't go off and stay off for a time,
you know." And I could see it was doing things to him with that rheumatic
fever and all; so I didn't do it for very long, but it was an interesting

interlude. And I might say that at that time after Reverend Clyde Helms

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 72

was chairman of the old Interracial Gommiseion—-and I mentioned also
we became a division of

Governor Herbert-then I think that when/the Southern Regional Council,
I don't know how soon but I think almost immediately, Marian was to have
been the chairman. And I‘d never seen her before. But they brought up
the matter of the suit. There were two suits that were very much under
discussion in the board meetings during this period, and one of them was
the application of John Hrighten of Charleston to the law school, the
University of South Carolina law school. And of course the other one was
probably, although I'm not sure, the idea of cracking the all-white Demo-
cratic primaries. So anyway here was Mr. Wrighten, the chairman; he had had
nothing to do with the old Interracial Commission and Mt. Dabbe had had
nothing to do with the old Interracial Commission. But they were discussing
and opposed some response to the idea of John Wrighten's application to the
University law school. And someone had moved that a separate law school be
set up at State College. Well, that was bashed and discussed and all, and
seconded. Well I sat there thinking, "Well how stupid can you be?|| And I
stood it; but I wanted to hear the stupidity. So I sat there and listened
to it. And when it fell through I got up and I said, "I wonder how many of
you think that State College can develop by pressing a button by this fall,
or even next fall, a law school that would be comparable to the one at the
University of South Oarsline——-and that's damning the one at the University
of South Carolina with faint praise. And I wonder how many of you think
that this would be fair to the blacks who are investing their time and their
money to go to that school, and how many of you think that they will be
satisfied with that very long? I'd like to know how many of you think the

state of South Carolina, which has such inferior education from the cradle

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 73

to the grave and very weak professional schools and higher education,
if we can't afford to have one system that has any standards then how
can an intelligent group like you sit here and think that the answer is
to dilute what we have and add to it?“ I said, “Personally I couldn't
possibly go along with this at all.' And then there was some talk too,
you know, about this matter of sending them out of the state, or some of
them; and I think we had some remarks like that said;

JH: Now of course they did set up a law school at State.

Wright: Oh yes.

JH: And it's just a joke.

woman
Wright: So then a perfectly beautiful tea-oolored black / from Georgia
(supervisor of all the)

who was the assistant state home demonstration agent in charge of all/the
state home demonstration agents in South Carolina looked at me and she
said, “Mrs. Spearmanl' She said, ”Don't you know that will never be, that
they will be allowed to some to the University of South Caroline.I I said,
"I don't think you ought to be pushing for having another University of
South (Jarolinsu'I So she said, “Oh, it's just
She said, “Mrs. Spearman, do you think I could ever?ll And so I looked at
her in the face, and I knew this would hit her. I said, 'Thie may not seem to be
pertinent, but I would like to ask if you think that there is a God.” I
said, l'J’ust as sure as there is any truth, any justice, any love in this
world in which we live they will be admitted. And unless somebody starts
the process it'll be delayed further." Well, Miss Reid later told me this:
when she told him he said, 'Well, that woman
before‘." [Iaughteg Well anyway, so anything he writes he always puts that

in there. And he says, I'I had no legal training. Here this woman had no

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 75
legal training.I He says, "But my God, what a eonstablel' Zﬁhughte£7
But anyway I do remember that. Here they were enlightened, intelligent,
and no one had thought of coming out and getting behind John to help the
boy get into that, don't you see. But they did go out and do something.

JH: When you took this position . . .

Wright: Well now, which one are you talking about: that temporary
one or the full-time one?

JH:°/ihé full-time one with the new State Council, and this just
overwhelming resistance began what did you do? What did you try to do
through the Council during those early years?

Wright: Well, I might say that we continued to try to offer the type
educational programs that gave people insights and knowledge about what
was going on. You see, a lot of people aren't in a position to know, and
your papers or nothing lets you know what the undereurrents are and what's
causing this, that and the other. Of course, not too long after that, as
I told you, the White Citizens Council was organized. I might say that
one of the mayors (the Council was trying to get the support and cooperation
of the mayors; this was one of their methods of organization) sent me all
this material that had been sent to him, and said he knew I would like
to start getting to work on it. So I immediately ordered kits out of
Mississippi of all the material that they were sending to the mayors. And
I kept those kits and just circulated them all over the state to people
who 'weren't going to come out and weren't going to do anything,“ but I
thought they should be alerted to this low-grade oarrying-on, you see.

Well, in addition to that and the one who told me, I had contacts with

some of the mayors. And I would either write or visit them, and get them

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 76
to promise me they'd never permit them to be organized in their commu-
nity, don‘t you see. Then we began also smelling around that they were
trying to get these ten thousand signatures to make it possible to alter
the Republican ticket. So we kept up with that through all these little
maps and all that. When you realize this, that first there was nobody
but me. . . . I had the secretary in Spartanburg-and there's an interes-
ting human story about that that I won't get into. But I think by this
time probably I couldn't even get a secretary until I finally found the
wife of some kind of a sargent on the post that came in. Then somewhat
later than that came in. So what we began doing
then was: it had become obvious that the men at the NAACP (Mr. Hinton
and Mrs. Simkins and this John McCray of the Lighthouse Informer), that
they were really, even the Negro preachers and all just
The ones who had sent in their applications-I know in Orangeburg, for
example with McCormick: well, his wife was an eminently
excellent teacher but they lost their jobs, as I told you about, in the
reprisals. Well, we were documenting these reprisals. 0r Modjeska would
call me sometimes and say the people in Summerville were getting so low
and soared and the Reverend Delaney wants us to come down there and get
her popped up. And we'd go down there and speak and try to get their
morale boosted again, you see. So really what I turned into more than
anything else was pretty much full-time service to the blacks. And I'd
go around and meet in the basements, as I told you, and tell them that
they had friends. Then the first small grant I got (I guess I got my
first one from the Sohwauptz Foundation) I had to see these four work-

shops without it. Well, we~worked mostly with grants, not entirely though.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 77

The first one we introduced them to fields such as education, community
organization and maybe health (primarily just public welfare or something).
And they had no access, you see; they were removed from everything. They
didn't know how any of these things worked or anything. Well, we tried to
bring resources and people and things to them of interest along these
lines, so that they could start participating. And of course in community
organization we tried to discover ways that they could find allies or
baek-up for some of them living there with no white people that, regardless
of whether it was benevolent paternalism or what, would respond, you know,
on a person to person basis. So we began trying to find people that way.
Well, I would say that I don't know what my exposure to Martin Luther King
and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference was, but anyway in the
summer of 1959 the Negro community was still so frightened and they were
so jealous of each other. I mean, it was just the kind of thing I had seen
in the Federation of Women's Clubs, this emotional immaturity. And people
were not devoted to a cause; they were devoted to how great I am and the
role that I have to play. I mean, it was thoroughly understandable. I
don't know what you think, but it seems to me the type of culture that
we've had has perpetuated an eternal adolescence or something of so many,
many people.

So actually, some of them did start to fall in behind and begin to
get some feeling of cohesion in what they could do.

JH: In the summer of ‘59 you became involved in organizing wasn't
it a workshop for SOLO? What was that?

Wright: It wasn't a workshop; it was a regional meeting for, oh,

I think it was about five days as I recall. But Martin Luther King spoke

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 78
at the Township Auditorium. You see, all of that. . . . They weren‘t
accustomed to seeing Negroes‘ whole meetings stem

JH: Now was this a regional meeting?

Wright: It was a regional one.

JH: And how did you get involved? What was your role in that
meeting?

Wright: Well, we did every bit of the promotion in the state and
the organizing in the state. We used all of our facilities: the one
secretary I had, all of our stationery and postage stamps, everything.

JH: To get to tell people about this meeting and get people to come
to it?

Wright: And, my dear, I made an exhaustive study; in other words,
from then on I was a complete walking encyclopedia of 221 organization,
grass roots and all. And I got their membership rolls; I knew places
where they were. And I found that the rural areas, all they had was a
church(and usually an absentee pastor that might come in to preach once
a month) and burial societies. So that Mr. Meeny that I was telling you
about, being an undertaker he knew all about the burial societies. Also
the Prince Hall Masons. Now it seems to me that they had two brands of
Masons, but the Masons had that. Well, always I was told, 'You'll never
get the Masons in on this." We got burial societies, Masons, everything
and everybody.

JH: You got them to send delegates to this conference?

Wright: They came; that auditorium was packed.

JH: Where was this again?

Wright: It was in the Township Auditorium in Columbia. And we also

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 79
had a huge banquet at which Martin Luther King spoke. And you would have
never known it, but people would send me or bring me letters that different
organizations would ‘ and all of that,

you see. And we found out who they were;

JH: What kind of organizations? Black organizations?

Wright: No. The NAACP was the worst about trying to undercut the
SOLO, don't you see. And I think most of them stewed from some NAACP
convention, because the NAACP was really the only organization spearheading
...-except for whitee-activities in South Carolina. Now Mr. Levy and Mrs.
Matthew McGollOm were the only two blacks in South Carolina who were on
the SOLO board. And on the lettersuand I wrote the letters because they
didn't have the time or the secretarial staff or anything of that kind—
they would sign them and we would tell them all the names and everything
else. But it showed Negroes what mnnerical strength they had, how many
organizations they had, and they covered the state.

JH: Now how did Ella Baker relate to this?

Wright: Well, she was the executive director. And please remind me——
I'm not going to take this time to tell you-n-but I had more funny experiences
with E119. Baker and all.

JH: Well, who got you to do this work for the SOLO?

Wright: Well, I guess it was Ella more than anybody else. I mean,
we felt very much on the same wave length. I was just wild about her.

And when the sit—ins started Ella kept coming on over there. One of my
members had her picture taken by some photographers, you know, in trying

to pretend. . . . I guess she was talking to some black students from the

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 80

outside. And we had several white students that had come and eat in.
Of course the Negro student leaders were never . . . well, I would say
as all-encompassing or as. . . .
BEGIN SIDE I TAPE IV

Wright: . . . just be down there by chance, and some photographers
were always taking pictures if you ever marched in anything, you know, any
demonstration-—which Libby never did; I never knew it if he did. But any-
way she just was paralyzed with fear over this, and she told Ema

So Erma told me afterwards, she said, 'I consider that

much more than a report; that was a revelation?“ laughter] which it was.

But now the first demonstration that we had was organized by GORE.
And a man who was working with CORE by that time by the name of Reverend
(I've forgotten what his first name was) Hall, who was a Baptist minister
in Greenville, he and CORE organized what was by this time—F‘ritz Hollinge
was in as governor-—a march to the airport. And they wrote and asked me
to meet Will Sanford and what the name of the black church was and help
get the crowd motivated and . . . calmed down too, you knowu-I mean, give
them assurance and all that they weren't going to be thrown in jail, or
if they were that they could live through it. So the letter came just as
my chairman was in there. And he said, “Alice, you know yourself that
it's been hard enough for us to get these white people. And you know that's
what the blacks want, is to work on the white people.' And he said, 'For
heaven's sakes, don't go there because the Greenville papers always cover
all those meetings and put them in the paper.‘ Now our local papers in
Columbia had stopped covering NAACP meetings and there was never anything

in there about them, naturally.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 81

So he said, IThey‘ll understand. TheyVll know that you want to do
that; they know you're a very disturbing person. Don't you go there
and then get your name in the papers. The Council's having a hard enough
time now getting people active." So I didn't say anything; I just wrote
them and told them that they could expect me but not to call on me to
speak: that I would talk with people around and do all I could, but that
they knew how badly we were all trying to get whites. No, he took it to
the executive committee, and it wasihnanimous reaction that I shouldn't
speak. So I called up this crazy old chemical engineer out at General
Electric and I told him, I said, ''Now listen, I don't know whether you have
tender feet or what kind, but I haven't said a word-—I didn't say a word
to the executive committee about marching—-but I am going to be in that
parade beeause,‘ I said, 'if I or you or some of us don't go it's a big
lie. There's many a white person in this state who knows that Negroes ought
to have full rights to use the airporti and the facilities and the air-
planes as much as anybody else. But,‘I I said, 'I am marching. Now if
you've got the itch you can come and march with me, or you can just stay
home and do whatever you please.’l And he said, “Well, if you put it that
way, you know, I'll go." So he came. Well, on the Greenville News theme
was a twosome from near Wilton who was kind of chicken but his heart
was in the right place too. And we had a lot of people from the national
media, you know: all those nice ones, IEEE and Eifﬂ and all were represented
there. So I saw Gil and asked him to I

And he says, "My Godl
expect that there would be a white woman marching.ll And you know, just as

quick as he could do he said that he was just writing down my name and

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 82
address.

JH: Were you the only white woman to march?

Wright: Yes, and Tom was the only white man.

JH: This was in 1965, wasn't it?

Wright: I don't remember exactly, but it was about that, not too
long after the SOLO conference and all. So anyway, Gil as quick as a
flash told the senator. "Man," he says, "we‘ve been integrated here for
so long.' He said, “Don't worry about that; we've got all kinds of

about Negroes
ideas ,' Ziaughte£7 to entice me off/eo I wouldn't
get into anything. It was right funny.

Then I don't know how much longer it was too until I got one of these
day telegrams or something or other that appeared on my desk one Monday
morning from Reverend Newman saying thattgeywere going to march on the
capitol and they would appreciate it if I would come. I went and marched;
I don't think there were any white people there. But this same old Victor
Tuck or something like that (I've forgotten what his name was) that had
taken Libby's picture coming out for the sit—ine, I could not shake the
dust out of my shoes (the rocks had gotten in) for him snapping pictures.
I don't know what they do with those pictures, but you always. . . .

JH: Oh yes. There should be an archive someplace of all those
papers.

Wright: I expect so.

JH: The FBI used to have one.

Wright: Yes, yes.

JH: Well, tell me about some of the main projects that the.South

Carolina Council had up through the

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 85

Wright: Well, we had had program workshops that started from a very
early time. Well, let me say that during the sit-ins that year I was
thrown out of my office four different times.

JH: What do you mean?

Wright: Oh, just they wouldn't rent to me. They wrote and told me
to get out. Now, I mean, I could tell you any Christian thing surrounding
each of those, but that was what happened.

JH: You mean out of four different places in 1961?

Wright: Four different places.

JH: The eit-ins started before that.

"right: Well, I'll backtrack. The first office I saw was the first
one I was in, and I was in that for three years. And then at the end of
1959 I was thrown out of there, and I always thought it was that activity
with the SOLO that was the cause of that. Then I went to my home and had
to work from there-and I probably still have some things up in the attic.
Then I got one downtown in the Building. At that time, you see, we
had no phones coming in. The maximum I was able to raise, I guess, in a
year was around eight thousand dollars, out of which I had to go on the
road and everything. 80 a girl who had worked with me, a little black girl
who had some bookkeeping and had done some secretarial work volunteered to
come down and post the books and things like that. That meant she could
help me on the side In this old building
(it was one of the skyscrapers just about two blocks from the capitol) we
were in there working one day. And we didn‘t have the door locked, you

know, since we were going to be there. So the door opened and the most

irate young man you've ever laid your eyes on appeared; and he said, 'Is

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 84
this the NAACP?“ And I said, “Why no,but I think I can tell you where
their office is if you want to go.|| He says, 'Well, what do you want to
do?" And he just started carrying on. Well, this little old girl, she
was just black as she could be. And after that she said to me, 'Alice,
that's the only time I ever turned white in my life.' But she was literally
afraid to death, and the papers were just full of it. So I called her and
tried to see her and calm her down. But I really think that he was plotting;
he had an office in the building there, and I think that he probably
started it by going to the people who were the rental agents for it. But
anyway, there was a lot of interesting things around that. So then I had
to get out of that. So finally I was able to get an office in an old
residence, and I stayed there the rest of the time. But I had a terrible
time getting that; it was owned by a schoolteacher, and it was off the
beaten track, about two blocks off Main Street; So I got that. But this
thing of moving all your things and, you see, we didn't have money to do
anything. And a contractor, a legal contractor with broken down trucks
and broken down peeple would come and move our broken down files, and they
would spill it all and it just stuck out like everything} it was just
terrible. And at that time about all I was doing at all was treading
water.

But it was very, very interesting. Let's see, I was keeping the
books and sending out all the notices about membership and doing this,
that and the other. But we were having our regular board meetings, and
I was distributing materials as much as I had time to. And I was having
blacks with problems come. In other words, it wasn't a thing but a symbol

of faith: that was about as much as it was, don't you see. But now

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 85

there was one tall Methodist minister that I:m sure never raised his voice
and didn't rattle around the service or amrthing else. And there was
nothing funny about this--I mean, he didn't have anything going for me
or anything like that-u-but he would just come up there and find out how I
was doing. I think a lot of people thought I was going to get killed. I
know one night I was coming home from Orangeburg. I'd been at a board
meeting and I'd run out of gas (my mind was working on what I'd been trying
to do in Orangeburg). And I stopped at this little different country
station. And just as I pulled up there, afraid I wouldn't even get to the
gas PIMP, this man came out, of course looking like a
and I saw a:h7thigg niggers and Communists allowedt' So leave it to me
to pitch in and say, llYou really have some sort of
I just said, "I notice your sign But are you planningzny kind of trouble
here between the whites and the blacks or anything?“ But I said it in just
the most mindless way I possibly could. He said, IIYou can say that again,
ladyl' 0h, he just got very belligerent with me. I said, “Well, what seems
to be the trouble?" He said, 'Oh, they' 11 lie and then stealing and raping
and doing like they alwaysdo." And I said, 'For goodness sakes, well that's

but they won't bother you.‘' I said, 'I lmow you must have some
black ﬁiends. Can't you ask them to help you see if you can't get things
on kind of a more even keel?"I He said-I don't know what he said, bmzut
that time he grabbed a pistol out of this thing and he pointed it and just
waved it like this and all. And I remembered that thing that he'd picked “P
on and said, 'You can say that again, lady; you can say that again.“ And
I thought, ‘Now what do you do with drunks and crazy people?' And I

thought, “Well, you don‘t or can't change them any further,‘ Jaughteg

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 86
so you just. . . . By that time he had gotten the gas in, so I just
pulled on off. But that man was just as-crazy as could be. Now that
was in Calhoun County, where Senator was the head of the segregation com-
mittee for the state. And there were all kinds of interesting things
that were going on there about the people whom that senator had defamed.
But there was a Methodist church sign and a Methodist Church U.S.A. down
the road from the University, and some of the local people obviously went.
I also got in touch with some law enforcement officials there (not the
sheriff but somebody else) and told them all about him. And I said, “Now
that man is insane. And I was supposed to go to Fisk a few days later
to a race relations meeting and," I said, llI can't go realizing that a
man like that is at large because somebody's going to get their brains
blown out.‘ Well, I found out that he had already shot I don't know how
many Negroes, and that some of them had long terms in the hospital and all,
221 this senator had defended this man against them. But in some way we
were able to get, I‘m sure among the Methodist Church some people of them

going, and some expressing themselves. Oh, the last man he had shot was

and so the senator wouldn't take that case. But anyway, whoever this
official was-and I ought to be able to think of it-what he told me was,
he said, “Well, what makes you think you know a crazy man when you see
one?u So I kind of gave him the picture of him and all, and I said, 'At
least he‘s emotionally disturbed.I And he said, I'All I can say is that
at that rate (I've forgotten what percentage he said) most of the people
in Calhoun County ought to be in the state hospital.‘ But that was the

intense fervor and heat to which all the people there were aroused, you see.

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 87

JH: Tell me about the relationship between the Southern Regional
Council and the state councils. I know that after '57 when the fund'
for the poet grant was over, then the Council continued to give grants-
in—aid to the state councils; the SRC gave small amounts of money. But
in '67__I don't know, were you at the meeting in Gatlinburg in '67 when
they told the state councils that they had decided to discontinue grants
to them, and there was a good deal of controversy?

Wright: Yes, yes.

JH: Could you tell me over that period what kind of support you got
from SEC and what the relationships were back and forth?

Wright: When I said that we had an operating budget. that after the
first grant was around eight thousand or something like that, in all pro—
bability around five of that probably came from Southern Regional Council.
And the rest was probably raised there in South Carolina. But I'll tell
you to say what kind of relationship. . . . I know
at one time we were required to send in monthly reports and then later
quarterly reports. And of course Marian's feeling about Howard Fleming
I don't share at all. I mean, I don't say that he wasn't a.person of
some competence and all of that, but he very soon,after the whites came
and George Mitchell left and he took over,he focused the activity of the
Council on the national arena. In some of the man's speeches that we've
just been going over recently (in Detroit, for examyle, for I guess it was
a national meeting of NAACP or the Urban League or something) he was
indicating, you see, what the rest of the nation had and also what;::rategy of
the segregationalists was in getting the rest of the nation on their side.

So I think it's quite understandable that if you have most of your work

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 88
is done by the professionals what the organization turns out to be is
usually in the line of whatever expertise or professional persons they
have. And this was his area of expertise, don‘t you see. But I always
covered him as someone with some knowledge of community organization and
of building coalitions and that kind of thing. And I felt very much as
my friend Mrs. T. B. Staekhouse expressed it at some meeting where people's
emotions wouldn't let them move when the need of movement was indicated-—
so usually it was tabled or a committee was appointed or something of
that kind. And Mrs. Steakhouse is a very fine old woman, and she got up
to protest, and she said, "Now those of you who've known me through the
yearsz—she'd been an educator and dean of women and so forth. . . .

JR: Where?

Wright: At Lawrenceton College. So she said, 'Iou know-—she had
some degree of soholarship-that I am not one to want to go off half-
baked, and that I do like to muster my facts. But," she said, 'in this
instance, my friends, I think we should look at ourselves.“ She said,

IWe have so many more facts now than we even know how to use, or are
willing to use. I would like to say that rather than this exercise in
futility of another survey to get up on the shelves that we had better
bring into play the facts that we already know. And everybody here knows
that something needs to be done about this, and we have facts in support
of that and know what's wrong. And we have enough information to move.ll
So I feel that this is so true. And while I think that if professional
people were free to move that most professional people are employed either
by governmental or voluntary organizations, and where governmental organi—

zations are controlled really by the interests that represent the status

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 89
quo, you can very easily make it impossible for those professionals to
move or to share what they know or believe anything else. And if they‘re
voluntary organizations, most of them are dependent upon people of means
for their support. So it means that really the people with the most
information, the most direct contact with the problems and the greatest
competence for techniques for doing something about it, are really frozen.
And this is why I say that every community and every state needs a group
of people whose interests are as removed as possible, you see, from the
sources of money. And this is one reason I have held out some kind of a
hope about women, because in the past where women often had been dependent
upon their husbands I have known a lot of them who had minds of their own,
and they would think and act and so on. Now some of these were professionals
before they were married too, you see, and they're not the typical home-
maker type. And of course every organization is shot through with some
of them. Fer instanceg'in”South Carolina I've worked very closely with
the League of Women Voters, first as a consultant to their human relations
or committees, and then later just as a member of them.
And there are some women, not unlike other parts of the nation, who have
had good training and maybe a brief professional career that come in, and
they have some competency there. But of courggjiflags these rules that
unless you studied at the and had gotten a eonseneus,that means
that you don't get any group action.. But you do have individuals who will
act in other ways. I mean, in Columbia we have had some really good
material among the younger women.

JH: But did you feel that the Southern Regional Council should give

more support to the state councils? I mean, there's a lot of bitterness

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 90
and controversy back and forth between the chairmen or the executive
directors of the state councils and the SRO about how much. . . .

Wright: I was on the two committees that were appointed to make
reports on this. And every time I reported or I felt that the Southern
Regional Council would be in a kind of a never-never land forever and
eternally if it didn't have some direct connection with the grass roots.
And what good is it to tell all that needs to be done and all that and not
have people who will do it, you see? I mean, I just didn't go along with
the set—up that was . Now when Les Dunbar was there he was
not much of an administrator, but at least he was a person who had a
pretty good analytical philosophical mind. And I thought he was capable

And when Paul Anthony worked
with the state electors he seemed to be fairly open to suggestions; and
without having any training he seemed to have some instinctive skill as
far as pulling in contributions that was very kind of different from the
group of people who composed the directors, you know. When we had our
state staff meetings there we would air our pet gripes and any constructive
ideas we had, any strengths that existed in the programs and in any of the
different organizations and so on. And he seemed a very different person.
But the minute he became the director I don't know whether it was his own
sense of inadequacy (because certainly he had no training or skills or
background or anything, and as I saw it this was the kind of director I
would like to have seen, you see-—this is what we were saying, 'We like
you as a pereon,‘ all right) but he got so motivated. And it became that
he and I, he told me once that I was the only director in the Southern

Rggional that he considered was very sincere and dedicated to what he was

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

wright 91

that
move,/ it was a job for most of then. And I didn‘t agree with him with
that: I mean, I think that many of them had more of a stake in it as a
job than I did. But nevertheless I didn‘t think that they'd move without
some idealism and some dedication and some concentration on the job at
hand. But he had expressed that to ma. And he also sent me a letter
that when they app1ied for the Fbrd Fbundation grant that they were required
by law to re-read all of the reports, and that while he had had the general
realization that he had been reinforced in finding that we were the only
ones who had had, had initiated and started and conducted, a rather effec-
tive student program. And we had started the rural work and had worked so
closely with so many organizations (DE? and this, that and the other), and
that he wanted me to know that he thought that we were head and shoulders
above every council in the region-whioh I thought was a pretty good
report.

But soon he got somebody as a hatchet man, Ed Stanfield, and Ed just
"2; mowing every one of the directors down. As we would consult with each
o er

/ it appeared to us that they were trying to knock out all the councils

because they didn't want anyone in the council

insecure to see some of the handwriting on the wall as far as they were
concerned, I don't know. But anyhow it did seem-I mean I coulant prove
this and I maybe couldn't even give too much support-and most of us in
the state offices felt that there was this concerted effort to kill the
Council.

Now there was a fellow by the name of Vandenburg or something like

that, Augustus or something vandenburg (that's not the exact name, but

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 92
anyway) in charge of the Florida office. And he was really a ball of fire,
a most dedicated person. And he had gone
migrants and the poverty problem, and nobody that knows him would not know. . . .
I mean, I'd rather have somebody that really kind of knew the score and was
working in some of these areas that so desperately need it, you see (very
little ever trickles down there and these people need it so). I certainly
hated to see him go, but he did get into some kind of migrant ministry or
something like that. But there were several of them like that that I
thought were really good. And frankly I thought that as weak a group as
we were that we had some expertise for working with people and organizations
that I didn't see in any of them in the Regional Council.

JH: Why did you resign in '67?

Wright: ‘67? Well, it was '65. And I was just burned out; I
absolutely was just shattered-—I was nearly going to say tormented. I mean,
I had gone and left for vacations like a stupid thing. I would go
into the lodge and maybe get three or four hours' sleep a night, sometimes
maybe more, and weekends and everything else. So I just absolutely was
Shocked when I realized that the law of diminishing returns had set in.

And another thing too: the Sbuthern Regional Council, the little bit of

money I had gotten from other sources they had told me not to do. But I

just went ahead and did it anyway. And then I started my personal grant

from the Schwauptz Foundation (it was for $5,500) simply to try to have

some mechanism whereby we could conserve what we had gotten in this SOLO

thing, of all the nuelearlgroups aware of each other and planning, and a
con

channel through which I/share with them or open up what I was aware of,

insights from living and being active in public affairs most of my life,

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 95
and also opening up channels for them to get in and experience some
things themselves. I wasn't trying to serve them and it wouldn't be but
me. Then the Field Foundation
brought in more whites to that. Then Mr. Hahn, who was the executive
vice-president of the Field Fbundation, and Judge Justine Wise Polier,
they|§o$e every year and they began to see our work, and I think they
felt that it was very basic and fundamental. So they started giving us,
I think, maybe seventeen or nineteen thousand a year
and that enabled us to do something. But, you see, when the Johnson
Head Start program came along here we were having. . . . And
it was these exhaustiveliets of Negroes and Negro agencies that I had.
You'll find in this material a letter that was calling all these many
groups together for a conference on desogregating schools. And we were
going to plan strategy, you know, in what places we were going to strike
first and what support we'd render there and all that kind of thing. And
just as I was leaving to go down to to start after the dinner
and all in the evening, I had a long distance call from Washington and
also one from the Atlanta office saying that in the state of South Carolina

ABA
the/office had had people in there working for several months, and that

and that the deadline was Monday morning. And could I be there for a meeting
to open at nine o'clock the next morning? So I went on down and took part

in the Friday night meeting and told them what happened here, and took a
plane from Savannah at five o'clock in the morning and got into Atlanta.

So we spent the entire day with this young thing out of the CEO office.

But she broke all the rules because she was determined to get things going

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 9%

and going on the spot. And she told us how to get this going. Well, I
got home about midday Sunday, and I called the only two professional staff
people I had. I couldn't get either one of them until that night because
they weren't at home. But meantime I had set up the different counties
knowing who needed what kind of things and all that. And I relayed in
capsule form what it had taken that girl all day to tell us. We got on
the phone about 10:50 that night and I made my last call about four in
the morning. And at twelve o‘clock when these things had to be postmarked,
about two minutes to twelve I was right at the post office and got them in
and got a twelve o'clock postmark on them. We got thirty-six counties in:
And we had had to phone them and tell them what to do; they had to contact
the schools,,the health departments and all that and phone us back. And we
had to put it on a massive printing and all. But, you see, none of the
schools fought for it. They were just so upset with the state. And the
state and the governor (who at that thme was Donald Russell) were at
loggerheads, so they were terribly upset that we had it.

JH: These were the first Head Start programs in South Carolina?

Wright: Yes. This girl in the OED office had told us that all we do
is we get the application and they take over-uthey had a staff and they'd
take over. But now this time the CEO office and Donald Russell, the
governor, were at loggerheads over the matter of organization. Donald
Russell was not willing for them to come in unless they could get through
the senators (this was his topic). And 0E0 refused to do that: you see,

it was simply perpetuating the old patterns. 30 that was in April that we

were called over there and met that deadline . . .

JH: What year?

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 95
Wright: '65. We met that deadline at twelve o'clock. Well,
then the next morning a Mr. Almondson called me from Atlanta, and he said
that they couldn't come in but (on the Watts line and everything) anything
that we needed to do. . . . Well, we hadn't planned or thought we were
going to do anything, you see. We had a lot of things we could have done
ourselves, but in a way we couldn't. But to get this going when the state
was blocking it, and get advisory committees coming in and all these kind
of things like that. . . . Well, finally they were able (Russell McCormick
and some senator,and Robert McNabb came in), they finally succeeded in
getting a school system or some group in all of these other counties except
for nine little backwards counties in South Carolina. And they moved in
from there. They had already called in the teachers from these other
counties and trained them. So Washington called me and asked me why
couldn't I train them for then. And they would provide me with a youth
or childhood education person
and we could do all the rest, which was building up community support and
working with the parents to interpret to them what we were trying to do,
and this, that and the other. And of course we had the loads of people
from Washington from the Bureau of the Budget and everything else coming
down there and all to see me. So that spring and summer was just shot
with that, with a hand in on what we tried to start about the desegregation.
Then Washington called and said that they couldn't get anybody in
South Carolina that would even want to touch it. Here was the
director sitting up there twiddling his thumbs and drawing a salary and
all that and didn't touch the Head Start stuff at all. So they said that

there was just no expertise and no knowledge of how to get or maintain

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 97
many of these programs going, and they felt that probably students would
be one of the best groups. And would we do a demonstration research
project using students in many communities and seeing what the results
were? So I tell you, that was really most interesting from a lot of
different angles.

JH: And that was Speed—Up?

Wright: That was Speed—Up. But the next year we did that. And this

Eleanor
Brad Poston, who had been our/hoosevelt intern, directed that.

Of course prior to any of the set-up of the CEO I was in Washington
on civil rights marches on the Capitol before the civil rights act was
enacted. And I was attending also at that time a hearing of the National
Labor something that Faye Bennett served at the same time she was serving
as the executive of the National Sharecroppers Forum. And the National
Shareeroppers Forum was paying half of the salary of our rural work with
the integration project. So at that time a very dynamic black man who
worked somewhere in the Labor Department wanted to talk with me. And he
asked me if I would go back to South Carolina and get up a meeting of any
people who had any knowledge of the old New Deal and the efforts to reach
the poor, and the things it had brought. And I knew plenty about that,
peonage and everything else. And he said, “Invite me."

Well, by this time we‘d been working to try to integrate and keep a
fire under the agencies that themselves were supposed to integrate the use
of MDTA, the Manpower and Development Training Act, and the ARA, the Area
Redevelopment Act, and all those things. And we had lines into the employ-

ment service. We were the only voluntary agency in South Carolina that was

always invited to all of the coordinating federal government agencies' council

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 98
meetings. And when people like came and epoke on youth
employment and all that we were the only ones except the government people
who were there.

So I invited one of the men who was in charge of these programs in
the employment service to this meeting with this fellow whom we invited to
come down (though it was at his request that we do this). And the man in
the employment service told me, he said, "I have just come back from
Atlanta." And I knew that the employment service at that time was under

the Labor Department

But he said, I'I got instructions yesterday at the Labor Department that the
people say that there are some people in there trying to upset
the apple cart, and that they'll be trying to get into the different states,
but for us to do everything to keep them out.I And he said, "I have an
idea that this is one of these fellows. And they told us whatever we do
not to cooperate with them.I So here are people whom the taxpayers are
paying sabotaging each other to keep anything except the status quo from
getting off to a good start, don‘t you see.

JH: Alice, I was wondering how your family and your friends in the
white community responded to you and treated you during this time.

Wright: Well, I might say that in the Federation of Women's Clubs
the women were very inconsiderate. They knew I didn‘t mind doing things
if I liked doing things. And most anything they’d call on me to do I'd
respond to. But there was just so much of it. When everybody threw so
much back at me I should have had enough sense to throw it back at some of

them. But some of them were so dumb and so helpless Zihughteg? that you'd

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Wright 100
wrinkles from them. The yoint about it is, I mean, it gives you
of the heart and a little of it goes a long way. But I
haven't objected to it too much. But at these state level meetings when I‘d
go again, some of these very people who had gushed over me and probably used
me (they weren't really using me because I never allowed myself to be used)
they would look in the mirror and see me, and they were so afraid they‘d have
to speak to me that they'd just walk on by. I mean it didn't bother me,
because I would pull something out of my pocketbook and go sit down in a chair
and read. But it was very noticeable. And my youngest brother, who was very
sooially-minded when he was a young man, said to me once, "Alice, I am a man
with a conscience , but," he said, "I'll tell you this:
I just wish you weren't so misguided." Well, with that attitude, you see, he
didn't want to say IWhat are you doing? What do you think can be done? What
do you think is the proper response?" But you see, his mind was made up. So
I had learned bucking the tide so much of my life that that‘s no tide. You
see, anything I might have said would have erected more of a barrier between
us. And I loved them, but. . . .
JH: Where have you gotten your greatest emotional and moral support?
From what people?
Wright: Well now, Miss Reid gave me a lot, and Mr. Dabbs did in a way.
Mr. Dabbs
And I never had the slightest feeling that Mr. Dabbs had any feeling for me
as a woman, you know, but as a person he really did love me. And he and
Miss Reid had this in common.

BEGIN SIDE II TAPE IV

Wright: . . . Which I have done, or made mistakes, of which I've made

Interview number G-0065-2 in the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection,
The Louis Round VWson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

 

Wright 101
in all that

many in my life,/I never felt that they were there on the sidelines
trying to pry or to be judgmental. And I always felt that anything
they didn‘t understand or that didn't seem to be what they conceived to
be really part of my real content [laughte57 they just thought, "Well now,
that just doesn't seem to fit.“ But they didn't even seem to be impelled
to find out if it fit or didn't fit. I mean, I knew I was accepted by them
regardless. And those were two of the persons who gave me the most.

Then there was a very dynamic young Woman--and I shouldn't get started
on her--by the name of Charlotte A. Hickman, who was a Baltimorean and a
Unitarian. She did voluntary service in our office, and then finally did
get a very small paysoale (that was all we had). She was the kind of per-
son that seemed very, very liberal, a darling person. She gave me a lot of
emotional support.

And I must say that the blacks did during that period, not only as
persons but in the group, all of them. And so I got emotional support
ﬂaughteg.
