  JACQUELYN HALL: I have read your fascinating The Making of a Southerner, and so I know something about your family background, your heritage and events through which you became alienated from that heritage, or &#8230; from aspects of that heritage.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Right.  JACQUELYN HALL: But that book is primarily, I would say, an intellectual biography, and I'm very curious to have a little more information about the personal history that lay behind that intellectual odyssey. So I thought I'd like to ask you a little bit more about your family and your childhood and your education, and then we could go on to talk about your career after your work as the YWCA secretary in the twenties, which is pretty much where that book stops, as far as your own life is concerned.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes. It had a certain object to fulfill.  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes. You were born in 1897 in Macon Georgia?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Could you tell me a little bit about the family situation that you were born into?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Well, I was born in Macon, Georgia, and Georgia was my native state, as you'll remember. There were seven living children in my family, of which I was the youngest. And I'm not sure what type of detail &#8230; my father &#8230; I don't know whether you remember this, was trained as a lawyer. Do you remember? This came by reading law, which was a custom in his youth. But he, for a good many years, he was a product of that period when it was very difficult - the period following the Civil War - when it was very difficult for a young man to find a way of life that was anything resembling what they had known as they grew up and from their childhood. So he moved over into a salaried position for a good many years. Actually, I think at the time of his death, he was - which came, my recollection is, around 1910 - he was beginning gradually to work back in to the law, which was his first love. He'd been in politics some, in, I would almost say, a desultory sort of way.  JACQUELYN HALL: He worked for the railroad?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: What railroad did he work for?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: The Georgia Railroad. I had to stop and think, It no longer exists as such, naturally. It was a smallish railroad. And I don't really remember precisely what the nature of his work was. I should remember, because I would have been in my early teens at his death, twelve or thirteen, something like that. But I was never clear in my mind just what type &#8230; I'd been up to his office many times. He traveled, I remember that, but &#8230;  JACQUELYN HALL: Your portrait of your father in your book is a very fascinating portrait of that generation of young men who grew up expecting to be master of their entire environment, and found themselves in the kind of position  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: You mean, if he had &#8230; when you say he grew up, you mean master of his &#8230;  JACQUELYN HALL: Of his plantation and his slaves and his &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes. This was his rearing, of course.  JACQUELYN HALL: Was this very much in retrospect, your sense of your father, or, when you were growing up did you have a feeling of your father being a man who was not at ease in the &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: In the world in which he had &#8230; I would say he was a man torn between the past and the present, perhaps. Never having given up the past. The very emphasis he placed upon the Lost Cause was &#8212; which were his terms, not mine. I mean, these were the terms which, in the period of the first decade of the century, people used when they spoke of the by-gone Confederacy, you see, as the Lost Cause. And we were certainly reared, each of us in turn, to revere the veterans of that period and to do everything we could to help them. I mean, well, of course, naturally those who came out of the ranks of the old Confederate Armies were just ordinary people. They were those who had been brought in. And many of them at this period - not the officers, but the veterans who came to reunions were, many of them, old men - they were getting quite old by this time, those who had fought through the war. Of course, my father only fought the last year, as a boy, fifteen maybe. Those who had fought through it were now old men and were disappearing fast. And lots of them were in need. I mean, they were poor, they hadn't much to live on. And they were great &#8230; people would visit, trying to do something for them, to help them, you see, to carry on.  JACQUELYN HALL: Well, your own family was not very affluent.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Well, not &#8230; I may have overplayed that some. [Laughter] I don't mean consciously. I  don't at all mean consciously. We were certainly not well to do, by any manner of means, because we were living on my father's salary, which wouldn't have been affluent then. But we always lived in the "nice neighborhood." And &#8230; we rented, we didn't own, until just before his death, he had purchased this farm where you find me as a young girl, going to school.  JACQUELYN HALL: What kind of effect did your father's disappointment in the historical circumstances he found himself in and in his own career have on his relationship with his family? I've wondered whether, in that kind of situation, a man would tend to turn very much inward and put a lot of the energy and hope that he might have put into his own career into molding his children and his hope for his children?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Into molding them, you say?  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: He was a very active person, in the causes he was concerned about. So I don't think your picture is quite correct. He said the usual things that a husband said, in those days, that his wife was the one who &#8230; I've forgotten how the phrases ran in his speeches, though heaven knows I've heard them enough, But just remember, I was quite small, and where a sister or brother a few years older than myself would remember all these things of that period very clearly, and what he was like, my memories would be colored by my awe of him. Because he was a strict discipliarian, and you can see this would overcloud what was really there. But he had a phrase which many speakers had in that time, his wife taught the children prayers, he taught them to revere the Lost Cause. I mean, you see, this conception. I may have remarked in The Making that I doubted if there were many monuments to the Confederacy around in the little towns of South Carolina that he hadn't helped to dedicate. This would have been true. He was forever going around making speeches to groups, whatever the groups, along these lines, and he was also very active, though, in Masonic affairs. He was a thirty-third degree Mason and very active in state affairs of the Masonic Order. Now, you ought to remember there were a couple of periods when he was running for political office. So, he was an extremely active, outgoing man, and was known as one who was a great story-teller. These stories would be couched in what some would call long jokes. But he loved that old book, Slow Train through Arkansas. Have you ever heard of it? It was a book of tales, you might call it a book of jokes or tall tales. And he would have wonderful laughter over the tales or something of this kind. And similarly, his audiences, when he told them, were filled with laughter, because these were very well told and with quite a wry tone and an eloquent gesture and a sober face. In other words, had hosts of friends. Now, some of this I may not have made clear in my account, because I was evoking a picture of what it felt like then, hence my after-view, as I look back now, might not have come through as clearly as it should have.  JACQUELYN HALL: He ran for the Senate in 1908, I think.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: He what?  JACQUELYN HALL: He ran for the U. S. Senate &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: &#8230; in 1908?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Your dates are better than mine at this point. [Laughter]   JACQUELYN HALL: But he was beaten very badly.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Oh, yes.  JACQUELYN HALL: Did he run for other political office and lose?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: No, I think he started again, to run for the Senate. I would have to go in and refresh my own memory, because some of these things I checked on and got down so I would have them accurately, at the time. But I think he once ran for the Senate and there was a great host of people running, as there so often was in South Carolina politics then. And all of them, as you remember, speaking from the same platform. This was the custom. They would go around together, the candidates, in the country places, and so on. But then I think he ran again when Tillman was running for re-election. I know his health became &#8230; he was ill. I mean, becoming ill. And he was not well, and I think the doctor advised him to &#8230; not to continue.  JACQUELYN HALL: But he wanted to run against Ben Tillman?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes, and I think he entered the race. I won't say this for sure, but this is my memory of it. I get the two races confused, but I know he was running.  JACQUELYN HALL: When you talked about an incident in which you saw your father chastising a black maid &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: I know. Oh, how I &#8230; [Laughter] &#8230; have not been appreciated for that.   JACQUELYN HALL: By your family?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Well, let's not get that on the recorder. I don't want to be too specific on a thing like that.  JACQUELYN HALL: We can delete anything that we want to &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes I know. But this was tough medicine. It was my memory, and a very vivid one. I was small, quite small. But I had decided, because it was for me a traumatic experience, and, without being over-psychological, it is easy to see that it would be an alienating factor as far as the racial system was concerned, and I don't question but that it was. So, it would have been removing if I hadn't cited it, I think, something that I know left a lasting impression on me. In this book I've just finished on Angelina Grimke, she had similar experiences with slavery. And this did not mean that on the spot she rejected slavery. She didn't reject slavery outright and consciously until she was twenty years of age, at least. But it created a sense of uneasiness in her. It made her disaffected, and she began almost unconsciously taking up for "the servants," you see. Well, this I could understand as I would read her diary and her letters, which recorded so faithfully (she didn't begin to write in the diary until she was twenty), but it recorded her memories so faithfully of these sentiments, how disturbed it would leave her, even though she still accepted the system. And this, I think, is the kind of effect that experiences of that kind on a child reared in the Old South, especially &#8230; even now it could be the case. The child is taught to be just and fair and kind and considerate and all these things, as important values and ideals, and then to feel just appalled inwardly by something you see or someone helpless, in the throes of those who rule. And this has a very deep effect, I think.  JACQUELYN HALL: Does that incident stand out so much because it was in contradiction to your image of your father? Was it the only incident like that in your childhood, or is it just one &#8230; ?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: No, it was not the only incident. It was the only one of that kind. I never had any occasion for any other. I mean, there never was any occasion. But all of the conceptions of black people, all of the racial attitudes that were common, these were just everyday affairs, and not in any mean way, not in any unkind way, but simply a part of our environment. So you can't say that was an incident. What you found was that you were deeply imbued with the whole patterns of racial attitudes that were common in your environment. You soaked them in through the pores of your skin, quite unconscious of how you did it. You knew that all those around you, my people especially, my parents especially, put the greatest emphasis with us, their children, on the highest values, the most basic conceptions of American democracy and consideration for others and high ideals. I mean, all of this was just part and parcel of our upbringing. It was implicit.  JACQUELYN HALL: What's so fascinating about your book is that I don't think I've ever read anything that showed so clearly how assumptions and values become &#8230; how children are socialized. How southern children become what they are. And then you begin to try and talk about how a child raised in that kind of atmosphere changes, mores beyond it, becomes aware of the contradictions in it and moves in one direction instead of the other.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: I wish everyone who has read that book comprehended what I was trying to do as well as you do.  JACQUELYN HALL: Do you feel that people did not?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Oh, often they do not. Often.  JACQUELYN HALL: Well, tell me, why did you write that book?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Why did I?  JACQUELYN HALL: Yes.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: I can give you my general purposes, I think, if I can vocalize them. I felt that there was still extant, widely extant, at the time I wrote it, which was in the late forties, a conception of a whole people being "inferior." I mean, innately inferior. The black people, Negroes. Hence, out of this grew the notion that prejudice was natural and could not be overcome if these people were inferior. So I knew out of my own personal experience, that it was neither innate nor true, and so I thought one of the best ways to demonstrate this was to give a picture of my personal experience which showed that I was indoctrinated with all these conceptions, and I got over it, completely. This was one of my aims. The other was to show the &#8230; so to say, the other side of the coin, that these feelings and attitudes were not innate, namely that they were culturally conditioned, that they came out of one's cultural background. And hence my reasons for this attempt to evoke how I was culturally conditioned was this story of my family, its background, its upbringing, our indoctrination with the Lost Cause, the way I loved it. Now, if a child learns to love this thing, so that she herself is caught up in it, this is really heady stuff. This is terrifically potent. And this could explain more for us, because we placed unusual emphasis upon all of this - but it was similar for white children of any class. And if people could but realize, at the period at which I wrote, you see, one just has to keep bearing in mind, this was pre-1954. At that period, segregation was just as intact as you can conceive of, as it had been for the last &#8230; well, for the period before it. So my wish there was to say, if this is culturally conditioned, then it can be changed by the culture.  JACQUELYN HALL: You went to Columbia University, you taught at Smith, you were at  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: I was at Mount Holyoke for a year.  JACQUELYN HALL: Mount Holyoke. When you speak of the kind of intellectual climate at the end of the forties, in which black inferiority was assumed, Sumner's notion of mores being embedded, not amenable to intervention, was that &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Well, this was the kind of sociology I was trained in, even in Columbia.  JACQUELYN HALL: Is that right?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Sure. Summer. Folkways. I know you wouldn't have been brought up in it, but I was.  JACQUELYN HALL: By 1947, when you wrote Making of a Southerner, was that still the kind of training that people were getting in universities?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: It depended upon the university, as to how much stress. At Columbia there was Giddings &#8230; you wouldn't know him, but he was one of the great sociological pioneers in this country. But, at this time, and even out at Wisconsin, when I went there, in the late twenties for my doctorate - I took my doctorate, I guess, in 1929 there, there was still a great stress on this conception of the mores and how implacable they are. I don't suggest for a moment that this affected people in general. I'm now thinking of my particular field of specialization, where much of this was accepted. But in some universities - at the University of Chicago, I doubt if it was, by the books that came out of there in that very period. They had Park. You wouldn't know him, perhaps, but he was a great scholar in this whole area. So I don't think one could generalize about that. It just happened to be my experience. And you must also realize that when I went to Columbia University for my master's degree, which I took in, I think it was 1919, if my memory serves me right. I'd have to look up on my vita to see. But when I went there, I was raw, fresh from the South. I'd never been out of the South, until I went there, and this meant that everything that I was seeing, learning, hearing, was mediated through this kind of veil of southern experience, even though I found I welcomed breaking these good old taboos in which I'd been reared, I thoroughly enjoyed having Negroes in my classes, eating with them and listening to them and feeling, oh, my this was very exciting. I was just throwing overboard all these stupid things, I mean, you know, the way a youngster does. And I was very, very raw, I felt &#8230; I feel, as I look back. I didn't feel it then. But, again, so that my biases of breaking away from the mores, myself, would have made me see probably more emphasis than was placed on the mores, I suspect.  JACQUELYN HALL: But this book was meant to be read by, in effect, a popular audience more than to &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Oh, very much so, very much so. That's why I attempted to make it as personal as I did. It was not, I'm sure, as personal as the publisher would have liked, But I had these certain objectives in view, so that I brought to it what material I felt was pertinent to my objectives, not a lot of side issues that might have been &#8212; looked into in a full-fledged autobiography.  JACQUELYN HALL: Have you ever thought of writing a full-fledged autobiography?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: No, I haven't. Angeline Grimk&#224; satisfied me on that, very much. Very much. Hers could be, in my view, having just marvelous material, as I had, all those first hand letters and diaries, very deeply intimate stuff. It was very satisfying material.  JACQUELYN HALL: How was The Making of a Southerner received?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Very well indeed. Extraordinarily well. Far beyond anything I expected, not in sales, because these things rise and fall. If I could find my scrapbook of clippings, you would see how very widely &#8230; I had some of the most interesting of people who reviewed me in the major [publications] the reviews came out the very week the book appeared, which surprised both me and the publisher. I had a third page review in the Times Book Review by Lillian Smith. No, that was not in the Times. I'm sorry. Lillian Smith's was in the Herald Tribune Book Review. In the Times. I forget the man's name who did it &#8230; oh, Hodding Carter. And what &#8230; Daniel &#8230; what's Daniel, the former publisher of the Raleigh News and Observer.  JACQUELYN HALL: Jonathan Daniels.  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Jonathan Daniels reviewed it in one of the papers. I had an excellent review in the then Saturday Review. And then, what interested me in many ways, I took a clipping service so I had it, was the wide-spread reviews in the southern newspapers.  JACQUELYN HALL: Oh, really?  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Yes. Oh, very widespread. I haven't looked it up in years, but I made a scrapbook at the time of the reviews, and they are really voluminous.  JACQUELYN HALL: I read a review in the Journal of Negro History, just very, very &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Well, I didn't appreciate that as much as I should have, because I knew &#8230; I'd had much correspondence with the man who wrote it. He was then the editor. And he was a very interesting person, and a nice person. I could tell you more about him some time. He's no longer there, I guess, probably. But he was quite undiscriminating. It was just laudatory, and I don't like that kind as well.  JACQUELYN HALL: Well, he also took off from your book to &#8230;  KATHARINE DU PRE LUMPKIN: Tell of his own experience.