
Sara Boyte:,4First of allg'could you tell meghow you got involved
iﬁ civil rights?

Mary King: Well, I was at Ohio Wesleyan my senior year, in 1962,
and went South on a trip to Atlanta that was sponsored by the Student Y.
We met SNCC people and SCLC perle, and we went to Tuskegee. At that time,
SNCC had sixteen_peop1e, Jim Foreman and Dottie Miller and Julian Bond
and Jane Stembridge, and, ten others maybe. And I Was enormously impressed,
I had been something of an activist campus leader myseif and I had planned
to go to graéuate school in English, but I wasn't quite happy . . .

SB: What had you been active in?

KING: Oh, anti-HUAC stuff.

SB: Oh, you had?

KING: Yeah. And a little bit of Northern support for the Sit—ins and
a little bit of student peace kind of activity.

SB: Did you come from a sort of political background?

KING: No, my father is a Methodist minister .

SB: So is mine.

KING: . . . and my moiher is an assistant principal of a high school.
Yours is? Great, where from?

SE: He was in South Carolina, now he's in Texas.

KING: Well, fantastic. My father was from the South ané my grand-

father was a Methodist minister, and my great-grandfather, so it‘s very

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
2
much a southern ethos, although I was raised in New York City. My mother
is a nurse—educator and neither of them is particularly . , , they're not
boat—rockers and they're not even "doers", in the sense that they get
most of their gratification from relating to parishioners or students,
the kind of ”year-in-year-out” thing, They aren't out to change the
status quo in any way. But, there is a kind of value orientation, or a
service orientation that I think is very hard for a minister’s kids to
get away from. No matter how hard they try, it's very hard.
SB: Right.
KING: It changes with generations, the form that it comes out in.
I didn't really want to go to graduate school, I was ambivalent about it,
I had applied to Emory and Tulane. I can't even remember where else,
wanting to go South so that I could relate to the movement on the side,
And one of the people that I met my senior year at Wesleyan on the Y trip
was Ella Baker. It was Ella Baker and Rosetta Gardner, who was then head
of the Southern Region for the Campus YWCA . . . and Casey Hayden. I met
them on that Atlanta trip and was enormously imptessed with them as I was
with all the other people that I met and when I went back to Wesleyan to
finish packing and getting ready to leave Ohio, I got a call asking me if
I would come down for an interview and consider replacing Casey Hayden
in a special human relations project. The Marshall Field Foundation had
been funding it for a year and she had been Working on it with Ella Baker.
So, I flew to North Carolina for the interview and it was just what I
wanted. It was not only a way for me to be related to the movement, but
it was a very legitimate way, I wasn't sort of asking to
SB: Tagging along or anything like that ,

KING: Right.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King

33% Exactly what was that for you to do? What was the job?

KING: Well, basically, what we were doing was to try to identify
stuﬁents in campuses in about ten southern states, who were probing
kinds of students, who were asking questions. At that time, the atmos»
phere on southern campuses was so oppressive that people would close
doors before they would talk about race, Students couldn't ask questions
in class, even in the best universities. Professors would say things like,
”I'm sorry, but I can't answer that question." I remember being told
that by a student who had asked his professor if it didn't cost more for
the state to run tw0 separate school systems, ”wasn't it a higher dollar
figure for education?” The professor said that he couldn't deal with
that question, he couldn't answer it. The implication being that his
administration would come down on him.

SB: Right.

KING: So, were trying to find students and some way to help them
bridge what was a very great isolation, We used the Y, the campus Y, as
our entry point. The National Students Association was considered
"communist” on most of those campuses, they only had a heachheaéin Texas,
Chapel Hill, maybe, you know. And nowhere else could they even get on
campus, So, I made a couple of Speeches and met with administrators and
stuﬁent government leaders and I worked with a black woman who had just
graduated from Barnard, Bobbie Yancey. we went as a team wherever we
could. That was very few places. We went to Queens College in Charlotte
as a team. I can‘t remember if we went anywhere else as a team. In
three cities, we organized secret groups of black and white students who
continued to meet together Without our support, That was Columbia,

South Carolina between Benedict College and the University of South

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
4
Carolina; Tuscaloosa, Alabama between Stillman College and the University
of Alabama; and in Jackson, Mississippi between Jackson State and Millsaps
College. We tried to organize those groups because the black students
had never met white students who would talk to them, and the white students
had never met blacks who were educated.

SB: Right.

KING: We were also . . . the actual money from the Marshall Field
Foundation had been given for a study on the extent of academic freedom,
or the status of academic freedom in southern schools, but we used it to
get on to campus and to organize workshops. We sponsored conferences at
Duke University, for example. Or Ella Baker would come. These would be
mind~boggling meetings for these students who had never met anybody who
had dared to think the same things that they thought. And on weekends,

I was working for SNCC, on just a volunteer basis, When the year was
over and the grant was up, I went over to work with SNCC full—time and
Jim Foreman sent me to Danville, Virginia as my first assignment, if you
will. Then that fall, which Was the fall of 1963, I started working with
Julian Bond, doing what we called ”communications”.

SB: What did that mean? Race relations, or

KING: We were, in a very real sense, using the news media to try
and get attention that we should have had without trying. So, we called
it ”communications” because it entailed everything from trying to protect
people who were in jail (by using the leverage of the news media) to
collecting affidavits, to preparing policy statements. Later on, Jack
Minnis set up a research shop, but we were, for awhile, we were the closest
thing to a research shop as well . . . we were the ones who kept the logs

of what was happening and then, in the summer of 1964, communications

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
5
actually became a life and death matter. One of the main reasons that
800 or so volunteers were invited from the North was very explicitly
(I mean it was very conscious in the planning of the SNCC meetings),
to get the leverage that we would have from being able to call on press
in northern cities. we would be able to call Des Moines and say, “We
hear that John Springer is incarcerated in the Natchez or Meridﬂan jail--
have you seen anything over the wire services about it.” Then, the
family and friends would immediately call in the UPI or AP and say, ”We
hear that John Springer was just arrested because he was trying to help
people vote. What do you have on your wires?” They had nothing of
course. So, they would immediately have to call the Atlanta Bureau. The
Atlanta Bureau would have nothing and they would have to send a stringer
out and get some coverage. And that was usually the only leverage that we
had against the kind of treatment that people got in jails. But this
didn‘t work on the three who were killed in Neshoba County and I was the
one who had to call Andy Goodwin's parents. The night that they were
killed, I was on the phone with his parents and had been calling the
jails in that area all day, trying to find out where they were. The
police denied it, they would not admit that the three youths were in their
care . . . well, care is not the right word there-—custody. Without some
outside authority questioning if people were incarcerated, nobody could
get the information. So, it was a really very critical part of the
strategy.
SB: Right.
KING: I went to Mississippi in the summer of '64 and was based in
Jackson. I ran a communications center there with Frances Mitchell. Then,
I became iHVDlved with a film that was being made in Natchez, called

”Black Natchez”, being made by Ed Pincus. It was a cinema verite

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
6
documentary about the rise of black leadership in a small southern town.
I was also iavolved in setting up a literary workshop and a darkroom in
Tugaloo, along with Mary Varela for production of materials to use in
adult literary programs.

SB: Who is she?

KING: Mary Varela is one of the people on this list.

SB: Did other people call her Mary Varela?

KING: Well, that's what she was then. When the ”black power" thing
started and she claimed to be a member of the Third World, she started
pronouncing it in the Spanish way. (Her parents were Mexican.) (the ”11“
sound is pronounced as ”ya") She's in New Maxico now.

SB: Let me ask you about that year that you worked with Julian Bond,
and I assume in the Atlanta office, on communications. What was your
role in decision-making processes in SNCC?

KING: What was my role?

SB: Yeah, did you participate in making decisions like to do the
summer thing, or . . .

KING: Uh-huh. Everybody who was on the staff participated. We
used to have these meetings in the basement of a restaurant on Hunter
Street and everybody got to put in their advice, whatever they wanted to
put in, Some were more creative than others. People who had been in
the field organizing had a much better vantage point, much more to con-
tribute than those who had been in the office. So, Julian for example,
was rarely an active verbal participant in these sessions, but somebody
who had just come in, like Charles Cobb, or Bob Moses, or somebody who
had been out organizing, would be much more able to influence the group

on the basis of their field work. I could have said a lot more than I

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
7

said. It seemed to me that the whites that were involved were careful
not to try to assume leadership positions unnecessarily. The whites
that were involved (and were not on ego trips) weren't into becoming,
you know, leaders of the black movement or anything like that. It has
been extremely aggravating to read the sloppy accounts justifying the
black power movement as attempts to prevent white takeovers. Because
there wasn't any possibility of it. The only person who ever came close
to being perceived in an active and visible leadership role-—able to lead
the singing, or lead a march, or anything like that--was Bob Zellner.
But he never went after it, he was always was drafted for it. He never
did any politicking or jockeying to be considered a leader as such. The
accounts have been very sloppy, I mean, history has got to correct that.

SB: Several people have said something along that line.

KING: Now, in terms of numbers in Mississippi, sure, there were
a lot of whites. But even there, whites realized for the most part that
they could leave when it was over and didn't try to wrest control. It was
a much deeper ambivalence about white participation.

SB: Yeah, the main thing that I've heard about that, in the sense of
people taking control, was simply a coupling of a certain kind of insensi-
tivity which still , . . well, the image of the Barnard girls who came in
and took over the mimeograph machines and wrote the press releases and
stuff.

KING: Yeah, well but at least most whites were smart enough to know
that if they had skills, they should work in areas where they had skills,
rather than trying to go out and do the things that blacks were better at,

At least that's what seemed to be true until 1964. There was no point in

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
8
my going to jail, I figured direct action wasn't my best contribution.
It made sense for me to do something where I had skills. So, I see that
as a very positive thing. Those who could write, wrote. But a white guy
trying to drive onto a plantation to organize voters is pretty conspicuous.

SB: And a white woman is even more conspicuous.

KING: Yes. And, now, this is an interesting thing. There were
white women who did not realize that the start of violence in a community
was often tied to the point at which white women appeared to be in the
Civil Rights Movement. We documented this in several places, where there
were no church burnings, there were no bombings, no flagrant violence
until a white woman became visibly involved, and then it started. And I
remember that some white women sort of insisted that they had a right to
go in. And those were for the most part, as I recall, and I hope that I'm
not being prejudiced, but those were volunteers rather than those who had
been on the staff for a long time and understood a little more about the
southern white psyche and how those who were pathologically inclined
toward violence anyway, could be touched off by a white woman's presence.

SB: Right. When did you sense any tension, or did you, with
black women?

KING: That's usually described in terms of the triangle, that white
women were involved with black men and black women became upset. Well,

I first sensed that about the winter at the end of 1964. When SNCC came
out of the summer of 1964, it went into a massive identify crisis. It
couldn't figure out which way it wanted to go. We had one pivotal meeting,
which if I play historian for the moment, what I would say that I saw
happen was a question as to whether SNCC should go in the direction of

becoming a pyramidal, hierarchical organization, in which all of the

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
9

activities in the various communities added to the total operation and
organization of SNCC, and in which SNCC would be the central entity. The
other choice was that SNCC could become a catalytic effort, sending out
organizers and facilitators--people who would try to unleash, or develop
the latent leadership in a community and get that leadership to begin
moving on its own, without any necessarily formal connection to SNCC. It
was a very traumatic time, because the organization had grown from being
very small (Sixteen staff members when I first encountered it in 1962) to
where there were a hundred and thirty—tw0 people on the staff after the
summer of 1964. And then there were hundreds and hundreds of volunteers,
of course. And when I first got involved with it, I said that there
were only sixteen on the staff. Any organization that suddenly goes that
large , , , if my company was to go from the size that it is now to say,
fifty, we'd have many of the same problems. You could chart them.

SB: Right, the same thing happened to SDS.

KING: Right, yeah.

SB: Right after the anti—war march, when it grew.

KING: I'm reluctant to say that the reaction of the black women
was exclusively that and I believe that it was connectied to certain other
problems of SNCC sort of finding its way. I began to be aware of the fact
that people whom I had actually been very close to, like Donna Richards
and Ruth Howard, and Janet Jamott and a couple of other people, Cynthia
Washington . . . were very, very distant and very inaccessible.

SB: It must have been painful.

KING: Oh yeah. Sure. Actually, it wasn't the winter of '64, it
would have been earlier, it Would have been right after the summer of

1964 or towards the end of the summer that I first noticed that. And it

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
10

was true, you know, the black guys found white women more interesting and
the black guys were more aggressive than the white guys and a lot of it
was true. It wasn't necessarily the fault of the white women, although
there were some who invited it. There were others who were, I think,
careful, who understood the issue and weren‘t interested in flaunting
themselves.

SB: Well, it makes sense that this would come to a head that summer,
when lots of women came in, who had not been around and did not have the
kind of background that would make them sensitive to the problem. They
were from the North . . .

KING: And they Wore provocative clothing, they insisted
on wearing pants whereas most of the women that we were working with in
communities wore dresses; they would insist on smoking, when these
ladies, these black women, didn't smoke. You know, it wasn't ”God-
fearing.“ They really didn't understand the South . . . you know, long
earrings and low-cut dresses and

SB: Yeah, I get this picture. I can see how it would happen, And
coupled with that, is that they are out to get rid of the evil of racism
and if anyone tells them that, there's a Way to proVe how unracist they
are.

KING: Well, that's the thing. The guys who screamed the most about
"hack-sliding" were the ones who were ”back-sliding” the most. It was a
real reaction for most of them.

SB: I've heard several versions of something that may have happened
in '64, well, then again it may never have happened, One person tells me
that there was a sit—in in the office of women . . .

KING: Uh—huh.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
11

SB: There was. When was that, and who was in it?

KING: I don't remember. It wasn't very clearly articulated, though.
Ruby Doris Smith Robinson would have been involved, I think. I can't
help you there, Sara, there was a point where Emmy Schrader and Casey
Hayden and I became so clearly identified with raising the Women's issue,
even though we weren't very abrasive about it, you know. We would just
bring it up occasionally . , . when almost anything we did was seen that
way. I really don't remember who was at the sit-in, but there was one and
I have a photograph of it somewhere. You know, there was a very strong
tendency to relegate the women to so-called women's work, And a lot of
wonen got tired of just being in the office

SB: Black women and white women?

KING: I think so, I think that Judy Richardson may have been in—
volved in it. Have you talked with her? She's here in Washington, she
might remember.

SB: Yes.

KING: Cynthia Washington is here in Washington, too .

SB: Right.

KING: She might remember something, although Cynthia wasn't as
close in to the office.

SB: Yeah, I gathered that this was an office thing. It didn‘t seem
to have much repercussions outside of that, it was probably fairly short-
lived,

KING: It's very interesting, because some of the guys who were most
hostile at that time about it, now remember it with a great deal of cone
passion. Ivanhoe Donaldson, every time he sees me, he wants to talk about

how great it was and all that and at the time, he was totally contemptuous.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
11
SB: That's fascinating, Did the men get really angry? Were the
actions and reactions really serious, or was it taken as a joke?
KING: As a joke, and then indifference, Some thought it was cute,‘
like Julian Bond.
SB: What was the issue? Office work?
KING: You mean for the sit~in?
SB: Uh—huh.
KING: I think so, I can't really remember.
SB: I‘ve also heard that Ruby Doris Smith Robinson read a paper at
a SNCC meeting.
KING: That may have been after I left. I left in late 1965, about
the time that ”black power" became most vociferous.
SB: Well, what I've heard is that it happened in ‘64. I‘m beginning
to think that a myth is being created, but . . ,
KING: I don't remember that.
SB: . . . and as the myth goes, Stokely replied, ”The only position
for women in SNCC is prone."
KING: Oh, Stokely said that on the wharf at the Waveland meeting
as part of a long humorous monologue. He used that kind of humor all the
time. Stokely has the most fantastic Trinidad sense of humor. He's full
of quips, he could keep going . . . I have seen him go on for two hours
like a professional comedian. A constant barrage of very, very witty
things, in which he puts down, not women, not blacks, but in which he
puts down everybody. Including himself. He used to say that kind of thing
all the time. There was never any situation where Stokely stood up and

made that decisive statement seriously, this was just one of his jokes.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
12
SB: I also had a hard time believing, I talked to a few people who
were close to Rub? Doris and it was just hard to imagine her being
squelched.
KING: Oh no, nobody could ever squash Ruby Doris. I don't remember
Ruby as ever being particularly interested or involved where women were
concerned. (Interruption, while King brings coffee.)
SB: That's interesting, because she is in the mythology of the
development of the women's movement. Somehow they've . .
KING: To my recollection, she ‘
SB: Did she take part in the sit—in?
KING: Let me say this. As I remember Ruby, she was rather rigid
in her interpretation of what was legitimate activity for SNCC people.
She cut me off SNCC payroll because I was organizing against the war in
McComb and Natchez where I was in the Spring and summer of 1965, we Were
mixing in war issues with race issues. There were coffins coming home
from Vietnam and they were all filled with black bodies. You know, it
didn't even take any effort to see the connection between the war and
racism. Ruby cut me off payroll, because she considered organizing against
the war as inappropriate. And as I recall, Ruby was not very flexible,
and her definition of "civil rights" was rather narrow. She was after a
certain kind of freedom. So, for me, this doesn’t ring true. Have you
tried finding Casey Hayden?
SB: I've tried and I'm still trying. I have an address in California
at an ashram.
KING: What‘s that?

SB: Well, it's an . .

 

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
13

KING: A yoga institute, that sort of thing?

SB: Well, kind of. But I've heard that she may . .

KING: I've heard that she may be in Vermont now.

SB: I think they've left now, because I called her mother at
Christmas time, trying to reach her, from Victoria, Texas, and talked to
her mother on the phone for some time. And she was expecting Casey for
Christmas, they had packed up and left California and were on their way
east. I‘ve not been able to get any response from Casey .

KING: I doubt that you will right now.

SB: . . . and I talked to Lenny.

KING: 0h, did you? Is she married?

SB: She's married to Paul Potter, but she changed her name from
Zeiger to Wildflower.

KING: Oh really?

SB: But she had seen Casey not too long ago. Casey wouldn't talk
about those days. So, I don't know. Casey is obviously one person for
me to talk to, but she won‘t talk,

KING: She probably won't then. Casey and I were extremely close
and lived together in Atlanta and Mississippi and I can't get any reaction
out of her. I haven't tried that hard, but I did call her mother in Texas.
I did write her at Christmas time. I suppose that I could keep trying.

I probably will.

SB: Why do you think that you and Casey started raising the women's
issue. Had you read the Feminine Mystique? Had something planted the
idea?

KING: No. I had been aware of things_about that for a long time.

When I was in college, I noticed that women professors were treated

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
14

differently than men professors. And I had a friend who was in the
philosophy and religion department who had actually organized the trip--
you know, that key trip that I was telling you about--she told me about
some of the difficulties, the kind of derision that she met. Troubles
with tenure and so forth. And Ohio Wesleyan would have had a much greater
proportion of women professors than than many others. For example, they
had a black chairman of sociology when I left. So, I feel . . . her name
was Miriam Willey, and to a very large extent, she made me aware of the
problems that I didn't even perceive for myself. She was able to point
out places where I had been circumscribed. So, the awareness had been
there. I'm the oldest child and I'm very independent and kind of a willful
person anyway. And you know, if that's the way you are when you're a
girl, you kind of get enough knocks coming along that you begin to think
about something.

SB: Right.

KING: 0,K., Casey and I—-you know, she's very, very thoughtful and
perceptive and we just found ourselves sharing a lot of stuff, not just
this, but a lot of Stuff. And decided finally to write this memo just to
try to see if we could elicit some response. And probably to help overcome
our own pain and feeling of isolation. You wanted to feel that there were
others who understood what this was about and maybe they would feel
better if they knew that somebody else felt the same.

SB: Well, I find in the memo that women have basically been talking
about this for years, does that include you too?

KING: It's basically true, all of those women who were key women in
a sense, Dottie Miller too, are very thoughtful.

SB: They're all white,

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
15
KING: well, the black women Were not into discussing it, except
for Dona Richards. Dona Richarés was very much ostracized by a lot of
peeple. She was too abrasive. They didn't understand why she wanted to
retain her own name after she got married. The black women didn't under-
stand that. There are some other people like Cynthia Washington . . .
SB: Did Dona Richards marry Bob Moses?
KING: Yeah. As I remember it, this memo was an attempt to reach
out to the black women and try to get some kind of discussion going.
Because they are sensitive, thoughtful women, I believe that they under-
stood and I think there were discussions with no snickering. I remember
an incident in Waveland, Miesissippi. It was in the Spring of 1964. We
had a SNCC meeting there and some local marauder set fire to the dock
house, it was right down at the edge of the water. And Cynthia Washington
was the first one to go into the truck and drive down to the waterfront
and try to find out who had done it and stop them and I think that probably
there were guns in the truck, I'm not sure, And the guys sort of lagged
behind. As I recall, there were male SNCC staff who were awake while the
fire was raging, and did nothing. There had been another incident in
Atlanta, wheren-this was just Casey and me--and there was a certain amount
of awareness of the fact that when push came to shove, women were likely
to be more "together". In a sense, there were some very strong people in
SNCC ané the women were no exception, They were going to be very strong
people.
SB: Right.
KING: There was another incident that happened in Atlanta and I've

only talked to a couple of people about this. This would have been in the

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
16

winter of 1964. I think that we were probably strategizing about the
following summer, I have all this stuff in my minutes and notes, but
there was a meeting with Charles Sherrod. It was in Casey‘s and my
apartment. It was in our apartment, Bob Moses was asleep in the bedroom,
but Courtland Cox and John Lewis were there. Three guys broke open a
door to the apartment (which they were always breaking into because they
didn't understand why two white women lived in this black neighborhood).
And one of them had a sawed-off shotgun and one of them had a knife.
And the guys all split out of the back door, leaving Casey and me there.
So, there were a similar number of things like this that would happen and
the black women were never as open in talking about it, but they knew.

SB: One thing that black women have expressed to me is that black
women have never been able to expect very much. They see some of white
women's discontent as from being from positions of privilege that they've
never been able to have, and one of those has to do with protection.

KING: White women's discontent . . .

SB: In other words, that you and Casey might have reacted to that
situation stronger than black women, who aren't used to assuming that
men will .

KING: Very possibly, but I think that anybody who would have run out
the back door would have gotten the same reaction from me,

SB: Right.

KING: Absolutely, You know, I tried to understand it, but it did
happen.

SB: 'Right, I can see that. Do you think that black women were more
concerned about the divisiveness in the movement. Did they see raising

that question as divisive?

Restricted: Quotati-on or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

 

King
17

KING: I don't know, None of them were in positions of power, it
seems to me, to think that they're really keeping quiet would help keep
bonds together. The black woman with the greatest power in the movement
was probably Ella Baker, and hers was indirect and infrequent. Ruby
Doris, I guess, was the second and to my recollection, Ruby didn't dis—
cuss issues. Now, Ruth Howard and Janet Jamott and Cynthia Washington,
they were all introspective, but they weren't in positions of influence
or persuasion where they could kid themselves that if they shut-up, you
know, that the adhesive would hold the organization together any longer,
or anything like that. I don't think. And it's probably because Casey
and I were in positions of relative powerlessness that we felt free to
do that, too.

SB: You all are perceived in very different ways by I think some
whites who were there briefly and worked at different times. You were
seen as very powerful people, Probably because you had been around for a
long time and you were accepted by the inner circle,

KING: Well, we were, but it's not the kind of power where you get
up in a meeting and make a speech and you sway eighty votes. It’s the
kind of power where you, in a staff meeting say, ”Well, look, what we
really ought to do is start taking depositions and hold a hearing and

such and such . ."

Betty German was in very much the same position.
Hard workers, I mean, if you were a hard worker and you were good, at
least before 1965, if you were working hard and you were willing to put
up with alt of the difficulties and weren't a prima donna and if you were
smart, you could evidently have an influence on policy. But it wasn't the

kind of thing where when all the kids came in from the field, you know,

the young kids who were being mobilized, or were mobilized would come

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
18
into Gammon Seminary or wherever we were having the meetings, that wasn't
the place to stand up and argue the positions. It Wouldn't have worked,
we knew that.

SB: Right. '50, when you decided to write--were you really trying
to deliberately reach out to SDS people, or did you just include some .

KING: Well, there was a great feeling of kinship, partly because of
Casey and Tom Hayden. I became sort of distant friends with Tom and with
Todd Gitlin. I don't know how distant, you know, it wasn't the same
intimacy that Casey had with them. But I definitely was very much aware
of what Rob Burlage and Todd Gitlin and Tom Hayden were doing and felt
that they were our northern counterparts and that it was a collaborative
thing that was happening, although it was in different places. We were
aware of SDS. Now, there was a point at which I remember SDS women ex-
pressing consternation because they couldn't get anywhere. I think that
must have been after the memo, actually, Or there any SDS women on here?
(looks at list) Let's see, there's Carol, Connie Brown . . . n0, well,
yes, Sharon Jeffrey was in there .

SB: Yes.

KING: 0.K., very definitely. But as I recall, none of those women
had really expressed anything, we weren't responding to them so much as
feeling that they would feel the same way we did.

SB: Support you. Casey worked with that summer, summer
of '65. Briefly.

KING: In Cleveland,

SB: In Chicago,

KING: In Chicago, yes, she went there, that's right.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
19

SB: And I was wondering if that had just reinforced her feeling
that this was a problem.

KING: I think that's when she got close to Harriet.

SB: Yes. Harriet was a very important person in Chicago.

KING: Some of these people like Alma Bosely and Margaret Burnam were
very strong southern—-well, I don't know if Margaret was southern or not--
they were Very strong black women that we just figured would have some of
the same feelings. Janet was a hell-raiser, we knew she, you know . .
Betty German was totally disinterested in stuff like that at that time.
She was not actually too simpatico. Prathia Hall, a rare and interesting
person. Why is she underlined?

SB: I don‘t know, I think I must have gotten her name from somewhere.

0h, as a woman who was very important in SNCC, I believe. Someone had

listed her.

KING: Yes, she was in a symbolic way.

SB: Why?

KING: She was sent North to do speeches. She was terribly articu-
late, has an enormous amount of presence. I think she too was a minister's
daughter, I'm not sure, but she had a command, mature beyond her years.
Could handle any size audiencee But within SNCC itself, she had relatively
influence. Joyce married Art Thomas, you should be able to get ahold of
her if you need to. In New York.

SB: Art Thomas was in Durham, wasn’t he?

KING: He was in the National Council of Churches.

SB: He used to be at Duke.

KING: Perhaps.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
20

SB: As a campus minister.

KING: Maybe. I don't remember.

SB: I think so.

KING: Dori Ladner is in Atlanta. I saw her last year. Jeanette
King is still in Jackson, I think. I hear that Dona Richards is in
drama in New York. Judy Richardson is here in Washington, I told you
that. Muriel Tillinghast . . . oh, yes. She was somebody that I thought
had an awful lot of potential. And Jean Wheeler Smith, Why isn't she
on here? I almost surely would have sent her a copy of the memo. Muriel
Tillinghast, very thoughtful, as I recall. I have a somewhat more vague
recollection of her. Jean Wheeler-—she married Frank Smith. She had
been at Howard and the Dean threatened to oust her because she let her
hair grow natural and later she worked with Congressman John Conyers on
the Hill and I don't know what she is doing,* but Frank is here in
Washington. She's probably here and they are still married and she's
another very, very thoughtful person that you can find. But you see,

I don’t remember any response from any of those people particularly. So,
the fact that it was sent out to them, is to me, sort of the end of . . ,

SB: Well, a few black women that I've talked to only vaguely
remember the memo. As opposed to Women in SDS and SOCC, on whom it had
an enormous impact,

KING: Yes. I'm sure of that.

SB: Why?

KING: I'm sure that black women have had to be a lot more adaptive

through the decades and centuries and that their upbringing probably

*She is in medical school with a year and a half to do as of December 1978.

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King

21

trains them to take a lot more in stride than a well educated, middle

class white girl who has been trained just the way her brother was, or

educated just the way her brother was. Who has been trained to think
like any other guy and then suddenly finds herself in a position of . , .

SB: Relative desPeration.

KING: . . . of a very much less esteem, you know, what she says is
held in so much less esteem. It must be more of a shock.

SB: Did you feel that way about your position in SNCCZ That you
were not taken as seriously as a man was?

KING: Oh yeah, but then I feel that way about everything.

SB: Right.

KING: I don't think the awareness . . . well, I don't know, but I
don't think the awareness necessarily has to be that, but I definitely
felt that, As much as whiteness.

SB: Yeah, you think that was as important as whiteness?

KING: I never really figured that out. I remember thinking that it
might be more important and then I remember thinking, ”Well, no it's not
so important." I don't really have an answer for that.

SB: What were you and Casey doing that fall? You said that you had
left SNCC.

KING: Yes, I had left SNCC and was staying in Virginia at a country
cabin that my family had and Casey came to visit in November and that's
when we wrote the memo, I think that's the setting.

BEGIN TAPE I SIDE II
SB: Had you planned before she came?
KING: No, no. We just had a long discussion and just finally

decided to write the memo.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
22

SB: To do something.

KING: To circulate it inside.

33: Do you think that maybe you and Casey had slightly different
audiences? That you would have been wanting more response from women in
SNCC?

KING: Yes, she was probably more interested in the SDS, although I
was very much aware that I didn't know who the figures were. I knew Sharon
Jeffrey and Harriet Stallman and a few other people, but I think that she
was probably more aware of who the women with awareness were.

SB: Right. Were you disappointed at the reaction?

KING: Oh yeah, I think so. I didn't even know for awhile that it
had had any impact. I guess that it was Lennie Zeiger who told me. My
attitude about things like that has changed now. I begin to realize how
long it takes for people to change and really how spectacularly successful
we were in SNCC in a very short time in making what I think was a funda-
mental change in a nation's citizens. A small group had a most profound
impact on American thought. When you think of the size and the shortness
of time, and you think of the changes that are still taking place as a
result of it, it's pretty phenomenal. I have a much different view of
those things, now. I see it all so differently. NOW, I would think of
writing a memo and beginning to see the ripples from it five years from
now, perhaps.

SB: But at the time, you looked for results.

KING: Yes.

SB: I know that it was a time when peeple were beginning to feel

kind of disillusioned _ . ,

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
23

KING: Yes, I think that my general feelings of disappointment and
sadness at the way that the movement had ground itself out over relatively
petty issues and had been unable to solve what I now think is a very
reasonable dilemma, that any burgeoning organization has, which way it
goes, or what its identity will be. It's a perfectly predictable kind of
problem that I know any organization will be faced with. And we all were
so naive and wrapped up in it emotionally that we didn't have the
perspective,

SB: It must have been a very intense experience.

KING: Oh yeah, blindingly so. So that we didn't have the kiné of
view that woulé have let us see that it was a turn in the road and that in
the long run, there would be other things to come, Many, many people
were decimated for different reasons by the experience of what went on
after, well, I'd say about 1965.

SB: What kinds of things?

KING: Not just whites, there were a lot of blacks left at the time,
too. There was an incredible amount of internecine struggle. I remember
a sort of "troika" of Cleveland Sellers and Ivanhoe O‘Donaldson and Ralph
Featherstone, Who Were reported—-they never told me this--but they were
reported to be coming through Mississippi, checking on what everybody was
doing. You began to see a much less flexible attitude, SNCC had been
famous for the fact that it allowed a maximum of individuality, of styles
of individuals, that it sort of invited people who were strong, had a lot
of ego strength, had a lot of independent ideas and you were not a person
who came to work for SNCC if you were a person who needed a lot of super-
vision, That's the long and short of it. Most people Shared that one

quality, they were capable of independent action,

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
24

SB: Right.

KING: And inevitably that was a very, very acetic kind of mixture
that had to be put together.

SB: Yes, I can see how it would be sort of volatile.

KING: A lot of very strong personalities warring with each other
over rather petty issues.

SB: And you would say that the same thing is true of women in SNCC?
That they were strong, independent, self—initiating .

KING: thyes. Absolutely.

SB: See, I have a theory that one thing that happened in SNCC is
that women were strong and did gain a sense of their own potential.

KING: And personal gratification.

SB: Right. And I would think, and perhaps you can answer this better
than most, since you did write the memo and Were thinking about this
issue--I would think that it would be more difficult to take being pushed
into a traditional role within an organization in which you were getting
a sense of your own potential. Of your DWn strength.

KING: Well, it‘s this way too, Sara. If you are spending your time
thinking about how to expand the decision~making process by enlarging the
vote, by community organization, by generally lifting or opening people's
awareness to their own powar in themselves, it inevitably strengthens your
own conceptions, your own ability. And I think it was very much that. It
was the kind of thing where all of our activities were feeding a growing
sense of our, what should be an increasing power, and wasn't. I think
that’s very much the case. I think that if Casey had been teaching at
the University of Texas, you know, and if I had been doing something

else, the memo might not necessarily have been written. Because there

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
25
wasn't the feeling of chomping at the bit, you know. So much of what
we were doing was a sense of feeding ourselves and not to be able to
completely act that out. I think that you are right, that's probably it.

SB: That's why it seems to me that women who came into the anti~war
movement, which Was much more mass and didn't provide those kinds of
opportunities, didn't rebel as much. At least not at first. Later they
did. What did you do after ‘65?

KING: Then I went to California for I guess for about a year, year
and a half. And I was doing mostly photography at the time, I apprenticed
myself to Matt Herron of New Orleans for about six months and iearned
photography, in connection with the illiteracy materials that were being
developed. And I built the darkroom in Tugaloo. And in California, I
worked with the grape strike and some poverty corporations in the Bay
Area, Urban Corporation for the Poor, and a lot of other things like that,
but it wasn't with the same kind of purposefulness that I had in the
South, because it took me a very long time to understand what had
happened. It was very, very sad to see something that was so creative and
so dynamic and SO strong, completely really——I feel that change was
inevitable, it was not that which I feel sad about and it's not that I
wanted the change to take place along certain lines particularly, it's
that it lost its dynamism. It lost its power. It was very, very hard
for me to understand that, I was terribly disappointed for a long time.

SB: Right. How did you feel about Black Power? Was that sort of a
part of it?

KING: That had been around for a long time, and it really wasn't
very much of a surprise. I was most affected by the way that the black
women turned against me, That hurt more than the guys, But it had been

there you know, you could see it coming. You could understand it, so

 

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
26

SB: You can understand things, but the pain doesn't go, right?

KING: Oh yeah.

SB: How did that hostility come out? Did they just stop speaking,
or did they make accusations?

KING: Yes.

SB: All of the above?

KING: You know, an interesting thing happened in that fall of 1964.
Which was that we had gotten a lot of people registered to vote in
Mississippi and in that fall, blacks began running for a few elections.
They were candidates and when the votes came in in those communities where
there was a black majority, places in the black belt where 85% were
blacks, we might not have 85% of the vote, but there were instances, and
I'm sure I‘ve got some of the records, where there were black majorities,
and they elected white candidates. This was one of the issues that was
causing that identity crisis after the summer, because we had all been
operating on the assumption that--well, we knew that voter registration
was a safe issue to organize on, because there was some federal leverage
that we could potentially and possibly gain. I think there was also a
very great feel of belief that things would begin to change if we could
just get the vote. And it didn't happen that way, because blacks really
didn't believe, I think, that blacks could represent them. I think that
the situation is very much analogous to Women in politics now. Women,
by and large, don't believe that women can represent them. And when
women believe that women can represent them, just as when blacks began
believing that blacks could represent them, then, you start seeing the

I

change.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
27

SB: Right. In the memo, you sort of make an analogy with blacks,
Did you see that as analogous all along?

KING: Oh yes. Very definitely. I get a little impatient with the
way that it's glibly bashed about now. I feel that it's no longer a Very
utilitarian analogy, except in the vote, electoral politics, where you
can point to specifics, and a few other areas. I want people to be a
little bit more analytical. I get tired of these sloppy analyses that
take the easy . . .

SB: Well, I think that it's easy to understand how at a certain
point in the movement, for women to have their grievances be legitimate,
they felt that that was the only analogy to make.

KING: Oh yes. I think that the term "disenfranchisement" is a
very useful one. That blacks were disenfranchised and women are disen-
franchised in another sense. If you look at franchise in a very broad
sense, I think that it‘s true. Lack of formal participation, but I think
that the issue is infinitely more complicated and I think that the reason
that women for the first time in this country, and I believe that it's
unparalleled in the history of the world, the reason that women are
mobilizing--and I'd have to say that the reason that I was writing a memo
at that time about something like this, is that violent subjugation of
women is no longer a problem in advanced societies, and because women can
control their productivity, a woman who was always pregnant was in no
position to argue about anything, I think that it is the consolation of
those two things more than any effect from the black movement, although
that's helped. I think that there are more fundamental cultural changes
that are taking place that are bearing on that. And that the black

movement sort of presented a catalyst.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
28

SB: Yes.

KING: It provided a way of opening our eyes and it provided a use-
ful method for organizing and it also was based on a movement where young
people, who had no money, no particular education, nor anything to commend
themselves, except their own personalities, literally their own ego
strength and their own personalities, the belief that you could do some-
thing to change something just by sheer dent of personality. And I
think that is a great thing that Americans have that I've never found
elsewhere in the world, anywhere. I haven't done much traveling, but I
have yet to find that kind of feeling that is so widespread here.

SB: When did you first hear of the women's movement and how did
you react?

KING: First hear of it?

SB: Yeah, that women actually were reacting , . .

KING: There was no point in time. I had read Ehg Feminine Mystique
When it first came out and thought it was good. And I just remember hear-
ing of groups meeting around our memo, that at one SDS meeting, the women
had tried to raise it similarly and had been laughed down and had formed
the Women's Caucus. I just began hearing about it and feeling that it
would eventually catch. It was inevitable.

SB: Maybe you could, in case I don't get to talk to Casey, catch
me up a little bit on what_—I have a sense that she sort of faded out
after that point. Did she?

KING: Well, that's very complicated, I think that most of the
people who were involved in SNCC had a process of adjustment, re-entry
to go through and it’s very complicated. Part of it has to do with what

I was talking about, the notion that you can do something just by sheer

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
29

dint of will, That’s not the way that things generally run. The timing
was right for us to have great impact on social attitudes, and we did
manipulate the news media well. But there were certain feelings of
betrayal, particularly I suspect that this was true of the white kids
involved, the feeling that you couldn't even count on your own government.
A sort of suspension of values, almost, that the things that I had grown
up believing were constants, were just of dust. Everything from the FBI,
to the way the Justice Department ran, to theories of state government
and local churches, all of it was racist. It was a very, I suppose, a
very realistic but disillusioning experience and I think that many
people involved in SNCC never have re-entered society and have never
really taken what they learned and transformed it, or tried to use it in
some other way. And you know, I think that it's a very great price that
we paid. There's an awful lot that was lost, some very good people. And
I don‘t mean the people who were expatriates to Africa, but people who
have just never gotten themselves together and have never been able to
make useful contributions,

SB: That's right, it was a great tragedy.

KING: You can count the number of people who are "in there” actively
now, fighting and still trying to use their influence and still trying to
get things changed, things done. Maybe some people took more private
routes that I don't know of, And I can understand how somebody could just
never be able to get together. I really do. I think that the process
that I've gone through is rather interesting. I think that I'm a much
better person for it, but even I was unprepared for how much politics
plays a part.

SB: After all of that, right.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
30
KING: Yes, after all of that. You know, I thought that I was
tough and I thought I understood what made the world work and I thought
I understood how important telephones were, and how one person called
the other person and that makes it click. And it's really been an eye-
opener for me to go into business. I understand coumunity politics much
better for having been in the South and I think was much more effective

in developing the health programs for 0E0, because of the experience.

_And was used for about four years, in fact, as their primary trouble-

shooter, mainly in black communities who were irritated for one reason
or another at the federal funding apparatus.

SB: That's amazing,

KING: Yeah. I was sent everywhere from California to Florida to
deal with that. And the main thing that I had that other people didn’t
have was that I wasn't afraid of angry black communities. But nothing
could be worse than those SNCC meetings at Gammon Seminary, you see?

It was very easy. And nothing ever was any worse in terms of concentrated
aggression. I've never met anything like it. And I spent four years,
when you think about it, dealing with angry medical schools, angry
communities, angry public health departments of public health, angry
medical societies, all of them were furious at OEO's attempt to change
health services in their communities. Nothing ever touched the SNCC
experience, even meetings in response to CEO where there were guns
brought in by some of the community people.

SB: Can you just help me to see that aggression that you experienced.

KING: Well, there was a lot of aggression period. I'm not saying
that it was all directed at me.

SB: Right.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
31

KING: There was a lot of concentrated anger and aggression. At
that meeting in Waveland that I told you about, Jim Foreman thought that
it was a good idea to bring in some people from Synanon, he thought that
using the techniques of opening it up and letting it all come out would
be useful. And of course, it was impossible, because blacks had so
much more agility at expressing their anger and hostility than the whites
had. They had grown up expressing anger directly. It's much more open in
the black community. So, whites really got nothing therapeutic out of
that, because there was no way that anybody white could have possibly
held his own.

SB: That may not be just a racial thing, but a class thing.

KING: Well, I don't know . . .

SB: Except that the blacks tended to be from fairly middle-class
backgrounds.

KINg: Well, some of them were and some of them weren't. The
southeruers weren't. I don't know, it depends on how you define "class”,
too. If you define it as education, than many of the blacks were middle—
class. If you define it as what your parents did, then many of them had
maids as parents. Stokely, his mother Was a maid, Bob Moses' mother was
a maid. There were not many second generation professional people.

SB: .1 guess that's what I'm assuming more. More what I'm thinking
about. The kinds of families that people grew up in and how much ,

KING: Yeah, those kinds of emotions . . .

SB: . . . how those kinds of emotions were expressed, or in our
case, more often, were turned into intellectual, rational, suppressed kind

of thing . . .

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
32

KING: Well, I've always been taught that it's not nice to criticize
people. And it's not nice to be hostile. And I don't think that happened
to most middle—class black communities. At least my friends who are now
middle-class, I notice that they still are better at it, you know. They're
wittier, they're quicker, they're nimble, more than I will ever be,
Julian would be no good at that, now. Julian would be a good example of
what you‘re saying, because he comes from, I think, several generations
of black leadership. And I never remember Julian raising his voice,
ever, in the three years. And he's now on the board of directors for our
company, so I see him from time to tine. I've never heard him raise his
voice.

SB: Does that come down-sexually at all?

KING: well, I think so, although black women know how to shout. I
felt often, Sara, and this is just one little thing. I felt often that
women in the movement saw certain issues more clearly than some of the
men. And that that was a very positive thing about having women involved
with it.

SB: Yeah, what issues?

KING: Well, Casey Would always be more inclined, for example, to
talk about What people were doing to each other. You know, ”We're hurting
each other . . .” I remember a meeting in Hattiesburg, Mississippi
where she stood up and said, "I've been in the movement for”--however
many years it was then--"and I still feel fear of blacks and I know that
there are blacks in this room that still feel hate of Whites.“ Now, it
was only a woman who ever talked in those terms. Men were incapable of

talking in those kinds of emotional terms, and I think that has been

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
33

true throughout the culture. And I feel that women in politics in the
next few years, because Women don't know anything about politics and are
ingenuous when it comes to understanding how things get done politically,
are more likely to stick to the issues. It isn't because they are better
.people, or better human beings, it's because they don't know the toughest
roles of politics. They are more likely to talk the issues. And I think
that whether or not the credit is given, women really made a significant
contribution to the movement. Because they were a little bit closer to
people and the issues.

SB: I have one other, well, two questions jotted down. One—is--you
know, I'm asking you more about Casey because I'm afraid that I won't get
to talk to her. She and Tom got married in '61, or something like that
and spent the yearw—well, I've seen a letter from her to Ann Braden at
about that time and it seems to me--She pops up in records here and there,
but I don't have her chronology togethermuthat they sort of went different
ways pretty soon, but from what you say, it sounds like they maintained a
friendship.

KING: Well, they maintain a relationship, I don't know . , . Tom
came to visit Casey in the fall of 1963, and I think that it was the last
attempt to see if anything would work. What is your question?

SB: Well, you had said that through your--through Tom—-you were
familiar with SDS people and so one could have assumed that if they broke
up quickly, Casey would have had nothing more to do with those people,
but it sounds like that wasn't true. That her friendship circle remained.

KING: Yes.

SB: Despite whatever happened to their personal relationships.

KING: Yeah, right. Well, I don't really want to go into that very

much.

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
34

SB: Right, well, I‘m not asking you to give me details, but I just
wanted to understand that sort of connection.

KING: I don't believe in collusive, amicable divorces myself, and
I don't know how to interpret it when I see it, because I don't think
that it ever really happens. I don't know, I'm sure that it‘s possible
to have a relationship afterwards, but it seems to me that it takes a
long time for those feelings to change. Casey maintained her communica-
tion with Tom for some time. She wrote to him from Atlanta and eventually,
I guess, it just ended. He always spoke extremely lovingly of her and I
suspect there were some problems there that made it difficult for him to
make a commitment to her. That's been my feeling, but I may have been
too close to her,

SB: Well, see, in terms of just my research, I need to be able to
make the links between what was happening in SNCC and what was happening
in some of the SDS projects and Casey is a link.

KING: There was good communication. I remember when Kennedy was
killed, calling Robb Burlage and asking him his reaction to Johnson. And
I remember sending things in the mail to Todd Gitlin and Tom Hayden. I
remember one time sending Tom a clipping from the Atlanta Constitution
and I don't remember what it was about. He sent it back and on the
reverse side of the slipping was an item that President Kennedy and
Jacqueline Kennedy had gone to Georgia to stay at the plantation of some-
body or the other dowu there in Georgia for a week. And Tom's comment was,
”I found this much more interesting than the clipping"--which was
probably something related to the movement. So, there was definitely

communication and I think that it probably related most through Casey and

 

Restricted: Quotation or citation during interviewee lifetime only with prior written approval.

King
35
me, but I'm not very sure about that. But it‘s mostly through Casey,
yeah, she was the link. She had been involved in all the SDS stuff.
SB: My last question, I think, is whether you can differentiate--
well, let me go back and explain what impression I'm talking about. An
impression that is related to the way in which black men came on aggres—
sively to white women—-whether or not you could characterize black men
in the movement as having a more stereotypical male type stance or
attitude toward Women?
KING: Than what?
SB: Than white men.
KING: Yeah, but that's true throughout the black community. Yes.
But I find it now. You know, I work with a black program in Chicago,
in Lawndale. We've had a couple of contracts there. They just relate
quite differently from the people in Kentucky that we have a contract
from or the people in Charleston that we have a contract from. It's
just different,
SB: Right, thanks.
