
Kirsten Leloudis: This is Kirsten Lutis interviewing for the Southern Oral
History Program in Communication 669, Women's Activism in the Triangle. I'm
with Monika Johnson-Hostler, the executive director of North Carolina Coalition
Against Assault and it is June 11th. So I guess our first question would he could you
describe your childhood, where you grew up, what your family was like?

Monika Johnson-Hostler: Sure. I was born and raised in Thomasville, North
Carolina, small industrial manufacturing town. Almost everybody in my family
worked in the manufacturing industry. I grew up with all of my grandparents. Well
not my paternal grandfather; he was deceased before I was born. So my paternal
grandmother, my paternal great grandparents both grandmother and grandfather,
both my mother's parents and I also had a step grandfather who essentially was
married to my grandmother most of my life. I have lots of cousins. I am an only child.

By the time I was growing up my parents were not together, but both my parents

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

were very much a part of my life. They both still are because I'm both, their only
child for both of them [all laugh]. I'm it!

I mean I tend to say I grew up in a small town so my childhood is reﬂective of
that. I knew everybody in my community and everybody in my community knew
me. They knew how to chastise me, how to make sure that I excelled. I had a lot of
people invested in my life so I consider myselflucky. I had a lot of childhood
investors, so from my church to my family, which when I say family so my first
cousins. My mother has two brothers and one sister and my father has two sisters
and two brothers. I only have two, three ﬁrst cousins on my dad's side so they are
very small but my mother, brothers, and sister have multiple kids and so all of them
are like my siblings. So my husband who is an only child technically says I'm not an
only child [KL laughs] because my ﬁrst cousins were like my siblings and so I have
very close relationships with them. And I go home a lot to see them and they all
come to my house to see me. So my family is extremely close knit on both my
mother and my father's sides. Luckily I was the recipient of all of that love.

KL: Can you tell me more about your parents?

MJH: Sure, what do you want to know?

KL: What did they do for a living? How did they inﬂuence your career and
your education path?

MJH: Both my parents worked in industry. My dad was in the navy for a while,
but growing up both of them were in manufacturing which is what everyone did in
Thomasville. My mom has a high school education, I guess; oh so that's what you

want to know? My dad had two years of undergraduate he did not ﬁnish college. In

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

terms of my path, I mean, I'm it so everything that they thought they wanted out of
life they invested in me. Pretty much I'm an obedient child and I still am [KL and
Paris Vaughn laugh] and so what they said I would do I did. I made good grades
because they told me to make good grades. I went to college because they went to
college [all laugh]. Yeah, I mean it stopped there. Once I got to college they were like
"now you're free to make your own choices, just graduate." And I still have that
relationship with both of my parents. They wanted the best from me what is
expected and I tend to deliver what is expected of me.

KL: At what point in your life did you start to get involved in activism?

MJH: Very early my--I'm one hundred percent my mother and my daughter is
one hundred percent me. So there's, so I watched everybody--I wouldn't just say my
mother but everyone in my family--take care of other people. So if anybody needed
anything, everybody called the Johnsons. Any of them, because both of my parents
surnames are Johnson. They're not related thank goodness, they're not even from
the same state historically [all laugh]. But everybody knew that, especially my
maternal side, which they are still very much so that way. So I tell people all the
time my pound where I grew up in was a community house. preople needed
something, if people were hungry, if people didn't have food, if people didn't have
anywhere to stay, we had a basement people that they knew could live their till they
got on their feet. So that's what I knew my entire life. And so I would say for me very
early ifI thought something was wrong or injust I went home and said something to
my mother and she said something she was like "Well what are you going to do

about it?" Because if there's a problem then how can you ﬁx it so I don't remember a

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

time not knowing that my job was to come up with solutions if I felt things weren't
right or if people were being mistreated.

I don't think teachers really knew what to do with me. Thank goodness
because of my father, I had a photographic memory until I gave birth. And so things
came to me. I could look at it and it's pretty much stuck with me for life. And so it
was a gift and a curse so I was extremely smart [5:00], but I also talked a lot. And
most of that talking was geared towards making sure things were fair. And one of
the things that both of my parents especially my mother was that life isn't fair and it
hasn't been fair and two things you should know is that you're black and you're a
girl and so you know excellence is what you have to do to achieve anything. And so I
understood that and what that meant for me isnot just justice for me but justice for
people that at the time I didn't have the language for people who didn't have or
couldn't speak for themselves. And so I had lots of teachers tell me "you don't have
to be the voice for everybody in the class." And very early I learned to say "But if
they don't have a voice they should have one because everyone should have a voice."

And it's interesting, I didn't know you were going to ask these types of
questions, but my mother for the first time she was getting her passport. So she was
going through all of her things looking for forms ofidentification because she has a
very common name, all three of her names. And she found all these letters that I
wrote to her. Like the ﬁrst time I got less than an A on my spelling test I wrote her a
letter that said, "I didn't make an A on my spelling test. I didn't hear her say put it in
alphabetical order. Several people didn't." And this is in a letter not spelled correctly

[KL laughs]. So after I got my grade back I said to the teacher that she should

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

reconsider because everybody didn't know that that's what she meant, not just me.
"But don't worry I made an A in language and I made an A in math." Today, like this
is a grade for the day, this isn't even like a report card. And she had tons of those
letters. I was amazed that I was that concerned about things. Like this is clearly not
in my memory bank that I was that concerned in elementary school, about things
that happened to me or things that happened to somebody else.

She found another letter I wrote in third grade about a teacher who said to
me that she didn't think I was academically gifted cause she didn't have a lot of black
kids and they already had one that was academically gifted. And I just walked to the
principal's office, which I knew the consequences I can remember that because I was
in third grade. I knew the consequences of walking out of class. I just always knew
that my mother said to me--and my grandparents were very, my mother's parents,
were very much involved in my life because my mother was raising me as a single
mother. And I knew that they said as long as I got good grades, didn't talk back and
get in trouble at school that, you know, that all would be well and everything I
wanted I could have and I will say I was very much so a spoiled child because I did
what I was told. But I walked out knowing I could get in trouble. But I also knew
that my mother understood fairness and justness and she also said if things aren't
right, if anybody is hurting you or harming you than you should tell me and I will
always have your back. So I knew walking out of that class that the decision I was
making was the right decision. Needless to say she wasn't pleased that I walked out

of the class, she did think it could've waited until I got home. But it didn't.

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

And so for me that's probably the first time that I remember standing up for
myself. There were lots of instances that I remember standing up for other kids but
that is probably the most prominent place for me that I remember thinking, you
know, "You don't get to decide who I am based on what I look like."

KL: Were there any other cases of racism that you faced in elementary
school?

MJH: Oh god yes. Even though I went to elementary school in 1980, I still
remember very clearly--and I think this is true now that I have a six year old--that I
didn't understand race or color going to school. I lived in a very integrated
neighborhood. Actually now that I'm older I wouldn't call it that because all my
neighbors were white except for the people who were related to me, which we lived
two house in between three families that were related so it was an entire street. So
now I'm thinking it really wasn't integrated [KL and PV laugh]. But in my mind it
was; I lived on an integrated street. It's very much integrated now. But for me none
of that mattered until I went to school. And I had a little girl tell me "you're black,
God must have burnt you in the oven." And I was like "I don't think there are ovens
in heaven" [KL laughs]. It's a good thing I'm not overly emotional. But I did go home
and I did cry. And it was hurtful that was kindergarten and I went home.

In ﬁrst grade I considered her to be my best friend in first grade and she
came into school and she said "I learned something new," and I said, "What," and she
said, "I learned that you a nigger." Well I'm black so I know that's a bad word, race or
not, I definitely knew that was derogatory. And I slapped her. Now I did get in

trouble because Violence was never acceptable so that was a little problematic. But I

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

never regretted it and I think my mother still she punished me because it wasn't
okay to slap somebody. But I also think she was very upset that I wasn't remorseful
and I refused to apologize. And we went the whole first grade without me
apologizing [10:00], because you know I didn't think it deserved an apology. I
thought I was due an apology and she didn't apologize to me because she said,
"That's what you are," and well I said, "Why would I apologize to you?"

So those are the ones that are the most prominent for me. I think those were
life changing and they were life changing because I was in kindergarten and the ﬁrst
grade. As an adult I've been very active in letting my daughter know that race does
matter, your race does matter. It doesn't mean you can't excel but it does matter and
people are going to remind you that race is relevant. And you're a female, and like it
or not that is relevant and it doesn't stop you but it is relevant. I wish I would have
known that because that was hard for the ﬁrst time in the first grade it to be like, "It
matters that I'm black? Then somebody could've given me an update on this." Yeah, I
mean, very much so people find it hard when I recount how verbal I was as a child
and they meet my child and they're like, "Oh, we believe you," because my daughter
is very verbal and processes things. And so there is not a time I don't remember
processing anything that didn't ﬁt for me or my scope of relevancy at every age. I
processed them and I still do. And so I'm very much so critical and I analyze
everything.

Now I'm not sure which parent I got this from because neither of my parents
are overly critical and I am so I'm not sure ifit's a combination or genetic or what

[KL and PV laugh]. Or how they raised me, I'm not sure. But I am extremely critical,

10

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

and I think that matters as an activist because you have to be critical of things that
are relevant to determine. If I tell people all the time as an activist there's still things
that I choose, I choose my battles wisely because at the end ofthe day I think the just
and fair route, equality is about the end of the day and not small things. And so I
think it matters to have a critical analysis. I didn't have those words in ﬁrst grade
but I knew [all laugh]. I just knew it mattered I didn't know why.

KL: So you said that your parents had a Vision for your education and once
you got into college you could do what you wanted. Could you tell us about your
college years and what it was like?

MJH: Sure. So my first year--I'm not so sure how my family is going to feel
about this being in public record. But my ﬁrst year of school I, so I went through
school again recognizing that race mattered but not greatly. I grew up in a small
town, I had good grades, I was a cheerleader, so things were, so I didn't feel the
inequality personally in high school. Middle school, a lot because then grades
mattered and then classes mattered. So again going into sixth grade I didn't realize
you got placed based on how smart you are until I start to notice, you know, that
sixth seventh and eighth grade there were three black people in a class of thirty for
three years in all of my classes. Just three. That wasn't hard to figure out the ratio
something was really wrong with that imbalance. And it also wasn't so hard to figure
out that all of the, and I did grow up in a community where people were black, white,
or biracial. They're, at Thomasville they're now looking at demographics because
we have a family scholarship so now demographics so I know the demographics

[laughs as she says demographics]. There weren't any demographics then (umm)

11

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

not in the city school when I went to the city school. County school probably a little
different, but at our city school we didn't. And I thought it was odd that all black kids
had lunch at the same time and I didn't and I was sort of offended because I wanted
to be with other people [laughs].

But again, by seventh grade I ﬁgured out that it was all based on--well
actually I had a teacher tell me in the seventh grade, she wasn't sure how I got into
these classes. And I will readily admit that I was lazy, like things came to me
naturally. I did not work. So if I'd have worked I probably would have had straight
A's forever. But I didn't I just knew I could make A's and B's without doing anything.
So I unfortunately, I don't want my daughter to read this until she's an adult [all
laugh] unfortunately I didn't do anything. I just skated through. So I had a teacher
he very, she was very honest with me and she just said, "You're in here because you
test well. There are kids that are probably smarter that should probably be in your
spot." So I decided that they should ﬁnd the kids who were smarter than me and put
them in there. My mother didn't agree with that either. That didn't go over well
either because I wrote the nice letter. Clearly I hate to write now because I used all
of my writing skills then. But I wrote a letter and thought that they should ﬁnd the
kids that they deserved the spot. And I only had a few qualifications that they all
couldn't be white [KL laughs, 15:00]. Yeah I was special [KL laughs].

But it is to say that that letter never arrived to the school. I did show who
that was, like, "I'm going to take this to school tomorrow," and they were like, "No
you're not". So at any rate, by the time I got to high school, I had a couple good

guidance counselors that basically said, "You do know you can go to college" and I

12

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

said, "You do know I don't have a choice. It's not really an option, I'm going." So the
schools that were given to me as an option were I guess the schools that they
thought would be fitting for somebody who wasn't going to work hard, which I get
that because as an adult. No I was lazy to put it nicely. And so, so I decided very
quickly that I was going to go to a historically black college. And so I went through
the list, did all the research on my own. I might add that we did not have internet
[KL and PV laugh]. They may have had internet somewhere, but it was not me and I
didn't know anybody else who had internet. So I just went to the guidance
counselor and went through every record that they had of every college or
university and wrote them and decided that when we had our college fair that I
would already know where I wanted to go and who I wanted to see.

So I went to Hampton University my freshman year and I'm just learning,
because my grandfather just died last year that they sent me to a school and paid
$22,000 out ofpocket. Now I cannot even imagine how they paid $22,000 because I
don't think any ofthem made $22,000. But they did. I did not have a student loan. I
didn't even know student loans were an option. I don't even think they knew that
financial aid was an option. What they knew is that I wanted to go to college and
that I did all the work to get accepted and they would ﬁgure out how to pay for it.
That's what I want my daughter to know because that was, I'm still emotional and
astounded that they did it. I had no clue. And then I decided not to do anything in
college because there was nobody there to tell me what to do. And I would say--. So
of course I took a placement test and of course I didn't have to take any college

English, but I also took AP English so I knew I wasn't going to be taking English in

13

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

college because I took the AP Exam because I was, you know I could test well. I
already knew that [KL and MJH laugh]. I should also note that has since gone away
as well [KL laughs]. I no longer test well either.

But I went to college and went right into coursework and I thought that I
wanted to be a psychiatrist. [Phone rings] I'm not sure how you turn that off. (Let it
ring for a second. So I took a few, so I took botany as well as zoology. That was
pretty much a deciding factor where I was just like, "You know, this is not going to
work." So I went home at Christmas, hoping those grades would not arrive. They did
arrive and it didn't go very well. Even still I still didn't understand--. Well I
understood in my opinion why they were upset, because I had never gotten made
less than a B written on anything written in a grade that they could see, report cards.
And so I thought that was the level of disappointment. And when I say
disappointment I mean my entire family. Not just my parents and my grandparents,
but all my aunts and uncles knew, all my cousins knew. Like it was a family
discussion that I went to college and [slaps her hand] look at these grades. And I will
not tell you what those grades were, because it is just best to be sealed [all laugh].

And so I went back to school the next semester. I was still not sure how I was
not on academic probation. I now know, because I was still really good friends with
all the people I was friends with freshman years, that they were all on academic
probation. I was not. But I did leave there knowing I could not go back. It was an
environment that I'd never been exposed to. It was all African American kids. They
were all very very wealthy. And the exposure and access to things and just getting in

a car and driving somewhere out of state because we felt like it. It's just not how I

14

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

grew up. I mean I grew up understanding the value of a dollar and that dollars didn't
grow on trees because I was told that all the time. And so it was just a very different
environment for me and my mother cried every day that I was gone, and I am not
exaggerating. Every day. She drove my grandparents and my aunts and uncles
insane because she cried every day. That's a long time to be in college and cry every
day. I mean I'm her only child and I think she also had a lot of fears of the unknown
of what college was and what could I be doing. But she raised me well and one thing
I will always tell my daughter is that everything she told me not to do, I didn't do. I
have never took drugs [2 0:00] never thought about it, clearly exposed to it. I just,
I'm a rule follower and so I followed the rules and didn't do it because she told me
not to. Oh, I don't, of course she didn't know she could trust an eighteen year old to
follow rules outside of her house. I did not follow the grade rules, clearly but
everything else I believed her on.

And so when I came home for the summer, I went to summer school at A&T,
North Carolina A&T the state university because it was close to home. Because it did
kick in that I was like really not doing anything and so I felt horrible and I took two
full loads of summer school both sessions mostly because I'm a rule follower and I
knew my mother would not be okay until she was able to say, "Look! She's back!"
And so I went to summer school and then that's when I realized I need to be in a
smaller school or university where teachers still cared, because I grew up in a small
environment where I knew everybody and so ifI knew somebody was getting out of
line I could say something. I knew I could not go to A&T because I went there every

summer and it was way too close to my mom. I loved her and I was sad that she was

15

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

crying, but I was not that sad. So I went to Fayetteville State University and I
finished there in two years because at that point, I mean, my job was to go to school
at that point and I got that after seeing the bad grades in writing. Now I didn't think
I was going to graduate early until my advisor said "You know all those classes that
you took, like you're done here" [KL laughs]. And I was like, "Done with what?" And
they said, "Undergraduate, you're done." I mean I had six hours over what was
required to graduate from undergrad because technically they had pulled all of the
transcripts from both of the other universities that I had gone to.

So I ﬁnished school and I well I was told I was going to ﬁnish school and I was
like, "I don't know what I'm going to do." So I didn't leave after the second full year
there. I stayed another semester and took on, what was my minor ended up being a
double major, psychology and sociology but I technically still say sociology is still
my minor because I just did it because I needed to be in school until I could decide
what I wanted to do. And that's when I chose, because I had not even chosen a
senior topic and so I chose a senior topic and I chose sexual assault because my
freshman year somebody was sexually assaulted. I'm telling you this out of
chronological order because it matters in the scheme of things. So somebody was
sexually assaulted by a football player and I, she came to my dorm room and my
room is called "The rec" and it had R-E-C like recreation center because I went to
college with a big TV and radio that's all not here or there [KL laughs], but I went to
college with way too much stuff that wasn't really necessary for a college dorm.

They didn't know. They knew I needed a TV and radio so they were like, "Sure!"

16

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

So anyways she came to the rec to tell us what happened and that was my
first introduction to rape or sexual assault or knowing anybody who openly said
that they were sexually assaulted. And she told us what happened, but she didn't
want to do anything. She didn't want to tell anybody. She just needed to tell
somebody because she walked into the dorm crying, distraught, what have you. So I
said, "Oh we can do something." She said "Well, I don't want to do anything." And so
I was trying to ﬁgure out what we could do without saying who it was and it was
football players. And so I thought we could take on the football players and I did.
Needless to say, nothing changed for them. However they will remember that that's
when it sparked for me that, "Oh, there's agencies that do something about this so
we should at least have information available for people, for young women," and so
rape crisis stuff became available in our dorms because I just didn't know what else
to do at that point. So that's what I did I ﬁgured out who would know what to do.

So that is how I chose my senior topic and I interviewed the Rape Crisis
Center of Cumberland County and decided, "Oh this is pretty interesting. Like people
can do this for a living and I don't have to be a psychiatrist to actually help people?"
And so I did the paper and, a joint paper actually. I did it on African Americans who
were sexually assaulted because then I became intrigued by incest and child sexual
abuse and how it became very much a family thing. And of course I really only did
African Americans because I was one and wanted to be able to ask my family who
clearly was not interested in disclosing all these things. But I really had more of a
conversation with my grandmother and my great aunt because I wanted a

perspective from them, given everything was swept under the rug then.

17

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

So I wrote the paper and I knew I was going to graduate in December and by
that time I had already met who now is my husband. We had started dating that last
year that I was at school and I didn't know when I wanted to get my Masters then
because I knew I wasn't going to take any biology or botany [KL and PV laugh,
25:00]. So I didn't really know what a career choice was. I just knew that I wanted
to do something to help people. And the thing that I always will say about
Thomasville High School and the Thomasville School Systems, which they knew very
little I would say, but they knew how to score aptitude tests and it was right. In the
seventh grade a teacher told me, "You will do something to help people. That's
innately who you are and it's what matters to you and it's what is important." She
said "You scored very well in all of these other things, but everything came back to
people." And that's true; it's in my DNA somehow.

And so my husband, who is not my husband got a job in a small town in
Scotland county as a math teacher and he called me because he graduated before I
did and he was like, "There's a job at a rape crisis center and it is just now opening,"
and I was like, "Oh, why not?" So I went to interview with two people and I stood up
to walk out and they were like "So when can you start work?" I was twenty, I wasn't
even twenty-one yet and I was like, I'm pretty sure there are some question I should
be asking, but since I didn't know what they were. I said, "I will call you back." So at
any rate, so we had a conversation and they officially offered me the job. It's funny
now because I think about the salary and I think, "Wow, that's pennies," but it
clearly was still not pennies to people who grew up in a small town. Because even

to my family they weren't, two things they weren't happy about that I was moving to

18

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

a small town with somebody that I wasn't married to [PV laughs]. So those became
problems, not so much with my parents. I think with my mother I think she already
knew she could trust me like, the mistake that I made I did everything to make it up.
So I think if nothing else, my mother knew that I was at least responsible and that I
would always make good decisions and that she had done her job well. My
grandparents on the other hand, not so much [KL and PV laugh]. I mean I think they
knew I was still a good kid, but they were still concerned about an adult decision I
was making.

Paris Vaughn: And old fashioned.

MJH: And very old fashioned. And I, you know, people are like, "Oh yeah very
religious," and I'm like, "My grandfather didn't go to church I don't think you'd call
what he was thinking religious" [All laugh]. My grandmother, yes sure she was
religious. My grandfather, erm I'm not sure we could go with religious. I think he
was going with, "Oh lord my oldest granddaughter is going to live with a man that
we don't know." Because they are old fashioned in that, you know my husband is not
from a small town. He's a military kid. He grew up all over the country. He didn't eat
meat. All of these things were foreign to my family who just wasn't really sure about
him. But anyway I, I did it I took the job and it was the Executive Director who
actually is back at UNC; she's a student at the school government. And she was my
first boss and she's still a wonderful person in my life and really really tried to push
me to go back and get my masters. And I still didn't know what I wanted to do I was

like no, because I don't love school I happen to do well, I don't love it, hence that ﬁrst

19

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

year in college [all laugh]. But I didn't know what I wanted to be and so I loved the
job that I was doing.

So I stayed on the job and I, the agency was a Rape Crisis Center and it
started doing Domestic Violence and I had a couple of children and I knew that I
probably would not be able to do direct services for long because there was not a
systematic answer to stop what I was seeing. And for somebody who always
thought that I could figure out an answer to the unjust and to the things that aren't
fair I didn't have an answer to them. Society didn't, which still doesn't quite make
sense to me and I've been doing this work now for almost seventeen years. I'm still
not sure how as a society we don't keep our children safe and I think that was
another turning point for me to realize that, "Okay I can't do direct services because
clearly I don't have children. I cannot take all of these children into my home." I was
in my twenties. That probably was not going to ﬂy with my now husband either that
I was bringing a bunch of kids home.

The threats from perpetrators and abusers never bothered me. I didn't fear
people who used physical or sexual Violence to have power over someone so I was
never afraid. And it was a small town so I had quite a few threats but those things
never bothered me. It was the children. I, I just didn't know why as a society nobody
thought to make it their job to ﬁgure out how to keep them safe. So intervention is
still really important to me. It was important to me then, but I left there knowing
that there had to be another side to the work that I was doing in the local
community. So while I was at the rape crisis center in Scotland county I came on the

board of NC CASA in 1997, still in my early 20's. I came on the board here and a job

20

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

came open for the Campus Rape Prevention Coordinator, which everybody knows
my history in how I came to this work [30:00]. And so the Executive Director said," I
think you should apply because it's where your passion started and how do you
work with college campuses to help them deal with sexual assault on college
campuses." So I came here in 1999 to do rape prevention education on college
campuses and to write a sexual assault model policy for college campuses. So I did
that in conjunction with the person that was the director for the Duke Women's
Center. And I've been here ever since and I've probably held every job at the
coalition [KL laughs]. And I'm sure there are detailed questions that you want to
know but that was my college and that's how I got to my career.

PV: So you talked about how difﬁcult it was to especially work with children.
What kind of steps have you taken throughout your career to perform self care and
to prevent burning out in this job?

MJH: So it's the same lesson that I learned in elementary school that I cannot
win the war ﬁghting every small battle. And so I come to work and I work hard
every day and it's also how I, my work is now more policy oriented because I believe
system issues, they don't have policies in place and now my second issue is there is
now no accountability for the policies. Now that I know how to write policy I have
to ﬁgure out how to get other agencies to implement the policies that they now have.
But for me the self—care is my family. I mean I have a support system still the same
people outside of my grandparents who are all deceased now. But my support
system is unreal. They keep me grounded and let me know that what I do is

important but more important is ifI'm not here I can't do the things I like. And so I

21

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

have a best friend who is my first cousin, who we're six weeks apart; it's my dad's
niece. And she, well I'm not sure who keeps her grounded, but she is absolutely a
comedian and keeps me in stitches. And she and my husband and my mother are all
the same person to me, they all have the same spirit. So I know that for me my life is
surrounded by nurturers because I give a whole lot. I'm now at a place where I can
say that about myself, that I give everything to people or to whatever I'm passionate
about I give. And so I am very very blessed to have people who give to me because
they know that I'm not going to do it willingly on my own. You know, those three,
there are lots of people, but those three people are my best friend, my husband, and
my mother are my nurturers and they make sure that I know that there's lots more
important things and fun things that I can do that don't require me to be stressed.
Now my husband does have to remind me. "Oh gosh, like you don't have to fix
it ifit's really broken," if we're doing something that is so not related to work, like I
don't have to ﬁx everything and I do have that tendency to want to ﬁgure it out. And
then I have a six year old so I have lots, I mean well ﬁrst of all she has her own
schedule that requires me to not burn out. I would deﬁnitely say before my
daughter I probably worked a lot. I don't take sick leave. I took sick leave because I
was on bed rest for my daughter. But I don't stay out of work. I have chronic
respiratory issues and I deal with them. That's also being raised in a family who
didn't have sick days and so I also realized that sick days don't make sense to me
because they were never able to stay home sick. And so I now know that because
I'm able to analyze why I don't take sick days [all laugh]. Of course I don't take sick

days because I don't feel sick but I don't take sick days because you have to be sick

22

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

to be out of work. And I operate that way. So I'm a little old-fashioned old-school
and I learned from my grandparents. I don't behave that way as an employer but I
do operate that way.

So once a year I take a lot oftime off. My husband is a teacher, so I take most
of December offbecause he's out most of December and then now that my daughter
is in school I don't work full weeks when she's out of school. So that's why it's been
hard to get me for the interview [KL laughs]. And I, so I have a lot of meetings which
make me end up working for over forty hours. But in the summer I try not to work
forty hours I try to be home for her activities so my husband isn't the person who's
seeing her do whatever activity she's in. So that keeps me grounded. And I don't
think I burn out because I do this work from a place of pity or a place of exhaustion. I
do it from a place of changing society and that doesn't make me tired. People that I
see burn out come to work and get overwhelmed by a job and I don't see what I do
as a job. I just think I live it, or at least I try to. Clearly I have not mastered that
because if so there would be a whole lot changed in society so I have not mastered it,
but I live it. So, so I don't know. I just haven't really experienced burn out and I think
it's because I truly believe [35:00] what I do is not work and I also believe that those
people keep me grounded in my life outside of this ofﬁce. Although I am glued to my
email [KL and PV laugh], but that doesn't seem like work to me. I'm a wired
employee that's what I say.

PV: So what exactly do you guys do here?

MJH: Okay, sorry there is a surprise bridal shower happening in the office [PV

and KL laugh], which I thought it was happening at twelve so I thought you would

23

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

miss it. I apologize. That's what happens when you're out ofthe office most of the
time. So at NC CASA we're a statewide organization that is a membership
organization for the ninety plus rape crisis centers in North Carolina. So every
county is served by a rape crisis center but there are about sixty-three court
agencies that have offices in about ninety-two counties. But then they have staff
covering the other eight counties that there are not a physical ofﬁce for sexual
assault. So they provide direct services which is what I did in Scotland County for
many years. But we do the training for those advocates. We also do law
enforcement training on sexual assault specifically so impact of sexual Violence,
prevalence and how to interview sexual assault survivors. We also train sexual
assault nurse examiners forensic nurses on evidence collection and the importance
of the survivor because what they do is scientific and what we do is let them know
that that is a human being that is the evidence. And so we provide training there.
We also provide training for anybody who needs it. We have a campus
consortium which now we have probably over forty campuses who are a part of our
campus consortium so they have their own advisory committee of campuses and we
provide prevention training to them and with them because a lot of them now have
federal grants that they have at their school universities to do sexual Violence or
domestic Violence preventions; but we do the sexual assault side ofthings. And we
also work with all of the state agencies on writing model policies. So we just wrote a
policy on new research because I wrote one in 99. There wasn't a lot of research but
now there's lots of research. And we also have an administration, our presidential

administration who has this as a priority issue. So of course it helps to have the Vice

24

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

president that has a, "One is too many," website on sexual assault that happens on
college campuses. So that's a huge initiative for us, which we want to work on with
the department of public health.

You all interviewed the council for women so you all know they're a funder
and we are, statutorily the coalition provides training to the agencies that they fund
which are the rape crisis centers. So they fund direct services and we train direct
service providers. So there is a lot ofturnover because now that I'm older I know
that they really don't make a lot of money to do work that is stressful and that
absolutely has a high turnover and burnout rate. I just did my ﬁrst career fair at my
daughter's elementary school and I realized this is not a career that anyone will ever
tell you that you can ever have. So I'm looking in her yearbook and it actually has
where I work, but they asked me to come talk about being a non-proﬁt director and
I said, "Well that is really great of them to put where I work," because now
somebody knows that is a career. Because even in college this isn't a career choice
you'd think that you would do. Even women's studies majors, a lot of them think
about policy which is now where I now spend the bulk of my time.

So that's what we do our work revolves around training and education for
direct service providers whether they are rape crisis centers or we call them allied
professionals or first responders who would be involved in a sexual assault case,
and then campuses. But we also do prevention work, which is also training people
how to do prevention so society systematically understands that it is our job to
change to prevent children from being sexually abused, not children and not just

singularly parents but systems are also a part of that. So we do systems work as

25

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

well which is mostly translated into policy. So we do both state and federal policy
and so, which there will be a trend here. So in that I'm also the chair of the National
Alliance to End Sexual Violence, which I have been for, my daughter's six so almost
six years. I know that's a long time to be a chair [all laugh]. But it is a policy making
body so all of our work and there's no staff so we're all volunteer so I tell people my
6-10 job which is when I leave here is to work with federal policy. That is in both
writing and advocating for it, and that advocacy isn't just to Congress on the
importance of passing legislation but it's also to agencies so that they understand
why it's important that the policy governs their work. So that's my current focus, as
a public policy in legislation.

PV: So when you go to different meetings what exactly goes on at those
meetings?

MJH: I know that's like the million-dollar question. I think everybody in my
family including my husband and daughter are like 'why do you have so many
meetings?’ [KL laughs, 40:00] So we have a lot of meetings because there's probably
not a state entity that isn't impacted by our work. So that's health, that's human
services, that's schools, that's universities, you know, it's department of
administration. It's every agency or cabinet level agency that should be concerned
about these issues. So we've done a good job because there is a state sexual assault
coalition in all fifty states and territories including Washington D.C. So I'm a
counterpart in all those states and territories which [cheer in the background from
bridal shower, MJH laughs] make up the alliance the National Alliance to End Sexual

Violence. And so a lot of those meetings are for really helping them understand

26

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

where sexual Violence is integrated. So we're in the room so we at least understand
that they should be there, but they don't necessarily always understand why I say,
"I'm Monika Johnson-Hostler from the North Carolina Coalition to End Sexual
Assault". Everybody in the room doesn't necessarily understand why we are there,
so my job is to say why we are there.

So if it's funding priorities you know I'm there to say to them, "You know
sexual assault does this, this is what prevalence looks like in the school system. This
is what prevalence looks like in you know adult facilities or nursing homes or group
homes." So I always tell people there's probably not a facet of life that I can't
probably tell you how it's connected because sexual assault happens across the
lifespan and there are no boundaries. And so there's almost not somewhere we can't
integrate sexual Violence. And it should be because again to get to, I really do come
to work so that there is not a work for me to come to and that can't happen without
convincing the rest of the world that it matters, and that we are the only ones that
can keep women and children primarily safe. Because you know we have a society
that allows perpetrators to continue to perpetrate; if we didn't we wouldn't still be
dealing with it so. So that's what I'm doing at those meetings, telling them why it
matters [KL and PV laugh] and how it fits into whatever they're talking about.

KL: Oh wow. Would you consider yourselfa feminist?

MJH: Umm, I think theoretically I'm a feminist. I don't--well a couple things. I
would never call myself a feminist. I agree with feminist principles. I, you know,
without a shadow ofa doubt think Gloria Steinem is one of the most brilliant women

who has really brought to light feminists in this century and in my lifetime. Would I

27

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

say I was a feminist throughout the theoretical principles of feminism? No because I
don't think feminists included women of color. I'm a firm advocate that Sojourner
Truth that IE. Wells laid the foundation for black women to be included in women
having equal rights. So you know people like to couch African American women as a
women who had to make a decision between women's rights and women's suffrage,
and my issue is that real feminists would have recognized that that's not really a
choice that African American women could have made because they don't get to
choose which one they are first. They just are. And so I do believe that feminist
perspective understands that today. But I've never called myself one because I
understand the historical context in being who I am and I critically analyze things
and things that matter. I've just never chosen to call myself a feminist.

Am I offended by it? No. do I live by feminist principles? Absolutely. But it's
almost like when I was in kindergarten. I probably wouldn't have chosen to call
myself a black girl either but I didn't really have much choice [all laugh]. So it is
what it is. I think feminists, I think understanding feminist principles is important.
There are principles that I teach my daughter every day. But there are principles
that I was taught and I don't think my mother or my grandmother understood what
feminism meant. They just knew that this is right and this is what you have the
opportunity to do because you get to live and breathe on this earth and so why
wouldn't you have the same opportunities to make choices that are right for you?
And so to me that is, I'm not sure that feminist theory keeps it that simple [KL and

PV laugh], but that is what feminist theory means to me and so I would consider

28

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

those principles or indoctrine into my life and how I live and also teach them to my
daughter.

KL: Even though the center isn't directly for women who have been abused
do you still have women that come in?

MJH: We do, women, men, and children. And so we have two MSW's on staff,
which have different jobs but it is important that we maintain somebody on staff
who provided direct services other than me [laughs] which I can handle it all. I still
take crisis calls if I'm the only one available. But we also have a staff attorney so a lot
of the questions that we tend to get now are more about their legal recourse, or is
there legal recourse, or is there civil recourse; so both criminal and civil recourse.
Most of the calls and clients we get really want our help [45:00] and guidance on the
legal system.

PV: 0k.

KL: What do you think is the role of men who want to serve as allies to the
anti-sexual Violence and anti-rape movements?

MJH: So I have men on staffhere so I think they are integral to this work. My
husband and I went on a vacation with some friends and one of the things he said
which I think speaks to my thought on men in the movement, which I might add
happened in 1998 right before we got married so I didn't realize that this would be
about how I thought men were in the movement. But again I think it matters. I think
everyone has a role in this work. I don't think, just like any other major, you know,
political or human rights or social justice issue, it can't be stopped by the people

who were persecuted. So there has always had to be allies in those that have

29

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

privilege and power and that I also believe that those--which are in feminist
principles--that you know, that the majority, whether it is men or whether it's based
on race or sexual orientation or ability, there is always a privileged side of the coin.
And so if those people with privilege and power aren't engaged in the work then we
can keep doing the work but we're pushing up against in most cases the people who
are perpetrating whatever it is and in my case it's sexual Violence.

So the majority of perpetrators are men. We clearly have women who
perpetrate, but the majority are men. And so I believe that other men have to hold
men accountable because there are more good men then there are men who rape
and so if the majority of those men do their work and are allies and really setting the
standard--. My husband's a teacher. He teaches math. His job is to still integrate
what I do, that it's important that you respect women even before our daughter. And
he does that. I tell people every day, "If my husband could figure out how to
integrate sexual Violence prevention in math [KL and PV laugh], you can figure out
how to integrate it anywhere. So I guess what I would say is I've always known the
importance of men in the work. But I do have some feelings about it that I think
we're going to have to work out in this work. That men have come into this work
and I've said to men that come into the work, they come in and they charge their
worth because again that's a privilege that men have. Men tend to say, "we'll charge
$10,000 just to tell you why men should be allies." People ask me to come speak all
the time, I'm like, "Oh it's free." NCCASA doesn't have travel so you may have to pay
for my plane ticket, but like those things don't matter because most of the women

who do this work do it because it matters and because it is important to them and I

30

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

think men that come to this work believe that. But men are also socialized very
differently than women and so they ask for their worth. And I don't think that's
wrong, but I do think it matters in the work because now we're able to see yet again
a disparity being played out in a work where we're trying to move to equality for
men and women.

KL: Right.

MJH: Because the anti-rape movement that's about ending rape but it's also
about social justice and equality and liVing in a culture where women and girls are
not hyper-sexualized so that they do have, they are coming to the table with some
forms of privilege and power that are not associated with being male or of a certain
race or a certain dominant group and all of those things I think are interwoven into
our work. If I do this work from a place of know that the most vulnerable people to
being sexually violated are on the other side ofthe non-privileged side of the coin.
So people of color, people that have disabilities, people who you know are female.
People who are children, people who don't live, their sexual preference is not
heterosexual which is dominant in this culture. Like all of those people are closer to
the margin of vulnerability in sexual Violence and we know this based off of
prevalence numbers. The amnesty report among Native Americans I think has been
eye opening to this country for people who have been listening even a little bit. To
see that all of those things matter how we treat people in this country.

KL: Right [laughs].

31

Monika Iohnson-Hostler

MJH: Again there's probably not a thing that you can't come up with that I
cannot integrate this in. So that's my framework. Right or wrong that's how I live.
That's Monika's philosophy.

KL: I don't think I have any more questions unless you do Paris.

PV: Me neither.

KL: Great well thank you so much.

PV: Thank you.

MJH: No problem. It pays to interview a talker [all laugh]. Yeah I needed the
probey questions at first because I was like, "I'm not sure what you really want to
know." Once I ﬁgured out that you wanted to know all of the stages of my life I

figured out how to tell you.

