
Josh Bridges: I'm Josh Bridges, the interviewer and I will be interviewing Ms.
Bonnie Mize. Ms. Mize just to start off, as you are aware ofprogram and we would
like to just first off thank you for so many of your contributions to the overall
general women's movement of North Carolina. But we also just want to try to get to
know you a little bit better and what led you to this movement what led you to this
point. And so one of the first things I would like to know is just could you tell me a
little more about your upbringing, your home life, and your family? And just--.

Bonnie Mize: My parents they've been married for fifty years; they just
recently celebrated their ﬁftieth anniversary. They're still together. I was brought
up in Church. Graduated high school, never even went on a date till I was seventeen.

Never tasted alcohol until I was eighteen. My ﬁrst taste of liquor was when I was

Bonnie Mize

twenty-one when my oldest daughter was three days old. I was what you call a good
girl until [laughs].

]B: I got you, well could you tell me a little more about that?

BM: My second husband he--. I had tried pot and things some, but I didn't like
them and I especially didn't like spending the money. But my second husband he did
use drugs. When I met him he said he had quit and we did for probably, he was for
four years. But then he started bringing it in a little and to be with him I chose to do
everything he was doing. And I've smoked pot, snorted cocaine, shot cocaine,
smoked crack, I have been arrested many times for stealing, for [pause] obtaining
property under false pretenses. For possession, and I have spent six months at the
Rocky Mount Facility for Women.

IB: Ifyou don't mind, like just could you elaborate more on some ofthe
experience of how you feel like those things led you to want to help out with this
guide to recovery?

BM: I wanted to stop I tried to stop. I told my family that I was using drugs. I
told my children that I was using drugs. I wanted to stop it; I didn't know how. And
when I got out of prison I looked for a place like this, and there wasn't any in
anywhere near Alamance County where my children were. I wanted to be with my
children. At that time, me and my husband were separated and I wanted to be with
my children, and there wasn't any program that would take me anywhere near here.
I was going to have to go out of state to get into something and I didn't want to do
that. So there was nothing available for women in Alamance County at that time and

that was in '01.

Bonnie Mize

I stayed clean until September of '01. In fact I stayed clean for 9 months and I
relapsed behind a man. I have found that men was one of my first addictions, but he
didn't do what I thought he should do and so I reached back and started using again.
At that time, I found myself at a place called RTS Residential Treatment Services for
detox and that's where I actually met evangelist MCCauley and she came in my first
night and I was in the detox unit and she was talking about her Vision, you know.
This place was nothing more than a thought in her mind, and you know, a dream in
her belly and she told me about it. And I sat on that bed not even 24 hours clean
from using, from prostitution, from stealing, from all of it and I told her I want to
help her. And that was in '01. In September of'03 I actually moved in to God Did It
Recovery Home for Women. I'm a product of this ministry I spent seven months in
this home and in September of'OS I came to work for her. She [computer sound]
she asked me, you just said go ahead right?

IB: Yes ma'am.

BM: She called me by her house one day after I had left and I moved into my
own home and my daughter came to stay with me. Now when I left the program I
continued every meeting. I kept coming to every meeting that they had. The ladies
have meetings every night and stuff. I continued every meeting and I took my
daughter with me. She called me by her house one day and she said "I want you to
pray about something, I want you to pray about coming to work for me." And
[emotionally, voice wavering] nothing in my mind had ever told me [5:00] that I

would be doing something like this one day. And I just thank God for the

Bonnie Mize

opportunity, because I've been where they are. I know what they're doing, I know
what they're thinking, and I know what games that they are playing.

But I also know that there is help. Because see, like I said for so long: I
wanted to stop, but I didn't know how. I didn't know how. Here I learned something
different. I was raised in Church I told you I was the good girl. Every time the
Church door was opened, I was here. But I had a whole lot of head knowledge and
very little heart knowledge. Here where I was given the opportunity to build a
lasting relationship; to find another way, another thing to do other than reach for
the drug or reach for a man [crying softly].

]B: You take your time as well. Before we started recording this, as you were
filling out the life history form you mentioned just your parents and how you were
proud of them for graduating afterwards. Could you just tell me more about that
story and how it made you feel and tell me a little more about your parents if you
didn't mind?

BM: My father most of my growing up he worked two jobs most of my life.
My grandfather, my mother's father, and my mother at one point--I remember my
mother drinking to the point of passing out when I was smaller. But for some reason
she quit when I was small and I haven't seen her or my father drink anything for
probably thirty years; probably more, closer to forty. But my father he worked two
jobs most of my life. Him and my mother worked at Burlington Industries. My
senior year ofhigh school, no my junior year of high school he got a job at the can
plant in Reidsville that was just opening and he got a job as a maintainer there. And

they offered a class, an opportunity for him to go to RCC and continue in education

Bonnie Mize

and to get his high school diploma. And when he went, my mother went and my
mother went to--it wasn't RCC it was in Caswell County because they both went to
the high school where I graduated night classes, probably Yancey. And they both,
after I graduated, three months later they had a graduation for the continuing
education class but for them. Actually walked, you know, just like I did for the
graduation and they received their high school diplomas.

IB: That's good, how do you feel, and you touched on it earlier, just like what
led you to the recovery home per se in your experiences? But how do you feel like
where you are from and growing up the way you grew up contributed to you
wanting to do this as well?

BM: A lot of things I remember happened, my mother says didn't happen.
But Ms. MCCauley has a saying, you know. She says, "The truth is you know it." And
that is, you know, a profound statement because it is what I remember, and no
matter what you tell me this is what I remember. I made some wrong choices. Now I
was looking for something. I had a hole that wasn't being ﬁlled and I thought a man
could ﬁll it. And then I had this man that I thought was God's gift to Earth and he
started back using his drugs and I wanted to be there.

But in regards to my upbringing, my grandparents were never divorced from
either side. My grandmothers lived much longer than my grandfathers and they
both, you know, were buried. My mother's father he was an alcoholic. She stayed
with him, you know, through the abuse through all of it; she stayed with him. My

father's parents know nothing that I know of. He passed on, but my grandmother is

Bonnie Mize

still alive; she is eighty-six or eighty-seven. But [emotionally], you know I was
brought up what I believe right, you know.

Like I said I stayed in school, I graduated. I was the first of my family to
graduate. My grandparents didn't, my parents didn't; I was the ﬁrst. Then my
parents walked down the aisle and they got theirs. And you know I was brought up
in Church. But there was still a hole; there was something was missing, there was
something missing. And God was missing. And I went to Church but I hadn't gotten
past the point of, you know, God's out here. He's not just in the Church, God's in here.
God's in this home, God's in your home [10:00], God's, you know. That he's
somebody I need to talk to, all the time.

]B: Another thing you mentioned prior to the recording was just your son. I'm
not sure whether it was your son or daughter that you were not necessarily the
actual mother to. Could you just go into a little more detail about your current home
life ifyou didn't mind?

BM: Today I am a grandmother. I have a five week old granddaughter. That's
my ﬁrst grandchild she lives with her mother in Reidsville. She is 28 years old. She
is not married and yes, you know, I told her a couple of years ago when they were
talking about it. She said, "What do you think about it?" I said, "I just think you need
to be married first." But you know she has to make her choices; she has to make her
life. She has a very good job, she has her own home, her own vehicle, and she
wanted a baby. So she had a baby and she's beautiful, beautiful. My youngest
daughter lives with me. She's 20. She does attend school she just did her second year

of college.

Bonnie Mize

And I do have custody, guardianship of my nephew. He is my brother's son. I
am his fifth home inside our family. My family tried to talk me out of gettin' him.
They tried to tell me to send him somewhere. And let me tell you what, I truly bit off
more than I can chew when I took him. But I can't say before I started using drugs,
but I know after I started using drugs I know what it is for someone to tell you that
or to say that, "You'll never change. You'll never do anything different. You're bound
to say nothing but bad things over you" because that's what, you know--. My whole
family turned on me, even my children. While I was in God Did It, my parents tried
to take my parental rights of my youngest daughter. God wouldn't let it happen, it
never happened, by the grace of God.

But you know before I started using drugs, I don't have any memory of
speaking bad things on you other than you know being fat or something. Maybe
when they were mad they would call you stupid or something. But afterwards to say
that, "You'd never change," to say that, you know, "Nothing good is going to come
from you," all this stuff, you know. I know what that is and that is the way he was
and [pause] God changed me and he can change him. He will change him. I might
not see it but it's going to happen. I had to do what I could. You know they wanted
to put him somewhere. [Emotionally] nobody in my family have nothing to do with
him.

]B: I understand. Well I can definitely see that the way you grew up and
some of your experiences and just even with you talking about your nephew now
have led you to have a strong compassion for helping people in general, and more

speciﬁcally these women. And I guess I would like to say, what is an experience, if

10

Bonnie Mize

you don't mind, that you've had either as a member of the recovery home or
working here, either through you or through a lady that you know that has been
here or worked here that you wouldn't mind sharing with me that has touched you
[pause] or inspires you in a way?

BM: [Emotionally] I'm going have to back all the way up to the first time I met
Ms. MCCauley. That was a woman that had been where I was the night that I met her.
That was a woman that had been where I was and she knew something that I didn't
know. She knew how to live and not use drugs, she knew how to be happy. She
knew how to live life on life's terms, because life's not fair. Life's not easy. But she
knew how and I wanted to know [emotionally] what she knew and I still want to. I
still want to know what she knows. You know, I know much more today, nine years
later, than I knew then but I want to know. Whenever I met her then, I had never in
my life seen somebody more beautiful. When she talked to me that night, she
literally glowed [voice cracks] and I wanted to know what she knew because I
couldn't grasp it. Because see I had tried NA. I had tried AA. I had tried mental
health. I had tried prescription, you know, where they give you meds for depression
and all that stuff. I tried all of that and none of that worked. None of that worked.
But she knew something that I didn't know and I wanted to know what she knew.

]B: I got you, well as far as your current involvement in the program now,
could you just elaborate on that and [15:00] I would say give us more of an idea of
like what you're doing to help women. I know through the website its platform, but
I would just like to have the people understand exactly what this program is doing

and what you're doing to contribute to it.

11

Bonnie Mize

BM: I'm the facility manager, which you know I'm pretty close I'd say to the
caretaker. I keep gas in the vehicles and I make sure there are groceries in the house.
I don't take care of the bills, that's Mrs. McCauley's place, but I the things here with
the ladies. I make sure they have clean clothes, that their clothes is washed. But
even beyond that I take them to the health department and they get tested for
communal diseases as well as AIDS. I'm the one that takes them out for job search.
We take them and they look for work. But I pray for them and like I said I know the
games they're playing, and we, we know when they're really hurting or when they're
not. I can share from my experiences from things that I have seen, from things that I
have actually walked through in order to help them, in order to encourage them
because God's no respecter of persons. What he does for one person he will do for
another as long as I walk up right before him, as long as my heart's desire is to do
right. I don't always do right. I still make the wrong choices [laughs]

IB: Hehe.

BM: I still make mistakes, but he loves me anyway. And you know through
that I can encourage them because there is no miracle cure there is no, "This is the
scripture, you recite this everyday." No. Let him into your heart and get to know him.
Because, you know, when my parents were trying to take custody of my child my
mother stood at a round table meeting at social services where Ms. MCCauley had
went with me. And she told all of the heads of social services, you know, it was about
twelve people there--probably ten of them and then me and Ms. MCCauley. And my
mother told them, she said "I know God works miracles, I've seen God work miracles.

But to believe she will ever change is impossible." That just said, today I know that

12

Bonnie Mize

that just says she couldn't believe it and I know what that is today to struggle with
believing something.

But I today I know, today I know that God specializes in the impossible. And I
can share that with these ladies because I'm a convicted felon and to know that I
have custody of my nephew. You know social services, they've been to my house
they've told me that if they had been involved in any way I wouldn't have him. But
see God did it, even more than this. My child would have nothing to do with me,
nothing. Yes, my mama was trying to take custody, but she had made up her own
mind that I had hurt her too much. I had told too many lies and I had promised too
many times that I was going to stop. It hurt her too much to believe that mama
would stop. But God opened a door and she forgave me. And, you know, today I have
two amazing women for daughters that love their mother. [Emotionally] In spite of
everything that I did and didn't do for them, they love me. And you know when
these women come in and [voice breaks] their children have nothing to do with
them because of their mess, I'm here to tell them [through sobs], you know exactly
what that is, that ifyou just hold on, if you just hold on. Because there is something
about the love that God places within a child for their mother. [Sniffs] And I thank
God for it [chuckles].

IB: Well, um, I'm sorry.

BM: [Sniffs] You're fine.

IB: Would you like to just explain what were some ofthe struggles when you

first began the program? This is a two pronged question. What were some of the

13

Bonnie Mize

struggles when you began going through it and then what were some of your
struggles when you actually began working here?

BM: Pretty much they're a lot same. When I came into the program I wanted
something different. You know, a lot of times when people come into a recovery
program, they are avoiding the law. They want to get clean, but they don't want to
do it right. They, you know they just want to get clean but they don't want to do it
right. I wanted to know what she knew, you know, and I wanted something
different. Whether my child ever spoke to me again, I had made up my mind that I
was not using drugs again, but I didn't know how [2 0:00] and I needed to know how.
I lived in a house with seven other women. They wouldn't have nothing to do with
me, nothing. Because my mind, I mean I can't even say why, but they in the smoking
area if they were outside smoking and I went outside to smoke they all got up and
left. Today, I found out that the first week I was there, you know, they took turns
there wasn't somebody to staff then, we took turns cooking they all went to work
and I was the only one there so I cooked. And I can cook [laughs] by the grace of God.
And I cooked that fried chicken and all this stuff. And I want you to know those
women came in from work and they didn't eat one thing. Now that thing hurt me,
but then I found out that the one that had been there the longest told them, cause
she picked them all up and brought them home, she told them on the way--and I just
found this out in the past two years--that she told them that if they eat anything they
were answering to her. You know and I don't understand that mentality or nothing,
but, you know, they couldn't stand me, they couldn't stand my willingness. You

know, can't nobody be this ; there is no explaining it. And even to that point now,

14

Bonnie Mize

these women do not like me; they do not like me. They love me. And as time goes on,
but to start with that they had to abide by the rules. We've got rules here and we
can't come in here and do anything. I mean, she took you on a tour of the house
right?

]B: No I haven't been on a tour ofthe house yet.

BM: Oh wow, it's a beautiful home. And we've got women who live here.
Women who are used to taking whatever they want and doing whatever they want.
We've got women who've never cleaned a bathroom, that's never even made a bed
and they keep this house clean. Everyday, they have to turn lights off you know. I
always tried to--I mentioned that one of my first addictions was men. I had to please
that man, I had to. I placed my husband above God and above my relationship with
my children because he was number one. And I find myself even today trying to
please people. But I can't because I'm subject to the authority that I'm under. But
even in all that the lord just brought it to my remembrance.

You asked me what was the hardest struggles that I face today? When these
women come in here and they get a little taste [emotionally], a little taste and they
see that they can do this thing, that there is another option, and they leave because
they don't want it, because it is too hard for them. And they leave and I know what it
is because I was, I can't imagine anybody having more relapses than I did, because I
wanted to stop that I could do this and I wanted to stopped. And I tried so many
things, but for me to have to put their stuff in the van and take them to the homeless
shelter or to pack their stuff up because they took off running through the woods

[pause, starts to cry], I know what's waiting on them. I've been there and done that.

15

Bonnie Mize

That's the hardest thing, even more than the people pleasing and the people not
liking you. That was nothing that was just an obstacle. But the hardest thing is
knowing that [passionately and emotionally] if you just hold on, if you just hold on
you will get this thing, but you've got to climb this mountain. I can't climb your
mountains and you can't climb mine.

]B: I guess just, on more ofa ﬂip side, what are you most proud of with your
work with the recovery home your experiences in it as well? What is one of your
proudest accomplishments?

BM: You know I just told my oldest daughter the other day, I showed her this
blue card that I have. When I was locked up at Rocky Mount facility for women, I
was in a church service and many church services. But one in particular I was sitting
in the front row and I was looking across the stage at the windows in the gym in the
next room over that you could see outside. And I was sitting there and I told God
that I wanted to come back and tell him what he had done for me one day. And I
have a blue card that says I can go into that facility through this ministry through
this organization, I go and I get volunteer training. I also have a card that says I can
go in Raleigh. You know, I'm a volunteer for Raleigh and for Fountain and [25:00] I
have been blessed by the grace of God to share my testimony at Rocky Mount before
and [through crying] also God opened a door and I was able to go share the word of
God with the women one morning and couldn't nobody have done that for me but
God, nobody.

And to see these ladies after they stayed [voice breaks], you see them when

they come in and I told it before that I'm like a gardener. I feel like I am a gardener in

16

Bonnie Mize

God's rose garden. You know, those seeds are planted and you watch them as the
green starts to burst forth from the ground and it starts to get a little higher and a
little higher. And they get pruned just like we do, they get pruned. You cut the bad
off and you might find it here, you might find it there and you put some dirt to it.

But when that rose starts to bloom and it blossoms, and to see these ladies when
they leave after completing the program compared to when they come in, there is no
comparison; it is two totally completely different women. To see them glowing, to
see them go out and to get their own home, to have their children back, to have jobs
[sniffs]. There is nothing like it, nothing like it. To be able to come to work everyday
and talk about the goodness of [voice breaks into a high register, through crying] my
God to be able to come to work today and tell somebody that God loves you and he'll
do it for you because he did it for me, there is nothing like it. Nothing like it. And I'm
an extremely blessed woman.

IB: That's good. You mentioned Fountain and you mentioned Raleigh and you
mentioned speaking at Rocky Mount. So there are other-- do you do other things to
help out with this cause?

BM: [Quietly, voice even] Primarily just with this ministry, you know, here.
You know we volunteer. We've catered several events for, um, oh wow I can't even
think of the--. For the last two years we have catered a fundraiser for Women in
Domestic Violence through Pastor [pause], I can't think of her name. But we go to
Charlotte Hawkins building in Greensboro and we cater food, we serve the meal and
all. You know it's a seed for women. And it's a fundraiser for the program that she

has for women that have been through domestic Violence. And then of course you

17

Bonnie Mize

know I volunteer for every--I am included in everything that we do here from yard
sales, which is some kind ofwork let me tell you [laughs], to all the fundraisers
whether it is selling candy bars or fashion shows you know whatever. I'm
constantly trying to give and give back here. And then you know there are the
people in my neighborhood, my landlord's wife, her sister is an addict. I'm
constantly just trying to encourage her and share some strength with her.

]B: I got you. Well looking back, when you initially began working here I
know with you it was more... you went through the program you experienced things
that led you to it. But do you believe that when you started off you had this grand
idea in mind that you realized that what you were doing was helping so many
women or was there a different purpose at the time?

BM: At the time, the purpose was [pause] I believe next to Jesus Christ dying
on the cross, [emotionally, high register of voice] I've received no greater gift than
the gift of this recovery home. I learned how to live here and to be able to give back
what was so freely given to me because there's no set on--she won't let me do a lot
of things that I want to do [laugh]. We recently went through a time [sniffs] where I
was working, [sniffs] excuse me I wasn't working I was volunteering double my
hours every week. You know I get paid for this, but I was here for twice that and,
you know, that was nothing compared to what I received from here. So as far as
knowing when I started working here that I would be helping women, I'm just now
starting to glimpse that [30:00], [emotionally] I'm just now starting to see that. And
I've been working with the facility for seven years, by the grace of God.

IB: Igot ya.

18

Bonnie Mize

BM: [Through tears] Because see it helps me and they help me so much more
than I could ever help them.

IB: Mm. I understand what you mean. Is there, just with all of your
experiences and just in your continuing experiences, is there something that you
feel should be said or anything that you're led to say about not only the women's
movement in general and how this helps you but this movement and helping women
recover from drugs? Is there anything that you feel like should be said that can
contribute to us?

BM: [Pause] I don't even know if I fully understand what you're asking me.
Ok, ifyou're going to elaborate some go ahead.

IB: Yes. Just basically, do you have any more to add towards your feelings
about what you're doing? Is there anything that you want people to know about
what you're doing?

BM: Drugs, substance abuse; it touches I believe every life in Alamance
county whether it is just your life because you don't know an addict or your sister is
an addict. But we are people as mothers, daughters, sisters, friends, neighbor. It's
no respect to a person, you know substance abuse. But the bottom line is that drugs
wasn't my problem. Men wasn't my problem. That was how I chose to deal with my
problems and we're women that are hurting with issues and that was just how we
found--you know there's, some people deal with it in different ways. You know, the
women that are in abusive relationships, they don't know how to get out. They're
not there because they are choosing to be they don't know how to get out and they

don't believe that they can do any better, you know?

19

Bonnie Mize

And there's no category on, well this is worse than that and the other. It's just
that we are women, like I said that are hurting. We are women that need love, that
need acceptance. But we're strong women and we're determined women and we're
women with much to offer. And a lot of times we have used our families to the point
where they refuse to help; they won't do anything. But even if someone is blessed
enough not to actually somebody that is affected by drug abuse, to not have
someone in their family, or to not personally know someone, I want to encourage
them to sow the seed so that it'll never happen, you know? There will always be
hurting people, always; from children from babies that are not being fed to men,
don't mean to make light ofthem. But like I said whenever I came out of prison in
2001 there wasn't nowhere for a woman in Alamance county. There were many
places for men, but not for women, you know? And today I believe there is a few of
them but we are one of the only completely Bible based. We are not government or
state funded. We're completely God funded. And [pause] this is a good place to sow
seeds. That's what I want to put out there just in case there is somebody that, this is
a place that, this is good ground. This fertile ground.

]B: You say you are completely on God funding. Is it fair to say that the
method that y'all found funding, I mean how is that? Is it consistent? Is it a struggle
or are y'all able to do the things you need to do with the structure that you guys
have?

BM: [Pause] That question I can't completely understand. No one church
completely pays the bills here, you know. She pools everything together and puts it

in the pot and pays the rent, pays the light bill and by the grace of God in nine years

20

Bonnie Mize

the lights have never been turned off. We have never received an eviction notice.
These girls have never been without heat without air conditioning by the grace of
God. You know, they just went to the beach because somebody [35:00] had a
condominium--you know they do the timeshare thing and they get it for two weeks
a year. And they gave them one week so that these girls could go to the beach, you
know. But, you know, there is no one source where it is coming from. You know how
when you pay come Thursday you know you're going to get a check. There's been
lots of times where it was the last minute. I remember one time in particular that I
went out, the Holy Ghost he kept telling me, "Go check the gas." I already told him
the week before that it was on. It was cold it was wintertime. It was this winter and
the Holy Ghost said, "Go check the gas." And I went outside with a ﬂashlight because
it was dark and I told her I said, "Ms. MCCauley, the gas is on zero. It's on zero" And
we didn't have any money, and they wouldn't bring nothing until the bill was paid.
The next morning when I come to work, the gas truck was out there and she was out
here in the driveway dancing a jig because she went to the fuel company to tell them
[emotionally], "Whatever I got to do just get some gas down there for them girls
because I can't have them cold." And she said somebody else had done beat her and
paid and they brought us the gas. And she still to this day doesn't know who paid
[laughs].

IB: That's good. That's amazing. Well I just want to say, just, [phone rings].

BM: She's got it a phone that will answer. You know, she better have.

21

Bonnie Mize

]B: You know, what can people do to help out with this? Not only with the
women's movement but with this in particular, with the God Did It Recovery Home
and other homes like this that are trying to help women? What can people do?

BM: First thing that we desire is prayer because the fateful forever prayer of
a righteous man would bail us much. First thing we desire is prayer. Of course the
second thing is money, any monetary donation. We are a 501 3(c) we will give a tax
donation receipt, because Duke Power doesn't take clothes, you know. Fast Fuel
don't take clothes. Now these ladies do need clothes, so we do take donations of
clothing. We take donations of food, you know whatever. They clean up their house
and they take their pictures off their wall because they are putting up some more
and they bring them to us and we have a yard sale, you know. And then two people
come in and they share their experience their knowledge. We've had people come in
and teach budgeting. We primarily have Bible classes. But we've had cooking classes,
we've had craft classes, sewing classes; whatever gift people have, these women
need it. You know not just these women, but women because I've had fifty-year-old
women that truly did not even know how to make a bed. She had never been asked
to make her bed in her life. You know you may think that, the people may think well
I don't know nothing. Well you know something, you've been living a few years.
Whatever gift that people have, you know, is needed.

IB: Well at this point I just want to say thank you for your time.

BM: Thank you for listening.

22

Bonnie Mize

IB: Yeah no problem. I really appreciate all of your efforts with this guide to a
recovery home and the women's movement as a whole and we hope that this home
continues to thrive.

BM: Amen, I do too. It will, as long as hallelujah lord willing. But you know
they say that there is no more determined, harder working person than an addict.
And, you know, it's just like these ladies, after their thirty days we take them and
find a job and all. They go to work every day and they're there the longest and they
work the hardest. And the people where these ladies are placed and the jobs that
they have, they want more of our girls and they tell us, "When you get another one
bring them down here," you know? I've had them call and ask, "Do you have
anybody that is ready to go to work?" You know, because we are strong women, we
are women that have children. Women that, some of them have husbands, have
parents that want to know how to live, they just don't know how they got
sidetracked.

IB: I'm glad y'all are helping them out.

BM: Excuse me?

IB: I'm glad y'all are helping them out.

BM: I'm glad there are people like you to help get the story out.

IB: Thanks, thank you.

BM: Thank you Josh, right on time.
