
Marvin Richardson: Okay, I’ve got the recorders going and everything, and don’t worry

about that, the recorder. Just look at me. Let me see if I can—

Gladys Goins: Okay.

MR: —maybe get it out of the way and that way—.

GH: Well, no, it’s okay. It won’t bother me.

MR: That way we can look at each other and—

GH: It won’t bother me.

MR: —it’s not in your way, or whatever. Today is April 10, 2013, and I am at the home of

Mrs. Gladys Hunt.

GH: Yes.

MR: Is that right?

GH: That’s right.

MR: My name is Marvin “Marty” Richardson. Everybody calls me Marty. I’m not really

sure how I got that nickname, but I did.

GH: [Laughs]

MR: But that’s what they call me. And I’m here—.

GH: And I didn’t know your name was Marvin.

MR: Yeah, that’s my name, is Marvin, so that’s my government name, as they say.

GH: Okay.

MR: [Laughs] But of course everybody knows me as Marty. But I’m here on behalf of
the UNC Southern Oral History Program, and part of the mission of the Southern Oral History
Program is to just go and do oral histories with individuals in order to capture oral history, and

there’s no other type of source or way to capture people’s lives like oral history.
GH: That’s the truth.

MR: It’s really important for us to do that. I’m also here because I’m working there and I
was asked to kind of review the archive and see if we have the diversity that we should with our
archive, and of course I already knew it before I started looking at it but we really lack American
Indian presence in our archives. So my boss, she allowed me to come up with a list of people and
just to start doing some oral history interviews so we can have more participation of American
Indians, so that’s why I’m here today. The other thing that we have is what’s called—. One of our
projects is the Long Women’s Movement, so it’s looking at women, it’s looking at women’s
rights, and it’s also looking at women’s activism and also in community, so right now I’m just

interviewing women, so you’re the first person that I’m interviewing.

So what I want to do is I just want to start off, just to kind of break the ice, if you could

just tell me—. First of all, give me your address that we have here.

GH: Hope Mills, North Carolina, 28348.

MR: Okay. And what county are we in right now?

GH: Cumberland.

MR: Okay. We’re in Cumberland. So we’re almost at the Robeson County line but we’re

not there.
GH: Almost. I think we are about two miles from Robeson County.

MR: About two miles from Robeson County, okay. Well just tell me a little bit about

yourself.

GH: I started work—. Where did I start? I started work, working with Indian people, about
thirty-four years ago. I had no idea it was going to become a passion. At the time it was an
income, not that I’ve really actually needed that second income. My husband made actually good
money and he didn’t want me to go to work, but I thought my children needed extra things and I
wanted to buy them extra things so I went to work as a second job and I got hooked. I just
become hooked, you know, in seeing the plight and the needs of Indian people, because my first
job was community services. I worked in the community and I saw so much, so many needs. My
first job was as an advocate with the agencies in the community and taking people to those
agencies and advocating for them, and I saw they—. I learned all the rules and the regulations for

those agencies and when I would go in the door with the client they didn’t tell them none of the

services and benefits that they were eligible for and I would have to say, “This is what they

need.” So as a result of that it become a passion for me.

MR: Could you tell me, where did you work and what job was it and everything?

GH: I started working for the Commission of Indian Affairs at first as a community
services worker. That was the title. I think I worked in that position for two years and the
organization become its own WIA [Workforce Investment Act], or at that time it was job training
employment, JTPA [J ob Training Partnership Act]. It became its own prime sponsor and I went
to work for the Cumberland County Association for Indian People and just went from one job to
the other without applying for anything. The board of directors just would give me jobs until I—
from one job, I mean literally from one job to another, until the executive director left, and they

gave me that job. [Laughs] I thought that was really funny.

But it was, I guess, my passion for helping people, everybody saw through that, and it
still is today, from that ﬁrst—. And I only intended to work until, you know, just for two years or
so, and after that first two years I was absolutely hooked. I couldn’t find a way to ever leave, and
still haven’t today. So I went from that community services position to supervising the JTPA
program, and then from that to supervising over half the organization’s programs, which was
about eight or nine programs at that point, and from that to being the assistant director, and from

there to being the executive director, so it’s been a long haul.

MR: Well we’ll come back to that, but I would like to, just for history’s purposes, to just
get a little bit more background about you, about your family, about who your parents are, or

were, where you grew up, things like that.

GH: I grew up here in Fayetteville. My grandmother was the first Indian to move from
Robeson County to Cumberland County, and that is a story of its own. She moved here from
Robeson County because she used to bring her produce here to sell and somebody said I’ll give
you some land over on the east side of Fayetteville, or I’ll sell you some land real cheap, if you
will move here and your family sell me your vegetables, so she moved to Fayetteville and was
the only Indian at the time in Fayetteville. There was no church, no school, so she and her family
started the only Indian church and pretty soon other Indians started moving in and they were able
to get a school started. But she told me that—. And I used to spend a lot of time with her, and she
told me that one day I would work with Indian people, and I didn’t understand what she meant. I
was only about seven or eight years old. I never understood what she meant, and I asked her,
what was the understanding of that, and she said, “One day you will work with Indian people and
you will help them,” but I never [understood]. She said, “That was something I wanted to do, and
I couldn’t, but you will be able to fulfill that dream.” One day I was out doing some work in the

community and it dawned on me what she had said, and what she meant.

But anyway, my grandmother had a large family. She had twelve children and they were

all musicians and preachers and pastors of the local church and well known in the community.

MR: Could you tell me her name?

GH: Elizabeth Jacobs.

MR: Okay.

GH: It was Elizabeth Jacobs. She was a path maker, so she—.

MR: What exactly does that mean, a “path maker?”

GH: She led—. She constructed, she led the path, she built upon, she helped to start the
first school, the first church, and she helped to—and moving here was the first group of Indians in
Cumberland. Her family was the first group of Indians to move to Cumberland County, so she
was alone here as far as Indians in Cumberland County and she established a presence, an Indian
presence in Cumberland County, and a recognizable Indian presence in Cumberland County, and
people knew the family, my grandmother’s family, from that presence. They knew from her
presence here. She used to walk to the board of education from East Fayetteville, to the
meetings, and tell them how much a school was needed. Every time they’d have a meeting, once
a month, she would walk to that board of education meeting and tell them how desperately bad
Indian children needed a school, because at that time our children were being bused to Clinton,
because Robeson County wouldn’t take our children but Clinton would, and she would walk out
there and tell them how desperately bad our children needed a school. So eventually they listened
to her and they helped build a small building and helped pay teachers from Robeson County to
come and help train our children so that we wouldn’t have to go out of the county for school, so

that was a large accomplishment.

MR: That’s very interesting. Was she by herself or was she married or she was a widow?

GH: Her husband died when I was young. She lived to be a hundred and four, so she was
by herself for a lot of those years. I don’t even remember him, so he died when I was young—I
mean before I was born, so my mother was young. So I don’t know what year he died but she
was by herself for many, many years, so she had the time and the health, because her health
didn’t start going bad until—. It was with age that she died, so she had the time and the health to
pursue those interests and those dreams. You see, they had started a church, so they had that

church building. They had built a church. She, her family, and just a few other families who had

moved from Robeson County here, had built a church, probably about the size of my barn out
there. It looked much bigger than that to me then. But they had built a church so it was easy for
the board of education to come in and just build another small building and have a school there

on that same property, and that’s what they done.

MR: I didn’t get your birth date, if you don’t mind giving it.

GH: 1946. I’ll be sixty-seven this year. No, I’m okay with that.

MR: Okay. Could you tell me some more about your—because you mentioned your

grandmother. Could you tell me more about your other family, your parents maybe, or—?

GH: My mother and father separated when I was born so I don’t know that much about
my father, but my mother worked very hard and raised four children by herself. She would do
whatever was necessary, you know, pick cotton, put in tobacco. Back then it was hard for a
woman to get a job without education, and she didn’t have much, so she would do whatever she
could, whatever kind of work. She would wash clothes for people and do odd jobs like that to
raise four children, and she did, by herself. She raised four children just like that, that hard work,
and I mean raised us all grown. It’s amazing. Now that to me is more of an accomplishment than
most anything you could think about, because she worked—. I can remember her ironing clothes
for other people and us going to catch the bus and have to change two or three times to go up the
hill, and it was Haymount Hill because that’s one of the richest sections in Fayetteville. It’s not
now but it was then. She would keep some rich folks’ children. She was sick, she had asthma
real bad and she was sick, and I used to help hold her up almost to get to where she was going,

and she would stay there and look after the children and leave and go home and was sick, and

she did that for many, many years. Then she was able to get on disability when she was probably

in her fifties and then she was able to live comfortable after that. She died when she was seventy.

MR: What was her name?

GH: Esther, Esther Goins.

MR: Esther Goins.

GH: Yeah. She was a good woman.

MR: So that’s your maiden name?

GH: My maiden name’s Goins, yeah.

MR: Okay. So you’ve mentioned these strong women—you talked about your
grandmother and your mother—so how did these women inﬂuence you throughout your life and

your life path?

GH: I wanted to be like my grandmother. To me she was—. All my life I said I wanted to
be like her because she was the strongest, the most honest, and the smartest, and she seemed to—
and she was joyful and joyous, and people loved her. Everything about her was—. Of course she
would also tell you the truth too. Sometimes that wasn’t always popular. [Laughs] Because of
her honesty she would just tell you the truth, and that wasn’t always popular. But she was such—.
And she was knowledgeable. She read a lot and she knew the Bible. She read the Bible, I think it
was thirty-two times from cover to cover, and she was so knowledgeable, and I just admired her
because she—. That, “God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I carmot change, courage to
change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference,” my grandmother had that, and I

admired that about her. She knew when to speak, when not to speak, when to be quiet and when

to talk, and when to say and when not to say, and I admired that in her, and I always wanted to
be like that, always. And in all of that she was gentle. She was such a gentle lady and I liked that

about her too, and she was so loving and I liked that about her and loved that about her.

Now, my mother was different than my grandmother. My mother was different from her
in the fact that she—. She had some of those attributes but she was honest—. She was brutally
honest. She wasn’t like my grandmother. [Laughs] My grandmother was soft and all those other
things but my mother would just, you know, what you see is what you get with my mother, and I
didn’t want to be like that. [Laughs] I didn’t want to be like that. But I gained—. I didn’t have a
lot of male inﬂuences in my life because my dad was not around and I had a brother who went in
service when I was very young. I think he was seventeen. I don’t know how he got in service but
he was seventeen when he went in service and he was gone for most of my life at home, so I
don’t remember him much until he came back, and I was married. So I don’t have many male
inﬂuences but my grandmother and my mother and my aunts provided—. I feel Ihad a strong—. I

had a lot of self conﬁdence and it had to come from the women in my life, it had to.

MR: That’s very interesting. How do you think as women they were able to be so strong
and to be so inﬂuential, and especially your grandmother? You said that she was really
responsible for the school and the church and everything. How do you think, as a woman, she

was able to do all that?

GH: I think they left a lot of things up to the men and the menjust didn’t do anything,
honestly. I may be wrong about that but from looking back as a young person, from what I can
remember seeing, I don’t think the men did a whole lot, and I think had the women not took a
more, you know, took the role that they did, nothing would have happened, because even my

uncles were not as forceful as the women in my family. I had five uncles and seven—wait a

minute—yeah, seven aunts, and the men were nowhere near as ambitious as the women, never,

never were. I’m just thinking about this as I’m talking to you about it. I never thought about it.

MR: Why do you think that was so? Why do you think they were kind of passive and not

really ambitious?

GH: I’ve never thought about that. I don’t know, because I don’t think that’s true today. I
honestly don’t. But when I look back at that—. I honestly don’t think that’s true today. I know it’s

not true today. But when I look back on those years and think back to what was going on then.

MR: Do you think that it could have been that the women were closer to the people, per
se, and maybe a little bit closer to what was needed in the community, for some reason? Could

that be one of the reasons why?

GH: I was getting ready to say that. I think they were more involved in church. They
were more involved, and church was the focus at that point. Church was the focus of everything.
Everything happened at the church, and I think women were more involved in church at that
point, and they had more, you know, they taught Sunday school, the women were more—. I
would say the only person who had a leadership role in the church at that point was probably the
preacher, and maybe the deacons. Everyone else, all the other people in the church who were
workers—and most of the attendees—were women, and that may have had something to do with
that because I can remember a community meeting—. I can remember my grandmother calling a
community meeting for the purpose of the school, and my mother went and she took me with
her, and most of the people in that meeting were women. I can remember that, most of the
people. There were very few men, and it wasn’t that there was not a lot of men available because

there was. They just was not in attendance there at the meeting that night, because what was

there was women, and I think it was because, like you said, women had more of a connection to

each other in the community. I think that was more what it was.

MR: That’s very interesting. So while the women were doing all these things, what were

the men doing? What was their role?

GH: Working. The men was working. That was their role, because I can remember all my

uncles and most of the men in the community, that was their role, was providing for the family.

MR: And what type of work—

GH: And the women—

MR: —did they do?

GH: —didn’t work, see? Most of the women never worked. That was a given. Most of the

women did not work back then.

MR: Or at least not for a wage, right? They did plenty of work.

GH: That’s true.

MR: [Laughs]

GH: At least not for a wage, yeah.

MR: So what types of work did the men do?

GH: One of my uncles drove a concrete truck, and—. Let me think. They did factory work,
because there was a lot of factories in Fayetteville then, so they did a lot of factory work and they
could get on, you know, because Indians would work hard. It was like Mexicans now. They

could get on real good and there was one plant here that all an Indian had to do was walk in the

door and they had a job. As a matter of fact there was probably five hundred people worked in
that plant and I would say out of that whole plant there was probably four hundred and fifty of

them Indians. But there was—. Let’s see. Let me see what else they were doing.

MR: Were they doing farming much?

GH: I was getting ready to say, there was some farmers, and they worked at the hospital.
There were some that worked at the hospital. When they started coming to this area that was the
reason why. It was employment opportunities, because there was a lot more employment
opportunities here than there was in Robeson County, and getting a job here was not a problem at
all during that time. So, yeah, there were some farmers, but nowhere near as many farmers as
there was in Robeson County, nowhere near, and I don’t know that there’s—. There’s very few.
This area that I live in is known as country right here, and most of the farmers who live in this
area right here are non-Indian. I don’t know of one Indian farmer in this county, not one

anymore, so that’s unfortunate.

MR: Well farming isn’t really what it used to be though, is it?

GH: No, it’s not, but I mean, you know, it’s just not good that we don’t have one Indian
farmer. I’ve been trying to find one, you know, that Healthy Start program, just to find one

Indian farmer. It would be really good. But, anyway.

MR: So tell me a little bit more about yourself. Tell me about your education. Did you

just basically go to work or do you have any formal education?

GH: Well I just went to work, yes, when I first—. I had gone to Fayetteville Tech for a
little while and then I got married and stopped, but when I went back to work I started back to

Fayetteville Tech again, business administration, and I went two years to Fayetteville Tech and

transferred to Fayetteville State University and went there for about a year and never went back.

I’ve regretted that too. I really have.

MR: Where did you go to school, like in elementary or high school?

GH: We had an all-Indian school. We had Les Maxwell.

MR: West MaX—?

GH: Les Maxwell.

MR: Les Maxwell.

GH: It was an all-Indian school and I graduated from there. A year after I graduated was
when integration came and they sent all the students from that school to another school, to

schools all over the county.

MR: I want to write that. Could you spell the name of that school?

GH: It’s Les, L-e-s, M-a-X-w-e-l-l.

MR: Les Maxwell.

GH: Yes. As a matter of fact, we own that property. The organization owns that property

today.

MR: And which organization is that?

GH: The Cumberland County Association for Indian People owns that property today.
We petitioned the county for that property and they gave it to us for a dollar a year and
eventually they gave it to us, so we own that. It’s about twelve acres of property, so we own that,

that school building and the property, and it’s—.

MR: 80—. Go ahead. I’m sorry.

GH: It’s really in great need of repair and the organization plans to really do some things
in the near future with that building, but we do own that property, so that’s one thing that we’ve

all treasured here.

MR: Well you’ve brought up so many different things. You just brought up integration.

How did integration affect the Indian people here?

GH: It took years, many years, for students, for Indian people to adjust to that, many
years. Just taking children out of—. I’m so glad that I was not a part of that, but just taking
children out of an environment of all Indian students and sending them to schools where there
were white and black and a totally different curriculum was horrible for those students, and it
took years, absolute years for some of those students. The dropout rate was absolutely high and it
took years, and the Title VII program tried really, really very hard to fill in the gaps, but there
was just so few staff and the money was just not sufficient. We tried to help, the organization
tried to help, we came about too, but there was just such a difference. It made such a difference
in the life—. [Brief interruption to introduce her grandson] It made such a difference in the life of
our children for many, many years, and I think it was more the dropout rate than it was anything

else. Students just quit going.

MR: What were the benefits to having an all-Indian school, as you said?

GH: Our association was with other Indian schools. We played ball, we played with other
Indian schools, and they were just like us. They were our equals. We were not stereotyped. I can
see that from my own children. My little grandson—you just saw Caleb—he comes home and asks

me right now, asks me questions right now about what is he, because they tell him at school he’s

something else. That did not happen in an Indian school because everybody knew you were
Indian. Everybody knew what everybody else was. I mean there was just comfort from each
other in knowing what everybody was, and you were all family. Everybody was family and
everybody knew everybody. I don’t know. There was just a closeness that I can’t describe even
till now. Irun into people now and we hug each other. We’re family. And you’re not family
when you’re going to a school with a thousand students and everybody’s everybody and they’re
from all kind of cultural backgrounds and all kind of family situations. But in an Indian school
everybody goes to church, everybody’s, you know—. [Laughs] Everybody’s got the same kind of
issues, almost everybody’s got the same kind of situation and you can relate to each other, and if
you’re poorjust about everybody at school’s poor. I mean [Laughs] if you bring a jelly and
peanut butter sandwich then just about everybody else has probably got a peanut butter and jelly
sandwich. It was just about the same way with us. That’s just about the way it was. So you did

not feel ostracized.

MR: How do you think going to an Indian school and graduating from an Indian school,

how did that inﬂuence your life?

GH: I think I graduated with a lot of self esteem. I was proud of who I was as an Indian. I
married an Indian. I wanted to marry an Indian and I wanted my family to marry Indians.
[Laughs] I wanted my children to all marry Indians. But I was proud of my cultural heritage. I
received an education that Iknew that I could offer—. When I graduated with a twelfth-grade
education it was comparable to any other school in the county, and I knew it was, because when I

went to Fayetteville Tech and took that entrance—. What do you call that thing you take?

MR: Just the entrance exam, or—?

GH: Entrance exam. I didn’t have no problem going right into my curriculum. So, you
know, I know that I got a good education. Just because I was at an Indian school didn’t mean—.
And that was, I think, the stigmatization that they attached to being an Indian school; that our

education wasn’t equivalent to what the other schools offered, but I knew that mine did.

MR: I’m trying to think how I can ask this question here. Did it make any difference that
you and your family and other people were here in Cumberland County as opposed to Robeson
County that you had an Indian school? Was that more important, that you had an Indian school,

or—?

GH: Yes, it was.

MR: How was that important?

GH: Because in this environment, back then, there were so many places you couldn’t go
if you were not [white]. Listen, I was bright-skinned enough, and Ihad two friends who were
white, I could go anyplace I wanted to go with them. I could go to the movie and sit on the
bottom ﬂoor and get in and be accepted. I tried that and went in there with them and got in, and I
tried that one time and that was it. I didn’t ever want to do that again because I didn’t feel
comfortable. I didn’t. I never felt comfortable there, and I said, I told them I’m never going to do
that again. I only say that to make a point. Where I was comfortable at was with my people, my
Indian people, and I also make the point of how life was outside the Indian community, and I
didn’t get very far away from that, from the Indian community. I guess Indians are clamIish. But
in any event, had I had to go to school in a non-Indian environment it would have been cultural
shock for me, I think, which is what happened to those students when they were made eventually

to do that.

But it was good for me to live in an urban area and have my brothers and sisters beside
me when I needed help, when I didn’t have no money for lunch, and somebody would say, “You
can eat part of mine,” and when things were not going well at home and somebody would say,
“We’re with you. We care about you,” because that’s what happened every day. And if
somebody else was having a problem I would do the same thing, and that’s what happened all
my life in school, my whole life. Honestly, that’s my memory of school, and that’s not Caleb’s
memory of school, and that’s not Alex’s memory. Alex is seventeen; he’s graduating this year.

That is not his memory of school. Did you go to an all-Indian school?

MR: No.

GH: Is that your memory of school?

MR: No.

GH: See? That’s not your memory of school, but that’s my memory of school. That’s my
memory and that’s the way it was. They were not just somebody who—. Iremember a girl
coming to school one day and saying her mother—. She was the oldest and her mother was sick,
and she had six or seven younger kids and they didn’t know what they were going to do for food,
and we took up an offering. The school took up an offering for her, and I don’t know how—. We
didn’t probably get much because we didn’t have nothing but nickels and dimes probably to
throw in the little plate. But listen, we took up an offering for her, and I can remember that so
well, how good we all felt giving her that little bit of money to take home to her family. Who
does that now? Nobody. Who cares? That’s what happens now. But that is the way it was back
then, and to me that was important because it was all about family. You know why? Because not

only did we go to school with each other, we knew each other. We went to church with each

other and we socialized with each other. We knew each other and that’s the way it was. We were
a little team, but it’s not like that anymore. It’s just not. And that was just my—. [Sighs] They
were my friends. I couldn’t date none of those guys. They were my—. [Laughs] They were my

best friends.

MR: Could you tell me spatially and like the population of the community during that
time, like how many students were at the school and where did everybody live and things like

that?

GH: All over the county, and they had to bus them from all over the county, I mean
literally all over this county. People lived everywhere. Predominantly they lived in the East
Fayetteville area, but people lived all over the county. There was probably—. When I was in the
twelfth grade, if I don’t make no mistake, there were sixteen graduating, the year I graduated. I
think we started off with something like forty and ended up with like sixteen the year I
graduated. I think there were like two hundred in the whole high school and there was something
like four hundred or something like that, in the whole entire school, I think, somewhere like four
hundred and something, four-fifty or something in the entire school, so we really had a small
school compared to what they have now. They’ve got four hundred and fifty in Alex’s

graduating class, so, [Laughs] you know.

MR: That’s really interesting about the busing, that they used those types of resources for
that school. What was the reaction from the Indian community when integration came about?

Did anyone try to fight it—

GH: Yeah, they did.

MR: —or anything like that?

GH: They really did, but it didn’t do any good because it was law, and they were told
that. They had meetings. They had public meetings over at the school for awhile. As a matter of
fact, that may be some of what started the Cumberland County Association for Indian People.
Parents started meeting and saying what can we do about this, and at that point the men was
involved, you know, in going to those meetings. Someone from the board of education would
come and explain the process of how everything was going to work and where the students were
going to be bused to and that kind of thing, and the parents were curious as to what is going to
happen now, what school are they going to and what can we do about this, and they were

basically told, nothing. You can’t do anything.

MR: I just want to check this recorder and make sure everything is still running. Yep.

GH: They were just basically told you can’t do much of anything, so they just had to

accept it.

MR: When was that, along what time?

GH: Ithink it was [19]67, maybe, somewhere around [19]67.

MR: Wow, that’s interesting, because of course the Brown v. Board OfEducation was in
1956, if I remember correctly, so that’s interesting. So, the Indian school managed to stick

around for another eleven years after that.

GH: Yeah.

MR: That’s really interesting. I’ll just tell you, the parallels to your story to what I’ve

heard in my community, it’s almost the same thing.

GH: Oh, really?

MR: Yeah, because we had our Indian school, Haliwa Indian school, but we didn’t start
our school until 1957, and we had Lumbee teachers to come in. I don’t know if you know

anything about that at all.

GH: Ihave heard something about that. Yeah, I think Joe Richardson mentioned some of

that to me.

MR: Yeah. A couple years ago I actually did a project. We had two different grants
where we went and we did interviews with community elders about their experiences at the

school and we probably interviewed like thirty people.

GH: Okay.

MR: So it’s really an interesting topic for me, Indian schools in North Carolina. I know a

few years ago that the conference was dedicated to the school.

GH: Yes.

MR: So tell me about that. Let’s get into it a little bit more. I’m really interested in that,
and maybe at some point I might come back and talk with you some more about the Indian
school and maybe do a little research on it, but let’s get into—. What are you doing now? [Brief

interruption to introduce another grandson] So what types of activities are you into right now?

GH: With the school, you mean, or with the organization?

MR: Yeah, whatever you’re doing right now.

GH: The organization is—. We’re struggling right now, [Laughs] needless to say, but we
have some plans. We really, really do. I really can’t talk about them right now, but we really

have some plans for that school that I’m really excited about, so you look for the future for that

school because we really, really are excited about what we plan to do with that school. I think the
community will be really shocked to see what we plan to do. I wish I could really talk about it.
But right now what we’re doing is we have a senior citizens program where they actually come
and eat every day, and we prepare about fifty meals a week that go out to [homebound] seniors,
and that’s home-delivered meals. People come and get them and take them. So that’s one of the
most successful programs. People actually come and pick them up for people who are
homebound and take the meals to them, so that’s a lot of activity, and it’s really a good program
because there’s a lot of people, and when they pick them up they pick them up for the whole
week. We have several people who cannot get out of their home, Indian people, cannot get out of
their home, and we think that’s a very good program, because all they have to do is take that
meal out of the freezer and put it in the microwave or oven and just warm it up and then they’ve
got a meal. We still have the Employment and Training program, and we have the Healthy Start
program going, and we have the Four Feathers Enterprise program still, and right now that’s all

we have. So we’re struggling right now, we really are.
MR: What is the Four Feathers program?
GH: It’s ceramics and wood products and cloth products that we make and sell.
MR: Interesting. So who actually does the work?
GH: We have a lady that comes in when things are ordered and she does that.
MR: So is it pretty successful? How do you market it?

GH: It has been. It’s not right now but it has been really successful. The lady who’s been
doing the work has gotten ill and she has not been able to produce much, but it used to be very,

very—. As a matter of fact, that drum right there is one of the pieces that came from that shop.

MR: That’s a nice looking drum right there.

GH: Well I know you know.

MR: Yeah.

GH: You know.

MR: Is that yours?

GH: Yeah. I had him make that for me. I paid Four Feathers to make that.

MR: That’s a nice looking drum, I’ll tell you. I saw it when I came in. [Laughs]

GH: [Laughs] Yeah, I know you did, because you know drums.

MR: Oh, yeah.

GH: That’s one thing you do know, and that’s drums, and he made that. As a matter of

fact that was his ﬁrst dmm and that’s why I asked him for it, because he—.

MR: What’s his name that did it?

GH: [57:17] Emanuel. He’s a Coharie. He lives in—. What’s the name of that little place,

between Fayetteville and Clinton?

MR: Dunn? Is that it?

GH: No. It’s between—. Godwin.

MR: Okay.

GH: He lives in Godwin.

MR: I don’t know the area that well.

GH: But he put that hide in water, and it was his first one, and he got that hide soft
enough, and he kept telling me he couldn’t do it and he couldn’t do it, and somebody, I think

Ned—. Do you know Ned? Have you met Ned Barton?

MR: I probably do.

GH: He’s a painter, actually, but he came by and told him how to stretch that hide across
there and left. He had made the wood part and he began to stretch that hide and I thought, “Oh
my God. This is going to be a mess. He made that drum, and I could not believe it. I said, “That’s
mine. I’m going to buy that one.” [Laughs] So then he started making them from that one, and
the other ones he made are even better than that one. I mean he got really good. Then he didn’t

want to sell them after that. He wanted to keep them. [Laughs]

MR: Well that’s something. I mean I’ve never really met him or seen him around, you

know. I’ve never really seen him at many powwows and stuff.

GH: Well he made one for one of the drum groups. Who was it? It was a really big one.

What drum group was that for?

MR: Could be maybe that d1um—. I know they have a new [group] from Clinton.

GH: I do not remember who that is, but he made one and it was huge. I do not remember
who it was, but he made it, really big. I don’t know. He may have made theirs, I don’t know. I’m

going to have to ask Greg who made that one for him.

MR: So how did you come into—? You’re the director at Cumberland County, right?

GH: Mm hmm.

MR: How did you come into doing that?

GH: Well James Hardin was the director for many, many years here and I was his
assistant, and he applied for a job at Lumbee Regional Development Association and he told me
about that, that he had applied, and they hired him. I think he gave two weeks’ notice, or
something, a month’s notice. I think it was two weeks. He went and told the board as soon as he
knew that he was hired. He had a meeting, he called a meeting, or he asked the board chairman
to call a meeting, and he told them that he was leaving, giving his notice. So they advertised and
they interviewed and they didn’t like any of the applicants, so they advertised again. By that time
James had left and they made me interim and I stayed interim for about three months. [Laughs]
They advertised for about—. They interviewed I guess twice and they came out of there both
times and said, “We’re not happy with this.” I said, “Well, I guess you just go out again, then.
That’s what you do.” So the next time they came out and said, “You got the job.” I shouldn’t tell

that, but that’s what happened. [Laughs]

MR: So had you applied?

GH: No.

MR: So how do you apply?

GH: So then they told me to apply.

MR: Okay, so they told you to apply.

GH: So I did apply. I applied and sent my résumé in and all that kind of stuff and they
supposedly went through the whole process and told me I had the job. Now that’s exactly what
happened. I wasn’t sure I wanted the job. I’ll tell you the truth, I wasn’t sure I wanted the
responsibility, because at the time we only had about eight staff and operating that building was

a monster, and I wasn’t sure I wanted that job. But you know what? It wasn’t long before we had

fifty-two staff. That was the most amazing thing I think I have ever accomplished in my life. I
started writing grants and they started being funded, just like that, every one of them. Listen, I
wrote one grant, the same thing, sent [it to] three people, and all of them funded it. I said now
what in the world am I going to do with this? [Laughs] How am I going to carry out three

projects at one time? [Laughs] Honestly, that is the truth.

MR: That sounds like what we call a good problem.

GH: It was a good problem. [Laughs] But I had over three million dollars. [Laughs] So,
you know, I mean for a nonprofit to have over three million dollars without housing money was

just—. And Ihad three million dollars for seven years.

MR: Wow.

GH: And Ihad three million dollars worth of community problems too.

MR: How so?

GH: Ihad everybody in the community giving me hell.

MR: [Pause] How so?

GH: Everybody complaining. Where I had been having community meetings and I’d
have thirty people at the community meetings, I started having three hundred, two hundred, two
hundred and fifty people at the community meetings, [Laughs] everybody wanting some of the
money, everybody wanting a piece of the pie. It become a total issue, disaster, in a lot of ways,
but the board become very good leaders, they really did. I had one board member who had a lot

of—. He had a PhD and he was a very good leader. They made him chairman and he led that

board and he really, really become a very good leader and he got things really in place, and it

was easy to work under his leadership.

MR: Let me ask you—. That’s very interesting. I didn’t realize you all had that type of
budget. That’s a really big budget. What were your experiences—? First of all, how long have you
been in the position, and second of all, what have been your experiences as a woman, to be
director, and also—. I know Indian business, you know. Of course I haven’t been in Indian
business nearly as long as you have, but I’ve watched a few things. How have you been able to

stay where you are, in your position?

GH: I’ve just had a good board of directors, a very supportive board of directors, and
that’s just the begimIing and end of it. Not that they go along with me in everything; it’s not that
kind of board. It’s just the kind of board that are very knowledgeable, that are very open to
things. All of them are businesspeople and they’re very knowledgeable about things. I mean I
can honestly say—. One of the men is superintendent of the Methodist conference. He’s over a
hundred and thirty churches. Barbara Mele’s on my board, who’s over the North Carolina
Housing Authority. Earlise Jones is on my board. He owns Jones Plumbing, which is one of the
largest plumbing businesses in this county. So, see, the people who are on the board are just
very, very versed in business matters, and that’s the way it’s been over the years, and I don’t
know how that’s happened but it’s just been that way and I think that’s how I’ve managed to stay

there and how the organization’s managed to stay alive. It’s just good businesspeople.

I’ve been there as executive director for about twenty-two years, and how—. It’s been
hard. It’s been hard to—. As a female it hasn’t always been easy. I would say it’s been easy
dealing with the non-Indian public. Dealing with the non-Indian public in Cumberland County,

it’s been easy. I’ve served on mental health boards, I’ve served on the legal services boards; you

name almost any board in this county, I’ve served at some point, had some kind of contact, and I
have had no problem at all dealing with anybody, male or female, but in the Indian community,

that’s a different story. [Laughs] That’s a totally different story.
MR: Well, tell me the story.

GH: [Laughs] That’s where the problem is. Somebody told me last week they were
circulating a petition that said I needed to retire. I mean that’s just the kind of thing that Indian
people do. And somebody said, “Well who are we going to hire if she retires?” So, you know,

[Pause] I don’t know how true that was. I don’t know if there was anything to that or not.
MR: But there’s the Indian business. [Laughs]
GH: That’s right. There’s the Indian business.
MR: That I was talking about, there’s the Indian business.

GH: And that’s always—. There’s always something, and it doesn’t matter—. Ithink the
bigger the organization was the more problems I had. The more money there was the more

problems I had, and that’s always the way it was.

MR: Everybody thinks they can get a piece of it and they don’t know anything about the

regulations or what the money’s supposed to be used for—
GH: That’s right.
MR: —and all that other stuff.

GH: That’s exactly right. That’s exactly true. You know, people still come in the office
and say, “I want my Indian money,” not realizing that you can’t just write somebody a check for

fifty dollars. You can’t do that. So, it’s frustrating. That’s to me more frustrating than anything,

and honestly—and I repeat that—in all the other boards—. I’m right now serving on mental health,
and I don’t know if you’ve seen any of the problems that mental health is having in the state
right now, but mental health is going through a dramatic change from the state level, and it’s
devastating to the clients. We ’Ve been going to meetings regularly to try and settle the issue
because it’s with the county board of commissioners, and we’ve been meeting with them, joint
meetings with them and it’s not an easy thing to deal with. But I can tell you, there’s nothing like
an Indian meeting. I mean, [Laughs] there’s nothing like it, because they will tear your heart out

of you and walk off with it and not think nothing about it, not think nothing about it.

MR: That sounds like a universal Indian thing, right there.

GH: Ithink it is.

MR: [Laughs] Let me ask you—. I haven’t really referred to my list of questions that
much, but I did want to ask you about how and why—. Iknow you’re involved in the United

Tribes. How and why was United Tribes formed?

GH: I was not involved in United Tribes when they first started meeting but from what I
can understand the Commission of Indian Affairs started having the Unity Conferences and there
was money left in the budget after the conference was over, and it would always go back to the
state. Each tribe or organization would send a representative to the commission to represent their
tribe or organization at those planning meetings, and I’m not sure who or what or how that came
about but somebody become real concerned that that money that was left each year was going
back to the state, so somebody came up with the idea—and I almost think it was Lonnie Revels
and James Hardin—that there needed to be a separate organization that sponsored that Unity

Conference each year, so that that money would stay within the Indian community and then that

money could go to scholarships and other things of that nature, and that’s how United Tribes was
formed. So somebody came up with the name and the by-laws and all that other stuff. I think
James Hardin was really instrumental in that being done. I think he was. But anyway, that was
done and that whole process came about, so it was a simple thing. The by-laws were written and
they started off. At that time it was just to sponsor the conference. That was their main purpose.

We haven’t done much more than that since then, [Laughs] to tell you the truth.

MR: Well, let’s talk about that. I know you’re the chairwoman of—.

GH: President.

MR: President.

GH: Yeah.

MR: President of United Tribes, and how do you feel about that? Do you feel like the

United Tribes is meeting its obligations or would you like to see United Tribes do more?

GH: Under the present by-laws, we are. We ’Ve been talking about that lately. We’ve been
talking about whether or not United Tribes should be involved in more and this is how we feel
about it. United Tribes should be the catalyst for things happening, just like it did at the Unity
Conference. We want to be careful that we don’t become—that we don’t get involved in what the
commission should be doing. What happened at the Unity Conference was, at one of the housing
workshops, what came out of that was that there should be a statewide housing workshop, just
nothing but a housing workshop. That came out of that meeting and Greg is in the process—. Now
the commission is going to take the lead, I think, and they’re going to plan a statewide housing—.
United Tribes is not going to do that. The commission is going to take the lead now in planning a

statewide housing workshop and bring whoever in needs to come in. I don’t know how many

days they’re going to plan it but I think they gave Gre g what he needed. He was in that meeting
that day and they gave him the information he needed to be able to properly plan what they
needed, whether it was one day, two days, or whatever. I was not in there so I’m not sure exactly,
but Barbara told me about it a couple of days ago and she was real excited. It was something that

she felt needed to happen and all the other folks in there felt the same way about it.

So something like what we think is what the conference is supposed to do is be the
beginning or start of other things happening in the state, so while we don’t have an executive
director that is employed with us full time and all of us are volunteers, so none of us have the
time to dedicate to United Tribes full time and do a whole lot of things that we would like to see
done, so whatever is done has to be on a volunteer basis. So by the time we plan that Unity
Conference, that takes almost a whole year [Laughs] to do, and as a matter of fact that is on our
next agenda, you know, future planning and what we see as where we should be five years from

HOW.

MR: I’ve talked with people who have said that they think that possibly the Commission
of Indian Affairs is a little bit limited with what it can do as far as advocacy for Indian people

because it is a state agency. What do you think [about that?]

GH: I agree. I agree with that. I know that NAACP represents black folks better than
anybody I have ever seen, but they have no strings. Nobody can tell them nothing, and that—. I
cannot think of that one man’s name, but he’s just lost a lot of weight. I know you know who I’m

talking about. He’s the executive director of NAACP. [ReV. Dr. William J. Barber, 11]

MR: Is he like a reverend or something?

GH: Yes.

MR: He used to be a big guy. I know who you’re talking about. I don’t know his—.

GH: Yeah, he used to be a big guy but he’s lost a lot of weight.

MR: I don’t know his name but I think I know who you’re talking about. He came out of

the Wake County, the school stuff, busing and stuff.

GH: Yes, he did.

MR: That’s who you’re talking about.

GH: If something’s going on he will show up and he is smart, and he don’t Inind
speaking up for whatever issue there is and whatever situation there is, and if it’s about black
people you will see him on that TV. I mean you will just see him. But that organization is
supported by all black people in the United States of America, and he’s getting paid, so there has
to be—. In order for us to have something like that we’ve got to get an organization that’s got
staff, that can pay somebody to work for us, that’s just doing that, is doing nothing but that,

representing us, and you know what, I wouldn’t mind seeing that. I really wouldn’t.

MR: Well I think—. I don’t know. I mean I can just speak for myself and people that I’ve
talked to. I mean I think that’s definitely something that people would like to see because, like I

say, a lot of people think that the commission is kind of limited—

GH: Well, it is.

MR: —for speaking up because it’s a state agency. Like you say, it’s not like the NAACP
that’s its own self. Do you think that possibly though the reason why something like that hasn’t

happened in general, do you think Indian people are passive these days? Do you—

GH: Yeah.

MR: —think that Indian people are advocates these days?

GH: I think they are passive. I just notice at most commission meetings people sit there
and don’t say much, don’t say hardly anything, and I can remember when LomIie Revels was on
that commission board, and Ray Little Turtle; there was no closed mouths. If some of these
issues would have came before them, they would have hit the ceiling. You know that. They were

not quiet over nothing much.

MR: Well I was probably a young whippersnapper when they—. I can remember some

meetings but—

GH: Okay.

MR: —not so much.

GH: Okay.

MR: But Ikind of knew them, so I can imagine.

GH: Yeah, okay. They both were—.

MR: Especially Ray Little Turtle. I didn’t really know Mr. LomIie that well.

GH: Okay.

MR: I knew him, but I didn’t—.

GH: Well neither one of them were quiet, and if an issue and they felt passionate about it
they spoke. Champ Goins, and J. P. Jacobs, and Mr. Richardson, and Chief Carter and all those

folks, they—.

MR: When you say “Mr. Richardson,” are you talking about W. R.?

GH: I should have said “Chief,” Chief Richardson. I did say, “Chief,” didn’t 1?

MR: No, you said Mr. Richardson.

GH: I should have said “Chief,” Chief Richardson and Chief Carter and all those folks
who were on the commission at the same time. Those men, when an issue came before them
[Pauses, laughs] they spoke very loudly and you knew they were in the room, and now you go to
those same commission meetings and it’s so quiet. You wouldn’t hardly know it was the same

commission meeting. It’s just different.

MR: Why do you think it’s so different? What has changed? I mean you’ve been around—

. You’re a lot older than I am, you know, not so much—.

GH: Well I am. No, yes I am. I am a lot older than you are.

MR: [Laughs]

GH: Yes I am too, and it’s okay. I’m glad I’m still here. [Laughs]

MR: [Laughs] So what have you seen? What has changed over the years?

GH: It’s the people. It’s the people that are there. It is. Because there’s no Tom Carters
and there’s no Chief W. R. and there’s no Champ Goins. There’s just none of those men who
would stand up for whatever they felt was right. I mean I don’t think it’s the knowledge base
because these people are still knowledgeable. I don’t think that has anything to do with it. I think
it’s just people who just want everybody to like them. [Pause; children talking] I’ve got nine

grandchildren.

MR: They all stay here.

GH: No. No, they all stay on these ten acres, all except for one, my oldest grandson. And
then I’ve got a granddaughter in college, so other than that they all stay on these ten acres. But I
have custody of one of my—. My daughter was killed in a car accident so I have custody of her
son, and I have custody of one of my daughter’s sons, so they live here, and my daughter lives

here with me.

MR: But like you were saying though, you say the knowledge is there but is it the

personality, or is it more than that?

GH: I think they’re reluctant to speak. I think they’re—. Maybe I’m wrong, okay, but I just
think they’re reluctant to speak. I just think they sit there and just think they’re going to say the
wrong thing or they’re just reluctant to speak. They’re intimidated. I just think they’re just
reluctant to speak. They’re in this big room and they’re—. That wouldn’t have intimidated Chief
W. R. or—. It wouldn’t have mattered where they were. They would have spoke if they’d been in
front of the governor, and if something would have come up that they would have disagreed with
they would have told the governor himself they didn’t like it, Chief W. R. and Chief Carter, and
Mr. Jacobs here, Chief Jacobs, and Mr. Champ Goins. They wouldn’t have had a problem at all
in telling nobody how they felt, all those people that served on that commission [with] Lonnie

Revels fifteen years ago, or even five years ago.

MR: Could it be a change—? I mean I’ve thought about this myself, but could it be a
change in the needs of Indian people? Are Indian people complacent, or are they happy with
what they have? Are they scared they’re going to lose something? I don’t know. I’m just—. I

don’t know. What do you think?

GH: I don’t think people’s needs are met. They’re not met in this county, because they
still come to us with the same needs that they had, maybe not as many but they still come to us
with needs, with educational needs, with money. They need money to go to school. They need a
job. They still come to us with those needs. [Pause] I honestly believe that it’s the—. I hate to say
this, but I just honestly believe it’s just the people that’s there. I just believe they just don’t want
to speak up, and you know some people just want everybody to like them, and in order to be

liked they’re quiet and they won’t bring up nothing controversial.

MR: Could it be a legacy issue? Could it be that no one, or not no one but in certain
communities and tribes, that they just didn’t mentor people? I’m just throwing it out there,
because I can only speak for what I know and Iknow that Chief W. R., from what Iunderstand,

talking to people and what I saw of him, was a larger-than-life figure.

GH: Yes.

MR: And he was a my-way-or-the-highway type guy.

GH: Yes.

MR: He got along with people and stuff but he was the man, he knew it, and other people

knew it. They recognized that.

GH: Yes.

MR: But I can’t think of really anyone that he mentored that after he died and was no
longer chief that came after him, that represented that same type of personality, that same type of

leadership, and that’s just my thinking about it. I don’t know what you think. Could that be it?

GH: That’s probably true. That is probably it. That is exactly what it is, probably. We
have—. Our board just recently told Barbara that she needed to think about looking and trying to
find somebody to mentor in herjob, because we realize that she’s not going to work forever.
Now, after we told her that I started thinking about myself. If I left, who would take my place? I
talked to the board about it in a long conversation. I had a long conversation with my board
about that very same thing, who would take my place, so I was back with them to: I need to start

looking for somebody to do the same thing with.

So, you’re probably right. I don’t know that there’s a whole lot of mentorship in Indian
communities, and that is so important. That is so important, and we have bright, intelligent
young people. You know, all those students who stood against that wall—and I sat there and
looked at that group of young people who received scholarships to go to college this year—their
grade point averages were out of this world, going to college for all kinds of things, and that’s
the way it is every year. I mean last year we had I think it was seventeen. So it’s not that we
don’t have the young people who are qualified, and that’s just who applied. There are students

who didn’t apply who have other gifts.

MR: I know our community’s had issues with people applying, and I just can’t—. I don’t
understand it. Our tribe sponsors—or tribal members sponsor—a couple different scholarship
awards and there’s been years that I know of that none of our people applied, and I know there

were people who could have applied.

GH: Well, we need to—. You know what, maybe that’s a program United Tribes needs to
look at. Maybe that’s something we need to have a workshop on next year, is mentoring. Maybe

that’s something we need to look at.

MR: Like just leadership training, or—

GH: Leadership—.

MR: —something.

GH: Yeah.

MR: Leadership training or—

GH: Maybe that’s something—.

MR: —mentoring.

GH: Yeah. Maybe that’s something we need to look at. I’m glad we talked about that,
because that is so important, and how we can reach young people, because that is so—. How we
can bring them to—because they have that conference. They have their own conference, but they

don’t come to our conference at all, and we don’t go to theirs. 80—.

MR: Hmm.

GH: You brought a good point. You really did. That’s a good point. I know we’ve

probably just changed subjects, but.

MR: That’s all right. It’s all right.

GH: But that’s important. That’s really very important.

MR: It is. It is very important. So, besides that—we’ve kind of identified that—what do you
think are some of the biggest issues that, either historically or even contemporarily, Indian

people face here in North Carolina? What are some of the biggest issues that we face?

GH: Federal recognition. Oh, my gracious. I’m almost convinced—. We have messed it

up. We have messed up federal recognition.

MR: How so?

GH: The last time the Lumbees went before Congress they made the biggest mess. And

the other tribes, like your tribe, you’re going through the regular process, right?

MR: Mm hmm.

GH: How far are you? Do you know?

MR: Well, the short story of it is that we put in our letter of intent in 1979, we put in a
petition in 1989, and then like 1990 we got a letter of obvious deficiencies and since then we’ve

been trying to address it.

GH: Okay.

lVIR: And it’s been hit-and-miss, you know, research has been ongoing in some capacity,
but it’s just—. It’s like a little smoldering fire that every once in awhile somebody else will come
along and put another 10 g on it and keep the fire burning but it’s not a ﬂaming inferno, you

know, so I want the ﬂaming inferno, myself.

GH: And that’s what I want to see too, and that’s where I’m so discouraged.

MR: That’s the only way we’re going to get it, is a ﬂaming inferno.

GH: That’s exactly right, and I’m so discouraged myself with that whole process of

federal recognition that I just don’t see much hope, I guess, is where I am with it.

MR: Well, why do you think federal recognition—? You mentioned that; why do you

think that’s such an important—? What’s so important about federal recogmtion?

GH: Because it will bring some services. It will bring some services to our people. And,
you know, when I hear President Obama meeting with Indians, and he’s not meeting with off-
reservation Indians, I get upset about that. He’s not meeting with non-federally recognized
Indians. That means they’re not considering us Indians, and that bothers me, so I’m thinking—.
My thought is, well, if we were federally recognized we wouldn’t be in this situation. We would
be meeting when everybody else is meeting. It’s the same thing as when we were back in school.
To me this is where I face this at, is back when we were in school and we had an all-Indian
school, and there was the white people over here and we were over here, and we were different.
We’re not different. We’re just as good as anybody else and I don’t like for anybody to be
ostracizing us, and to me that’s what that does. We’re non-federally recognized and that
ostracizes [us]. That makes us different, and we’re not different. Maybe that’s just me. [Laughs]

Maybe that’s just my View, but that’s the way I see it.

MR: So you’re saying that federal recogmtion is not only about the services but also

about being equal to other Indian people.

GH: Yes.

MR: What are some of the other issues that are important to our Indian people?

GH: I’m so glad you mentioned that bringing young people along. That is important. But
you know what’s important, is working together; is somehow or another finding a way to work
together. I think that’s one of the most important things. And the next thing is drugs and alcohol

abuse among Indian people. Do you know nobody’s addressng that? Not no tribe or Indian

organization today addresses drugs and alcohol abuse, and it’s more rampant among our
communities than probably any one thing. Everybody’s smoking pot, just about, and you ask
children what—. “Well that’s not drugs.” They’ll tell you, “That’s not drugs. Pot’s not drugs,” but
it leads to other stuff. But nobody’s doing—. There’s no services, no program for alcohol and
drug abuse. Our conference don’t do anything. Everybody wants to hide from it. You know
what, we’ve got two board members who want to bring alcohol back to the conference, and I’ve
got another board member, and this is what he said to me: “I used to be an alcoholic. I don’t need
to be around alcohol. I might be the very one over there drinking.” [Pause] I said, “Well, if that
subj ect comes up, then you know what to say.” But you know how bad the conferences used to

be when we used to have alcohol. Do you remember?

MR: I remember a few incidents. Yeah, Iremember.

GH: We used to have some bad conferences.

MR: Well you know I thought a lot of that had to do with it being here in Fayetteville, to

be honest with you.

GH: It might have been.

MR: You know, because it was so close to the Indian community that you had other

people not at the conference to come in, and that’s where—.

GH: We had some bad, bad stuff going on, bad stuff. We really did, God knows, whether
it was stragglers coming in or whatever, but we had some bad stuff. I said something to
somebody the other day about it. No, somebody said something to me about the conference
being in Fayetteville the other day, and I said, oh, no. [Laughs] I don’t think we ever want to

come back here again. I don’t want a repeat of what we went through.

MR: The board—that was the place, back in the day.
GH: It was. It sure was.

MR: [Laughs]

GH: It was.

MR: Well, Ms. Gladys, I’m getting ready to kind of wrap up here. Do you have anything

else you’d like to share?

GH: Ifyou hadn’t asked me that I’d probably thought of something. [Laughs] When you
ask me that, I can’t think of anything. You know, I do feel—. I have enjoyed my work. It’s been
fulfilling. And even though there’s been a lot of bumps in the road my joy is in—. The other day I
watched—. We had a girl go to school to be a nurse, and we had to help her through three years of
school. We had to keep encouraging her. She’d come in the office crying and say, “I’m not ever
going back,” and we’d sit her down and encourage her and she’d go back and a month or so later
she’d come back in crying again about some professor or something, and we’d have her go back
and she’d go back. Then last May I received an invitation to her graduation and with that
invitation she sent a letter saying that she had been offered three jobs already. I went to her
graduation and the joy in watching her walk across that stage and knowing I had just a little bit to
do with that is what makes my job worth what I do. So I don’t know if I’ll ever see her again,
and it’s okay if I don’t, but knowing that I had just a little bit to do with her success, knowing
that she will never—she’s a single mom—knowing that she will never have to ask nobody for
nothing, ever again, makes my life, makes me happy. Because when she came into my ofﬁce she
was borrowing from Peter to pay Paul, and she did for three years, but she’s now a nurse, a RN,

and she has a good job making good money and she don’t have to ask nobody. She has a good

car, her own home, and she don’t have to ask nobody for nothing, and I can tell you story after

story. I know another girl who went to college and we sent her to school and she is now a speech
pathologist and she was in the same position. She now owns her own home and her own car, and
I can tell you when I see her I am so proud of her. Her daughter was the valedictorian of a school
with ﬁve hundred graduates this last year. And I can tell you, when I see her I speak and hug her,
tell her I love her, she tells me she loves me, and I go on, but when I see her I know that’s the joy

in what I do, is knowing somebody is liVing—.

Sandra: Somebody’s life is better, yeah.

GH: Somebody—. Thank you. Somebody’s living a better life as a result of just a little bit
that I had to do, some effort that I made, just a little bit. Because she went to school and she
made all the effort, she did all the work, I just encouraged her and just paid a little bit of money
for her that came through somebody else. So I’m not trying to take much credit, but just a little
bit. That’s the joy I get in what I do, and I don’t talk about that much. That’s not something that
anybody hears me say. Nobody hears me say that because I don’t talk about that, but that’s the
joy in what I do. So when I’m getting hell from here and there I think about those thoughts and

that’s what gets me across.

MR: Well let me ask you, just wrapping up here, who are some other people that you

think would be good to interview along these same lines?

GH: I will have to say my first person is Ruth Revels. I would have to say that. She is one

of the most remarkable women I think I have ever met in my whole life.

MR: Well I’ve talked to her already, so—

GH: Okay.

MR: —hopefully I’m going to go interview her next week, if I can get out there.

GH: She is such a remarkable woman. I so admire her. I think you will be so impressed
with Ruth. Well, anyway, she impresses me. She really, really impresses me. Oh, my gracious.
Ruth Woods. There are so many women, so many. I am just so at a loss. There are so many
women all over this state. I don’t know about your community. You know about your

community and who you need to do from there.

MR: Well there aren’t really that many that are still around, really. I know Ms. Ruth
Ealing. She just had surgery. She’s recovering. But yeah, I mean I’ve got a few other names, like

Ms. Shirley Freeman, someone had said.

GH: Ms. Shirley Freeman, yes. Yes, Ms. Shirley Freeman.

MR: Maybe a few others. I’ve got kind of a list. Maybe I’ll check my list and maybe I’ll

give you a call if I can’t think of anyone else.

GH: Well you give me a call. You give me some time and let me think about it, because I
can give you some—. I’ve been doing this a long time and I’ve been working with a lot of

women, and I can tell you some names who are really very good.

MR: Now, what’s your name?

Sandra: Sandra.

MR: Sandra. Okay. I just want to make sure, because she’s on the recording and

everything.

GH: She’s like me. She’s a lot like me. [Laughs]

MR: Well, that’s a good thing.

GH: She did a—.

Sandra: It really is. [Laughs]

GH: She did a presentation at the Unity Conference for the Healthy Start program and
somebody told me the other day, “That’s a little Gladys.” I said, oh my gracious. I don’t want her

working in the Indian community. She’s working her last months on her degree in psychology.

MR: Good.

Sandra: Yeah, hopefully I’ll start this month on doing my intemship and get licensed.

MR: Great, good. Well, I’m going to end, and I surely appreciate it.

GH: So what was your undergraduate?
