
BRITTANY DESGAGES: My name is Brittany Desgages and I am interviewing Comlie
Leeper today. We are sitting in the conference room at the Smith warehouse building at 114
South Buchanan Boulevard in Durham, North Carolina. It is Thursday, July 3ml around three pm.
So ﬁrst think you for being here. And can you start off by telling me a little bit about where you
were born and where you grew up?

CONNIE LEEPER: All right. So again my name is Comlie Leeper, and while I now live
in Durham and have since about 2008, I actually grew up in a very rural company town near
Charlotte here in North Carolina called Karmapolis. And Kannapolis was a mill town built up
around textiles, and I grew up in a very segregated community and went to segregated schools
until I was in the seventh grade when history caught up with little Karmapolis and anti-union
basically a bedroom community now of Charlotte, but at the time it was all things King Cotton.
So that’s my experience growing up in the paternalistic company town where one family owned
most of the land. They were the larger industry in addition to the hospital and controlled history
and the community.

BD: Okay. So is most of your family from Karmapolis also?

CL: Most of my family is from Kannapolis. All my family for the most part are from the
South. A lot of my aunties and uncles were part of the great northern migration, the second wave.

And so Pageland, South Carolina is where my grandfather’s family was

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

from, on my paternal side, and also my maternal side as well. But Kannapolis was where I was
born, is where my parents were born. And so that’s home.

BD: Yeah.

CL: Yeah.

BD: Can you tell me a little bit about your family background and your childhood
experiences?

CL: Sure. Well, I would want to be really frank, and I’ll probably use some language that
is passe and outdated, and that’s okay. I’m fifty-seven. So I was born in 1956, the fourth of sixth
children. So I have five other siblings. And my parents, my mom was really, really brilliant and
decided, and was the valedictorian of her high school class and decided to get married. My father
was a handsome fellow, and so she chose him versus going to college. And there were nine
siblings on one side and about ten siblings on the other side. I grew up in a very large extended
family. We grew up what we would consider poor. That’s some of the language that I’m talking
about. In a marginalized community that was almost a hamlet to the actual domestic workers
who had mill houses in a time when people of African descent, African Americans in that area
could not work in the mill at all. So a lot of our community folk did agriculture, had farms,
owned their own little small businesses and worked as domestics to the working class white folk
who were the rank and ﬁle, not in a union term of the mill.

My grandfather eventually did work in the mill at some point, but he was a shoe cobbler.
And my grandmother, we did what one would call now local food sourcing. I mean it’s rad and
popular and bougie now, but growing up it was a way of life. So we had our own gardens, and
my mother and my grandmother had green thumbs. So they raised plants in addition to things in

the garden that we would eat. And my uncles and great uncles raised livestock, either pigs or

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

hogs and so I grew up with my dad being a fisherman, a hunter and a gatherer. So I grew up
outdoors. I grew up in the great outdoors on all those trips that my dad would let the girls go on.

But I grew up in a Christian family. And the Christian denomination that my father was
Baptist, good old fashioned Southern Baptist. But my mom was Lutheran, Lutheran Church
Missouri Synod, and it’s important to make that distinction in terms of Lutheranism and the
Evangelical Lutheran Church or the Lutheran Church of America that eventually emerged and
the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod that’s a very conservative denomination opted not to do
that. And so it is a denomination that to this day does not ordain women as ministers while other
more progressive Lutheran sects do that. And so I grew up with this sense of really internalizing
that to be a girl child was not the best thing to be, not so much in my family because my mom
did not really ascribe to gender roles. We all had responsibilities and duties. It wasn’t girl, boy
work based on gender male and female. But in my own congregation growing up I always
wanted to be an acolyte. And girls couldn’t be acolyte.

BD: What’s that?

CL: So an acolyte are the kids that come in before the clergy and ministers, the deacons,
the elders and light the candles, put the liturgy books up, the Bible and prepare the service in a
very sacred way. And you got little training in that. It was really, to be an acolyte you wore a
little robe along with that and you carried and the bible and other liturgical materials, but you
also had what I thought was this really cool apparatus that lit the candles and put them out. So an
acolyte are the kids in my congregation who did that. It could only be boys. So I never was able
to do that. I mean it has changed now. I also grew up in a congregation that got started during
reconstruction. So rather than the Lutherans go to parts of West Africa or East Africa to do

missionary work, they may have done that, but they also came south. And they started a lot of

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

black churches that generally had white ministers and for the most part got subsidy from the
larger Missouri Synod to pay for those pastors, and it was called a subsidy, but it was basically
church welfare. And as long as we accepted that subsidy we were under the thumb and the rules
of the district that we were in, which was the southeastem district. And then more importantly
though it was a process where race was the deciding factor on who was in leadership in this
Missouri Synod. So African American men who were ministers could not serve in hierarchical
leadership positions in this particular body.

And so I grew up in an environment with a mom and lots of women in the church who as
a teenager I was able to be a part of my first coalition. And this coalition was to address issues of
power in the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, but this power was about black men being
elevated as ministers to positions of presidents and Vice presidents of various boards and
departments in the infrastructure of the church. And so as I was active in that process, Ibegan to
do my critical thinking and to say well what about women being ordained or being able to serve
as elders, which was impossible. And I grew up in an environment where women couldn’t even
vote in the church. So I would say that my own feminism and womanist tendencies started out of
being a child being denied the right to fully participate in a body where it was okay if I tithed and
offered. It was okay to be confirmed and baptized. I was baptized as an infant and confirmed as
an adolescent in this body. But that was the level of height that I could reach. That was my glass
ceiling as a kid and as a young adult. And it helped shape for me what we’ll talk about at some
point Brittany, and that is the intersection that I walk in.

So once I got the critical analysis around women being excluded and I’m participating
my own marginalization as a woman and when I started questioning my sexual identity, the issue

of queemess and same gender loving people being involved in a Visible way in the church wasn’t

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

even on the table at all. So I found myself participating in a process that used a racial lens to
elevate black ministers who were men to positions of more hierarchy and authority and the pay
that came along with that. And then that meant I had to make myself small as a woman and as a
queer person and focus on making sure that black men were tall.

So that helped me shape quite early on as a young person the intersections that we talk
about now, the transformations organizing that we talk about now that I didn’t have language for
then but shaped how I wanted to walk in the world. And the way that I wanted to do that was not
to cordon off a part of myself and be a part of any movements that lifted up a single issue while
the rest of me, the wholeness of me had to take a back seat. So that’s how I framed both my
intellectual curiosity, my critical thinking, my intersectional organizing lens and my ability to
work to bring my whole self into the work that I do no matter what that work was.

So in summary I grew up in a Christian poor and working class African American
community, segregated from the rest of the maj ority population in a mill town that was
extremely paternalistic with siblings who and an extended family that absolutely adored me and
let me know that I was pretty and smart, and not just pretty and not just smart, but pretty and
smart and capable and had the opportunity as a teenager to get involved in coalitional politics
and cut my teeth before I was eighteen in that environment that allowed me to understand that as
I work for justice, I am also working for my own freedom and that I am not to be excluded from
the work that I do. And that in order to be authentic and whole, I need to bring my whole self to
this particular work. And so I was always the one talking about gender equity, not just racial
equity or inclusion for queer people or making sure that if young people were involved that it
wasn’t adultism that kept them from leadership positions under the premise that youth are our

future. But I grew up an environment where I was afforded the opportunity to be a youth leader

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

now not when I got in my twenties or thirties. So that helped shape my own world View around
transformation and intersectional work, which is why I’m so thrilled to be a part of the Pauli
Murray project because of the intersections and because of the legacy that the Reverend Doctor
Pauli Murray leaves for us as someone who also ended up of course being an Episcopal priest as
a same gender loving woman, we know biracial but of course considered of color and the legacy
of working for peace and for justice.

BD: So it seems like you went to a church that was very supporting of patriarchal
systems.

CL: That’s correct.

BD: But what role did religion play in your own household?

CL: Well, my dad was more of a drinker than a prayer. And in my own household we
were all members of a choir from the angelic choirs as a kid all the way to the adult or chancellor
choir. We were involved in all the pageantry of Christmas and Easter. We were involved in
Sunday school. I grew up with my grandfather, my paternal grandfather—-his name was
Hezekiah—-being the superintendent of Sunday schools. So I participated in vacation bible
schools every summer in June when school was out. So in my own household we often hear the
phrase everything I needed to know I learned in kindergarten, from the famous book. Well the
golden rules that I learned in my own household around how you treat people like you want to be
treated. And to seek first to understand and then to be understood. In my own household it was
pretty Christian. But it was with a mom who in another time and era would’ve been considered a
feminist and who fought for women’s suffrage within the church and eventually became Vice
president of the congregation that I was in and who led by example who was an aVid reader who

probably read every book in our local library and was on a first name basis with our local

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

librarian who probably had the job from the time she got out of college until she retired. Miss
Settlemyre was her name.

And so in my own environment it was a day to day way of life. We said our grace before
we had meals. We said our prayers before we went to bed. And we tried to walk in very good
and stalwart ways. We tried to tell the truth (fast), and as a kid you don’t get caught lying, and
my mom raised us with if you come to me with the truth, then any consequences for screwing up,
if you own it and take responsibility for it then the consequences won’t be as great if you get
caught in a lie. So those values and principles that come out of some Christian tenets around
honesty and thrift and all of those was way of life. So I didn’t know any different because that’s
what the whole neighborhood demographic was. The denomination changed but we hopped, like
kids hop from camp now, from camp to camp during the summers. We hopped from vacation
bible school to vacation bible school, and it was staggered by the different churches. So we could
spend the first month of summer a week of vacation bible school here regardless of
denomination and so on and so forth with all the kids in the neighborhood.

The other thing is we lived near a high school that we couldn’t go to. And we had to walk
much further to the segregated high school, George Washington Carver High School. And but
the fields that the athletic fields that A.L. Brown High School, that was the white school we used
it as our playground. And so the tem1is balls that got hit over the tem1is fence or the softballs that
got left in the field or got over in the kudzu that was drop off to our community, we foraged for
all those things and played kickball and baseball and softball and made our own go carts and
were outdoor kids. This was long before the Xbox and the technology that we have today.

So my environment was one where we were encouraged to be outdoors. And you had

rules about when it got to be dark, when to come home. And my mom had this rule if she ever

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

came to the door and called us and she had a sing-song way she called us she started from the
oldest down to the youngest that we could all imitate when we got separated from one of our
siblings that they were trying to shake us. We could come to the house and call out all the
siblings names and my mom had this rule when you heard that you came rumIing. So we used it
to our advantage. When my sister would start courting at thirteen and fourteen and didn’t want
me around, and they would trick us and shake us. I'd go home and call out the little sing-song, all
my siblings and everybody would come rumIing. And then I'd be stuck like glue from then on.

So it was that [close knit] childhood, and I didn’t know the poverty that we lived in until I
got into I'd say middle school when I saw the differences. And when I got into high school that
was integrated when I saw the differences of kids getting a car when they turned sixteen with a
big bow, and it was like what in the world. Those kinds of things, so it was all comparative. But
we had all that we needed and wanted and because my father was industrious and loved to hunt
and gather and fish. And we gathered all kinds of berries and nuts, and my father dried fish, and
my grandmother made her own soap and carmed foods from the garden. Things that I go to a
farmer’s market now and pay top dollar for. I wish I had learned that skill although I have all the
Foxfire books and things that tell you how to can and how to store and how to do all that. I wish
I had paid more attention of course. We all say that in retrospect. As a young girl tending the fire
or bringing more wood as my grandmother was boiling the big pot and sticking the green beans
down in there or canning the blackberries and all the things that she did. And she made her own
wine as well.

BD: That’s amazing. My mom is into that stuff too.

CL: Yeah, cool. Some things I can do but some things I leave it to older relatives and go

to the farmer’s market.

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

BD: I feel you on that.

CL: I often tell people that it feels like irrespective of the politics that I lived a pretty
charmed life because I was the baby girl with two older brothers and two younger brothers who
were extremely protective. And we might have fought with each other, but the rest of the
community couldn’t fight with us because we rallied. It was six of us so we weren’t like an only
child or two kids. We were our own little gang. We were our own little gang pretty much, and all
of us were very athletic and always involved in extra curricular activities in school.

So I learned to play basketball at a very early age because our segregated high school,
George Washington Carver that I mentioned, did a summer program where they opened up the
gym and you could come and you could play basketball or do all kinds of arts and crafts. And
there was this one system where you had a couple balls and everybody was on the court, and you
had to fend for yourself. So every time I would finally get a ball and I start dribbling some kid
would take it away from me. And I was determined, dagnabbit, that I was not going to continue
to be dissed like that. My little self esteem was really struggling. So I practiced and practiced and
worked really hard and ended up being a star athlete and going to college on a basketball
scholarship. And that was my only belief that I would go to college once by my junior year the
coaches had made sure, and my parents made sure I got out of the track, the general track course
to college prep course and was able to go to college. But that was because of my athletic
prowess.

And it so happened that I was honored with dean’s list and who’s who and those kinds of
things because we’ve read a lot growing up. My mom read to us. She read a lot and there’s this
whole body of knowledge around reading that is literally fundamental that helped shape my love

of English and my understanding of how to conjugate a verb and use it in all of its tenses and

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

ways that you learn through reading before you even get into a classroom that you absorb.
You’re inculcated with that formal writing, reading that you do and that’s been done to you as a
kid. So that was part of my love of language and stories, and I traveled all over the world before I
was six and never left the house. Pippi Longstocking, that was me. I don’t know if you know
who Pippi Longstocking—

BD: Yes I do.

CL: Well, you know Pippi Longstocking, that I wanted to be Pippi Longstocking for
sure. So that was me.

BD: So at least for part of the time when you were in school the ciVil rights movement
was going on. Do you have any memories of like the desegregation process?

CL: All I can remember for the most part are vague tensions around the schools
integrating and what I was hearing from the adults how the white high school for a couple of
years beyond the integration laws still had the power to keep integration from happening. I don’t
have a conscious memory of that. It’s all in retrospect by looking back and now hearing and
reading some of that particular history. As kids we were shielded from that. And it wasn’t until I
was an adult working as an organizer with a group called Piedmont Peace Project, an
organization that is now defunct but an organization that was about the peace movement but
looking at kitchen table issues water and sewer and really looking at the federal budget that’s
spent on military and what could be going to schools and buses and teachers and all that thing. It
wasn’t until I started working with some of those women who were a part of the organization
and on the board of the organization that I started hearing the stories of what was happening in
my own local community around the ciVil rights movement.

BD: How old were you when you first started becoming involved with that organization?

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

CL: It was in 1989. So that’s all I’m going to say. [Laughing]

BD: That’s fine.

CL: It’s now 2014, and I got started as a volunteer and this was long before the Motor
Voter bill, and the Motor Voter bill basically made voter registration—all that stuff’s been turned
back now--but had made voter registration easier for people. What we had to do then and I was a
part of the Democratic caucus, the black caucus that was the arm of the black, of the Democratic
Party in our particular area. But you had to be sworn in by the board of elections to do voter
registrations, and they called them voter registration commissioners. And so I was one of those
persons because of my involvement in the community and because of my own family’s political
involvement and activism. You inherit generation to generation of credibility.

And so I started working as a volunteer, and this organization that was maybe three or
four years old at the time saw me being involved in that, and I got recruited to become an
organizer. And let me tell you, I didn’t know there was such thing as a paid organizer. I'd been
doing activism organizing as I said through the racial equity work for men and in my church
setting, and it was something that you did to make change happen. So now I am a part of what
we call the nonprofit industrial complex that we don’t have time for me to deconstruct and talk a
lot about, but a lot of work is stymied in the movement because we’re too busy fundraising and
playing politics and don’t really have a lot of time to be on the ground. But that’s neither here
nor there.

So the story that I want to share about that is there was a woman on the board whose
name is Estelle Wylie who ironically is being funeralized today, and I wasn’t able to go to that
funeral. It was originally Saturday, and I found out last night it had been changed to today, and I

had all these things to do including this interview.

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

BD: I’m so sorry.

CL: I’m going home for the holidays. So I’ll get to pay my respects and go to the
gravesite and be with family and friends. She was in her nineties and a rock of the community,
someone who we all made sure that she was able to go to the ﬁrst Obama inauguration.

BD: Wow.

CL: It’s a long story. I wish I had time to share that. But Miss Estelle worked at a dry
cleaners, and during the ciVil rights movement she said that one of the Klan groups, the Ku KluX
Klan groups brought in their robes and cone hats all to be dry cleaned and that she refused to dry
clean them.

BD: What time period was this?

CL: This would’ve been in the [19]60s. This would’ve been early [19]60s.

BD: In North Carolina.

CL: In Karmapolis, North Carolina. The Klan brought in their uniforms to be dry cleaned
and in this Laundromat it was mostly African American women. This was long before the
change in demographics in the community with lots of immigrants and immigrating from other
places. Like right now it’s been replaced a lot with Latino, undocumented labor that’s being
exploited. But then it was mostly African American women, and then all the supervisors were
white of course. So Miss Estelle organized the whole, all the women so no one would do that. So
they couldn’t fire everybody. So the concept of someone who is for all intents and purposes grew
up as a domestic worker working in a laundry taking a stand and organizing all the other women
to take a stand along with her so that no one can be retaliated against--. One of those acts of
resistance that you won’t read when you Google the ciVil rights movement and all the names

come up and all the stories come up. It’s one of those stories that you won’t ever hear about

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

because those kinds of things, those individual day to day acts of resistance that haven’t made it
into the annals of the ciVil rights history were happening in the community. So people were,
according to my mom, resisting going to the back door to buy things in the different restaurants
downtown. And then at the height of the sit in movement that’s when all this was happening
locally. It was never a real organized it was people taking a stand.

BD: Were there Violent repercussions because of that?

CL: No, there weren’t. The only Violent repercussions that have happened in Karmapolis
ironically was not in the ciVil rights movement. It may have been in Cabarrus County individual
things around misogynation when black men who were in relationships with white women and
then the white woman got caught and hollered rape, and then there’s an individual named Rom1ie
Long who’s in jail, has been for the past twenty-five years in a situation like that that came from
the [19]70s. But it was more Violence around the 1934 general textile strike because this is an
anti-union town, and it wasn’t until the mill was threatened not to receive federal grants or
federal contracts for the textiles that it made that it opened up the mill for black workers. It was
under duress that that literally happened.

But as far as there were always gatekeepers in the black community who were ministers
or who were teachers or who were the buffer zone. There were younger people who would’ve
wanted to be more active in the ciVil rights movement around the sit ins and stuff, but the
gatekeepers would definitely prevented that from happening. So no there wasn’t Violence, but the
owner Charles Carmon of Cannon Mills during the general textile strike was friends with the
governor and was able to get the National Guard to come into the town to prevent union
organizers and walk outs from happening. And there were lots of beatings and Violence around

that. So there was more Violence around anti-union work historically in my community than

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

there was knowledgeable about ciVil rights. There’s a film done by Judy Helfen and George
somebody out of UNC who is an emeritus professor there called The General Strike of [19]34
[The Uprising of ’34 by George C. Stoney, Judith Helfand and Suzarme Rostock] that documents
that southern story. And it wasn’t until they started working on that that I learned that history,
and I was, let’s say, still working at Piedmont Peace Project after 1990, and this happened in
1934, and it was very hush hush and people still wouldn’t talk about it in the white community.

BD: Do you know if any of your family members who worked in the mills were
involved in that?

CL: I don’t know, in the general textile strike, no because there weren’t—there were of
course always a few black men who were able to do the dirtiest jobs in the mill like open the big
bales of cotton. But for the most part masses of black people did not work in the mill at that time,
at all. It wasn’t possible at all. So no, there were no one in my family who, there were family
members who were a part of subsequent fights to get the mill unionized, my mom being one of
them, uncles, aunties. So from probably the [19] 70s on there were every few, every decade there
was some union trying to organize into a union shop. And it didn’t happen until the [19]80s with
Unite Here. And shortly after that well, the mill was sold and too much information.

BD: Yeah. No, that’s fine.

CL: No, I realized I was getting ready to go into some detail that’s neither here nor there
for this particular interview. I come from a history of troublemakers you might say.
Troublemakers in the sense that you fight for what’s right and you fight for justice and you do
that not with Violence, but you do that in organized ways that protect the community. And so
another example would be someone wanting to fight for a pay raise in a small hosiery mill where

everyone gets organized to do a petition and sign that so that they can’t fire the whole shift. They

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

can’t fire everybody. So from organizing principles that I was able to watch growing up and even
into a young adulthood on how you made a stand and how you tried to protect yourself. Now
suffice it to say there were lots of retaliation during union fights and a lot of people were fired
and eventually fought to get their jobs reinstated through the legal process, the labor rights
process. But yeah, there was some retaliation but only around economics but not around, to my
knowledge, Violence except for when it came to black men having relationships with white
women.

BD: Okay. I want to go back a little bit. Since you grew up in a household where
Christianity was really important and at the time being queer in a lot of places was dangerous,
when did you first realize that you were queer and how did you navigate that?

CL: Well, I didn’t have language for feeling different as a kid, and that I was socialized
and under a lot of peer pressure to date guys in junior high. Ironically my first two boyfriends
ended up being queer as adults.

BD: Wow.

CL: I don’t know what that’s about. That’s a whole ‘nother story. Yeah, exactly. My
third grade boyfriend and my seventh grade boyfriend are all in same gender loving relationships
with men.

BD: That’s funny.

CL: It is funny. It is a study of its own. What do you see in each other when you are
young that’s of like mindedness that you find solace and protection. I didn’t realize. I might have
been a senior in high school, and I realized that there was this nagging attraction that I had to
other women, but I suppressed it and ran away and ended up getting pregnant my senior year of

high school. I have a son and three grandkids.

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

BD: Wow.

CL: Amazing family that it had to happen that way. It was supposed to. But I bought into
the rhetoric that the way to cure lesbianism is to find the right guy, and I didn’t want to be, we
called it funny growing up. And there was this little sign that people did, she’s furmy.

BD: Yeah, I've seen people do that still.

CL: Yeah, exactly. So I didn’t want to be funny, and more importantly I had been raised
under the rubric of Christianity that I had internalized that to be gay was an abomination and that
not only was I going to die, but I was going to die and go to hell. So the ﬁrst time I realized that
if I were to name myself in any way as same gender loving that I was in trouble. Existentially I
was in trouble. So though on some gut instinctual level when the option to be married once I was
pregnant was presented to me by his family and my family, I automatically knew that that’s not
something I wanted to do. And as great as my father was, my father was an alcoholic, and there
were times he was MIA. There were times when he was extremely Violent. And so my opinion of
marriage as the model that I was able to see was, I didn’t want any part of it. As great as my
mom was, she had made myself small so my dad could be tall, big. And it wasn’t an institution
that I had any interest in whatsoever, even to this day. I understand the gay marriage issue and I
will march and fight for the right for people to get married, and I understand the legalities behind
all of that. But it’s not something I ever would want to do as an institution at all.

But back to the question at hand, it wasn’t until my freshman year of college. Well, let
me back up. So I grew up in this nuclear family but a great extended family as well. When my
son was one month old, my grandfather died, Hezekiah who I spoke about earlier, died. And a
tradition of our family you go to the house where the death is and you’re there until after the

funeral or whatever. And so my son and I went to my grandmother’s house, and my grandmother

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

was my champion. Long story short, she said I want you and—my son’s name is Marcus—I
want you and Marcus to—Marcus Reshad. We call him Reshad. I was getting ready to say his
nickname, but they grow up and they want to be something different. But I want you and Reshad,
Marcus, to come live with me. I want you, you’ve lost your scholarship to Fayetteville State
University. No, Elizabeth City State University. you’ve lost your scholarship because you got
pregnant because at that particular time you had to come out of high school. This is 1970-
something.

BD: And you still played basketball in college, right.

CL: I did. Still had a basketball scholarship, yeah exactly. But I didn’t get a chance to
play my senior year but by my junior year already had my grant in aid scholarship to attend
Elizabeth City University. It was a college at the time. My grandmother said, “I want you to
move in with me. You and your mom are having some issues,” because what I wanted to frame
earlier was my mom had chosen not to go to college. So she had put all her hopes and her dreams
in one of our kids going to college. Iwas the first of my siblings to go to college. And my other
brothers had gone into the military. My sister got married blah, blah, blah, blah. My grandmother
said, “Look, it’s not the worst thing in the world to have a kid at your age. You’re eighteen. I
want you to go back, finish high school. I want you to go to college. And I’m going to help you
raise your son.” And so when my grandmother freed me up to realize that all was not lost. And
my shame that I was carrying around, all of that, when she soothed all that away, it was at the
same time that Ibroke off the relationship with Reshad’s father whose name is Bill and decided
that okay, I’m going to explore this thing. It wasn’t like linear thinking. It was something that
evolved. So Iwas a little older because I had to go back to school. So most kids when they get

into school, they’re eighteen, nineteen. So I’m nineteen, almost twenty.

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

And then I get on campus, and it’s a whole ‘nother world. So I started exploring, and
there’s an open secret in the African American community that you keep. You don’t do anything
to embarrass the community. Like you don’t get caught butt naked on a ﬂoat in a parade on
CNN. There are things you don’t do. And it’s open secret. We know you’re funny, and we know
you know you’re funny, but you don’t say nothing about it. I won’t say nothing about it, and
we’re going to love you anyway. I mean that’s prolific in the African American community. So
the reality though, Brittany, is for me learning all what I had tried to frame earlier about the
intersections and being holistic and authentic, I still lived my life very openly. My partner’s
helped raise my son as I was in relationships as he was growing up. Family reunion I brought my
girlfriends home. Events for family I showed up with them. But we didn’t talk about it.

And so for me that invisibility began to gnaw at me in a real depressing way. And so as
true with many of us who grow up in small rural communities, Christian, come to terms with our
sexual identity, substance abuse happens. And so I was trying to drink away, smoke away the
feelings of shame and guilt and the image in your mind where you’re going to be abandoned and
rejected by your family if you don’t play along with this secret of silence, the open secret around
being silent. And then ultimately I started doing therapeutic work, look at some post-traumatic
stress stuff from watching fights in my own family where my dad would binge and come home
and raise hell. And that whole experience left a real dark mark on me, but once I decided to do
therapeutic help I had to do some anger stuff. I was angry, and I was ashamed, and I had
internalized the homophobia that I had learned. Like we internalize the race issues or the gender
issues, the whole less than, the whole matrix of domination stuff. So I started doing therapy and I
started doing some Virginia Satir work, who is a therapist, but Elizabeth Cooper Ross was this

amazing woman who did a lot of work on death, dying and transition. And death and dying is not

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

literally always, but the death of an innocence or the death of a way of thinking in life or the loss
and transition that one has to make and was fortunate to have some serious intensive work in
group therapy with that process and had a chance to meet Elizabeth Cooper Ross. And then my
therapist basically said, “your issue is coming out. You’ve got to come out. And let’s do this in
waves.”

BD: And how, I’m sorry, how old were you when you started going to the therapy
sessions?

CL: Oh I would say that I was in my thirties.

BD: Okay so that long.

CL: Yeah. That long. So because I really literally thought I could live my life and to hell
with, I’m going to live my life. I’m going to show up like I am. But what I didn’t know was how
that gnaws at you from the inside around feeling like a fraud, not being authentic, not being
whole and holistic. And so I started this process quite frankly of, the therapist met with my
parents, well with my mom. And long story short I started, I literally started with my
grandmother who basically said to me, “Brittany, is that why you’ve been shut up in your room
and not going to church,” and she held me. She said, “You have a right to the tree of life. You’re
not sharing anything with us that we don’t already know.” And I said, “Well, Grandma, if you
already knew why didn’t someone say something?” She looked right in my eye and said, “We’ve
been waiting on you.” Same with my siblings, same with my mom, same with my dad. Same
with the board, I was out with the staff but not the board, the organization that I was. What I
began to struggle with though being out was, I didn’t get abandoned by my family. I got
abandoned by the other folk who were in the closet who by association with me as an out

woman, queer woman now by default meant that they were queer also. So that was the most

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

painful piece of losing my circle of friends who we could get together in clandestine ways. But
they didn’t want to have a public presence with me because they weren’t ready for the process
that I had been to. So it was a long struggle. It was a long struggle and a long time coming. Did I
answer most of your question?

BD: Yeah. Yeah. That was really good.

CL: Yeah. It was painful, quite painful.

BD: I’m about to start crying.

CL: Well, I don’t cry anymore, I've told it so many times. But if you water up, I’m going
to water up. Yeah, my son and his friends they were, all his little friends, I mean, these were the
same kids I taught to play basketball. Same boys I taught to play basketball and they were like
sixteen and seventeen before they could beat me in a one on one game. I mean it was like beating
me in a one on one game for my son who was sixteen before he could do that and his friends was
like wim1ing some super bowl and going to Disneyland, Disneyworld. I mean they made a big to
do out of it, like celebratory.

BD: So you were really good.

CL: I was very good. I pre-dated the WNBA and if had the WNBA been a franchise
coming out of college, I would’ve been first round all American. I mean it’s true.

BD: Iknow.

CL: I’m not even going to even get caught up in the boasting or the bragging. I’m stating
the facts.

BD: Yeah.

CL: Without a doubt. I worked hard. I worked hard on that. I mean, my whole history of

athleticism from junior high to college was I either captained or co-captained every year of my

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

squads all the way through, and I didn’t play my senior year of course. But yeah, I had game.
Now the old mare ain’t what she used to be. I can’t take a charge, but I can still pull up and shoot
a three-pointer or--.

BD: Jump shot.

CL: For sure, without a doubt. But I had a debilitating illness now, rheumatoid arthritis.
And so it prevents me from being as active. That’s why when I was teasing you when I was
reading that and I was like uh, sound mind and uh, the body part’s not so great anymore.

BD: Yeah.

CL: Yeah, exactly. For sure. So did I answer what you needed from that?

BD: Yeah, that was perfect. I've barely been using this actually.

CL: Well, I've tried to frame my story so that you can go back and from this tape and
look at your questions and see how I've answered. I've tried to weave my story not in a linear
way but to talk about how I have arrived at being a feminist and someone who always advocates
for an intersectional analysis and who’s always lifting up and fighting for the rights of women
and queer people in addition to looking at issues of class and race. So I can’t give a pecking
order. It’s not a hierarchy of those. It’s a fusion in my own way of walking through the world.
And so if I had to choose right now an oppression, how much time?

BD: I think that I actually need to put this on the charger.

CL: Okay.

BD: Okay. It’s still going. Okay so my next question that I wanted to ask you about. It
seems like you had a lot of feminist ideas at a very young age, but didn’t have the language to

express it that way. When did you actually realize and identify yourself as a feminist?

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

CL: It would’ve been certainly in college. And it started because even going to a
historically black college that was majority women, the athletic programs were very different.
The men’s program had all the money. They had several different uniforms. They’ve got all
kinds of shoes. They got sandwiches and juice after practice. They went away to away games in
a really cool bus and got to ﬂy places, and for the women’s program I tease and say it was the
original uniforms from the late 1800s when the school was founded. The reality is I had an
advisor who took me under her wing and told me about Title IX and the gender equity fight. And
I was able to organize not just the women’s sports programs but also other women and men on
campus to really fight for gender equity in the program. And it was through that process that I
realized that I was becoming a feminist. Not because I was reading about it but because I was
doing things that were lifting up the equality of women in an equitable way. I would say by my
sophomore year of college, and that would’ve been in 1977 that I began to see the language, and
then in my women’s feminine studies once I got language for a lot of the things I was already
experiencing. And then I went for a while battling between the feminist movement that was
single issue and not really concerned about race and class, just gender, of following the
movement of black women like Alyce Walker who were coining a language around womanist
that resonated, and now I reclaim feminist for sure. It was a while before I knew that’s what I
was. But certainly I call myself a feminist today.

BD: Okay. And can you tell me a little bit about your career aspirations, your goals that
you had for your career while you were still a young adult and also your work history?

CL: Okay sure. Well, believe it or not I had career aspirations to be in law enforcement.

BD: I saw that on your resume.

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

CL: And it didn’t take me long to become uninspired by that debacle. And then I wanted
to be an educator for sure, which is what led me to Highlander this whole concept around
participatory learning and popular education and participatory research and culture as a Viable
lens for doing community education. And the history, I don’t know how much you know about
the Highlander Center and the history that comes out of—

BD: I know they’ve done a lot of grassroots programs and ciVil rights.

CL: Right, exactly. So and a great legacy that they’re still standing on. Highlander still
gets the royalties from the song “We Shall Overcome.” Any time that’s used in any movie or
film or documentary or whatever it is, they get a royalty, and they have a fund called the We
Shall Overcome Fund that they give money out to community groups doing culture work. So
that’s an amazing program that from that legacy of a lot of that ciVil rights work. But your
question though is about my career path and what I aspire to be. And certainly I wanted to be
policewoman or detective, all that. I found that fascinating.

BD: And what changed that from you wanting to be in law enforcement to community
organizing because I saw on your resume that you got your law certificate I think it was.

CL: Basic Law Enforcement Certificate.

BD: Yeah. And then you went to community organizing. So what caused that shift?

CL: So what caused the shift quite frankly was being a company police officer for
Carmon Mills, the same place I was telling you about, being in management, being a sergeant
and literally having as a job description to prevent union organizing. And to be in those strategy
sessions that squashed the right of employees to vote for a union. And all the tactics and things
that management had to do to discourage the employees from voting for the union, all the tactics

that as the police officer for this company, which means I was a company police officer, that I

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

had to do that didn’t feel good. To when we had all these cameras all over the plant and had a
control room and if I get a call, there was somebody leaﬂeting in the parking lot. It would be
union organizers putting their ﬂiers and stuff on cars. My job was to run them off and to keep
them off. My job was not a good feeling job when it came to that.

The other thing that I got a chance to see was we had great relationships with the
Karmapolis city police because when they had a warrant for someone, we had to escort them to
that department or bring that person out to them. So they hung around our control room, and I
went to rookie school with several of the officers. And so certain nights, like Friday night,
Saturday night, the guys who were on patrol would come by the control room, have some coffee,
eat with us, and they would be waiting on the clubs to let out. And then they were going to go set
up so they could try to get as many DUIs as they could. And so it felt like are you serious. Are
you serious? And then I realized, okay this does not fit with my own principles and values.

And so then I left that and became a private investigator. I thought okay. I could take,
because Iwas doing lots of investigations and lots of stings, buying drugs and whatever. It was a
huge plant. I could go to another area and they wouldn’t know I was Sergeant Leeper, and I
could be a chameleon and get lots of information. I’m invisible. Basically I was invisible as a
woman and as a black person. And I could get information a lot of other people couldn’t get
because I was telephone pole. You see me and you don’t. But anyway, then Ibecame a private
investigator and what I discovered Brittany was, it is Brittany right?

BD: Yes.

CL: Okay. All my cases, so Ibecame licensed in South Carolina and a provisional
licensee in North Carolina. It’s two different processes to become fully licensed in both different

states, different requirements. And so what I found out, I was working for a firm called Salin and

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Associates based out of Coral Gables, Florida, but we had an office in Charlotte. And I was
going all over North and South Carolina doing cases, and it hit me at some point because I’m
always doing critical thinking was all my cases are people of color. And all my cases involve
workers comp, somebody who a 10 g fell on them from the logging truck or an accident, some
woman fell getting off an Amtrak train and so or an accident that someone had, and they had
listed their quality of life and how it had diminished, and they were waiting on a settlement.
Insurance companies were hiring my company to try to find some dirt on these folk with the
assumption that because they were people of color they were lying. So it took me about a year
and a half to put all of that together. I’m like okay, all right. Okay, this sucks. Okay, this is not
the Magnum PI thing I saw growing up. This is not cool. This is not happening to me. And so
having to do surveillance and look at people’s records in the Clerk of Court around any liens that
they might have, like there’s an assumption that you’re lying. And trying to find things that
would prevent someone from getting a fuller settlement. That was my job.

And so this is what I know about being an African American woman needing to make her
way out of no way. And that is this. IfI had an accident in my knee and I’m incapacitated in any
way, and it’s three o’clock, in the morning and my grandmother’s sick and she calls me and she
says, “I’m scared I need to go to the hospital and you need to call an ambulance,” whatever. I’m
on it. I’m hobbling. I forget my cane. I've been asleep. I didn’t put my collar on, whatever. It’s an
emergency, and I’m going because that’s Grandma. So what I know about the African American
community is you rise to the occasion. You sacrifice yourself in a selﬂess way. And so what
would happen then if I’m doing surveillance on me when I do that and I catch me without my
collar or without my cane or driving when I said, I can’t shift or whatever, then that means it

doesn’t matter why I’m doing it, what matters is you are construed as having lied. So you don’t

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

get, so you may get penance on what you would’ve ordinarily gotten. So when I realized that you
can’t look at paper and tell someone’s story, and that my job was to screw well deserving people
out of compensation to pay for a lifetime of suffering that could happen from a particular injury I
was like oh no.

So about the same time though I started doing volunteer work in the community, and I
was also concerned because my son was getting to the age where he could manipulate my
grandmother. I've done my homework, whatever. And I was traveling so much, and I was like
okay, okay. This children think because I’m not here he’s, oh no. So it was a perfect storm of
needing to have more hands on. It’s Grandma. Grandma called him lamb chops. He could get
away with anything. Lamb chops, Lamb chops. So I needed to be more based out of home.
Couple that with oh no, I left this job because it didn’t match up with my principles and values.
Now here I am working to further marginalize a population of people who, yes there’s fraud. But
it ain’t, it wasn’t these people who were doing it. It was other people, other demographics who
was doing it that we were all paying for on our insurance policies, to compensate for that. So
bottom line was I was already doing some volunteer work in the community on the voter
registration and was still doing activist work. I was still involved, at some point went back to
church and stayed involved in the coalition.

And then realized that I needed a job that lined up with my values and principles and
working for a nonprofit on justice issues met that criteria. So I got recruited to be an organizer
and then I have been in that ever since. Now I've had different kinds of jobs in the nonprofit
sector. But always working with justice based organizations, not service based organizations. I've
always asked the question, “Why are the babies drowning?” or “Why is there no food?” or “Why

versus a band aid approach to giving the service and not looking at how do you prevent the need

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

for the service.” So that’s how I got there from, by accident, from not wanting to do the
corporate thing. The other thing is I started locking in 1990, which I was like a second person,
the only person living in the county locking at the time. Now you’ve got to remember this is
1990 now. And I got more ﬂak from African American women on the board because I was going
to perm my hair, and I was into wearing more authentic African clothing, and they wouldn’t to
put—what do you call it when you get a certain clothes that you can’t wear.

BD: Dress code.

CL: They wanted to put a dress code around African attire, and I had one brother of a
member of the board who basically came to me as I was locking to say, “Com1ie, you are a pretty
girl. Will you please straighten your hair?” I had to say to him, “Joe, I don’t tell you how to wear
your hair. And you can’t tell me how to wear my hair. You don’t have to like it. You don’t have
to like it but you can’t ask me to go backwards.” And then I said, “This is part spiritual growth
for me. This is part accepting my own standard of beauty and rejecting the blond haired blue
eyed standard of beauty. And I’m happy to talk more about my own process of getting my hair
straightened and by the time you get to the front then the back’s already because it’s thick and
course. I mean how I can no longer get in the water. I can’t swim. I can’t move because I’m
going to sweat my hair out and then the perm, the burns in my hair. The scabs, no! I’m not doing
it anymore.” And who knows what I ingested through my scalp from the chemicals that I was
putting in my hair or how it could have contributed in toxic ways to my RA. I don’t know. All I
know is when I started locking, it was a scandal in small town Karmapolis, North Carolina. But
saying that to say that nonetheless though it fit my value system for fighting for justice.

And then when I left PPP, Piedmont Peace Project, I went to Highlander because I had

always worked in my hometown. So I wanted to know—okay, so I’m grown now—how will I do

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

outside the state in an area where I don’t have all the safe houses. If something happens, I can’t
stop or somebody’s going to pick me up. Girl, I've got somebody to tow your car. Don’t call no
Triple A. What you mean calling Triple A, that whole thing.

BD: And Highlander is in Tennessee.

CL: It is in New Market, Tennessee right outside of Knoxville in a small farm, well, I
guess you want to say small. I don’t know. Lots of acres. And so I worked there for a couple of
years and a half, and I was trotting all over the South doing popular education and adult literacy
work and a lot of the tradition. And then I realized my grandmother died and then my father died,
and it was the first time I had experienced a family death of someone so close from far away. I'd
always been rooted in community. So getting three days off and going back and then the grief
that happens when you’re not with your people. It was unmanageable. It was unmanageable. So I
was going home every weekend I wasn’t working and ﬂying up and down the road from
Tennessee to Karmapolis, North Carolina. And then I realized that I wanted to work in North
Carolina. I’m a Tarheel.

BD: I go to UNC.

CL: I’m a Tarheel, right. I’m a Tarheel. I need to be back in North Carolina. This is
where I want to work and I had opportunities. I've traveled abroad a lot through all of my jobs.
I've had opportunities to work in other states, and I choose to stay in North Carolina totally. I
will retire in North Carolina for sure. So that was my path. One of thinking I wanted to do one
thing in a very male hierarchical line of work, doing that, and then to have integrity in my work I
had to do what my job description was, what I accepted the paycheck to do. And then that wasn’t
feeling good. Now I didn’t really lose a lot of sleep over it. Just quandaried, just inquired, just

this doesn’t feel right. Then do something about it. And thinking that okay, I’ll go do the PI

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

work, and then oh and then stumbling into organizing as a paid professional from work in the
community.

BD: And can you tell me also a little bit about your work with NC WARN?

CL: Sure.

BD: Promotes clean energy and climate change.

CL: So I was working with the Southeastern Regional Economic Justice Network, and I
got laid off in January of 2011. But in April of 2010 I had gone to this conference called Whole
Communities with an outfit out of Vermont who was be gimIing to really look at what’s
happening in conservation movements where it was mostly white and middle class and upper
middle class, single issue. They cared more about the polar bears and owls than people. And
working and then looking at in order to have whole communities how do we bring the social
justice, social change arena into the environmental justice or the environmental justice into the
environment and merge those two. So I had done that, and it was done amazingly well. And I
had plarmed to see that I wanted to work on the environment, and I wanted to dispel the notion
that people of color don’t care about the environment that we’re too busy trying to eke out a
living that we don’t have time to care about climate or environment or whatever. When indeed,
that’s not true. So that was already in the back of my mind.

And then I had peers and colleagues who knew about NC WARN, and a particular
colleague who I had known since my early days in organizer who worked at another organization
who was now at NC WARN. Three people sent me that job description. It was a perfect storm.
By the time I go the third one I was saying okay, the universe is saying pay attention. So I called

Pete MacDowell who was the person I mentioned. And I said, “I’m thinking about applying for

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

this job,” blah blah blah. He says, “I've been looking for you. I want you to apply.” So I started
working as an organizer with NC WARN that April of 2011.

I’m still there now, and my work is about several different things. But the most important
thing is NC WARN has a theory of change that basically says that when you’re working on an
issue like mitigating climate change and trying to get Duke Energy to change its business model
from fossil fuel plants to more renewable energy and that would include wind and solar and
something else that’s called co-generation. But it’s combined heat and power and you use the
leftover energy from that to do more renewable energy. And energy efficiency and conservation.
And to do that by targeting, the theory of change is if you want to mitigate climate change and if
you want, you go after the biggest boy in town. And Duke Energy is the largest electric utility
now in the world since they merged with Progress Energy. They have a business model, because
they are a regulated monopoly, that allows them to get up to an eleven percent return on any
investment that they make. So it’s in their advantage to build more fossil fuel plants where
there’s coal or gas. It’s in their advantage to try to build more nuclear plants, and it’s not in their
advantage as the bottom line to try to harness the sun or wind because they can’t make a proﬁt
like they can from that. And so my job is to get people to reduce their demand for electricity so
that we don’t have to have so many power plants built.

The justice piece to that has to do with not everybody can afford renewable energy. So
and then energy justice isn’t the lens that people are looking at or impacted by climate change.
The food we eat and how far it has to be trucked in and how nutritious it is. The transportation,
our greenhouse gas footprint, the carbon that we use. The health disparities, the asthma all the
things that happen from the power plants. So looking at jobs, greenjobs. Looking at how to

impact communities particularly front line communities that are ﬁrst and most impacted, when

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

Katrina happened, when storms happen, when weather disasters happen, there are some of us
who have another house some place else. There are some of us who can get out. There are some
of us who have the insurance and savings and portfolios so we can bounce back very quickly.
And then there are some of us who not only get impacted ﬁrst but get impacted the most because
of racial disparities, class disparities. So my work at NC WARN is to work with frontline
communities on the justice lens and connect climate to the impact to their communities around
needing jobs or health or housing or food. And to do that by working to yes reduce our demand
on fossil fuels but also to take on the greens, the bigger greens who are single issue focused on
energy and not the other impacts of climate for the most part. So I do a lot of training. We have a
signature workshop called Our Energy Future where we’re looking at energy production in North
Carolina and connecting with that environmental justice issues.

So NC WARN started out doing a lot of fighting landfills and waste incinerators and
toxic dioxins in an environmental justice way. And in the past ten years have been looking at
more closely the planetary crisis we’re in because of climate change and trying to do a lot of
education and awareness around resilience. Like so how do we adapt, and how do we become
more resilient, and resilience isn’t, “How do you bounce back to the same BS that you’re in?”
Resilience is moving, is bouncing forward in less oppressive systems. So a lot of racial equity
work, a lot of getting people to come out and speak at rate hike hearings, not being advocated for
but speaking for themselves. But not just about the pocketbook issue. The pocketbook issue, the
cost for people is very important, but we care about it not because our bills go up. We care about
it because our planet is going to hell in a hand basket and we want to make sure that the health
disparities that happen to people living around coal plants. This coal ash piece, we’re dead slap

in the middle of the coal ash fight because some groups are fighting for moving the coal ash to

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

landﬁlls, and we know historically where these landfills are. And so we’re fighting for a solution
that addresses where the coal ash is, the transportation to where it goes and where it lands so that
no one has to bear the burden of accepting that in ways that being the poorer communities across
race and communities of color regardless of class get stuck with having to breathe that and eat
that and leak into the water. So in summary I’m doing climate justice work.

SP: And are there ways that you see the work that you do with NC WARN align with the
work that the Pauli Murray proj ect does? And what led you to start working with the Pauli
Murray project?

CL: Well, it had nothing to do with NC WARN. The Pauli Murray project certainly is
about the intersections of who we are and how we walk in the world and using the story and the
legacy of Pauli Murray who was many things as a biracial woman who ultimately became an
Episcopal priest and did that despite her gender and despite her sexual identity and her own ciVil
rights work and her own justice work. So the parallels have to do with fighting for justice across
the intersections where it’s not an either or, or a zero sum, but it’s a both. And so I didn’t know. I
had Proud Shoes before I moved to Durham. But I didn’t know I was supposed to have read it.
Someone gave it to me. An older woman gave me two books. One was an autobiography of
Lillian Smith who was a white woman who was a lesbian in the South. The [19]40s, [19]50s,
[19]60s who was fighting for ciVil rights and marginalized because of her queemess. Amazing
story. If you ever get a chance to ever run across Lillian Smith I'd say you should check her out.
And then it was someone who was accidentally mentoring me and I didn’t know that’s what they
were doing. But and they gave me Proud Shoes by Pauli Murray, and it sat on my shelf. And it
wasn’t until I started seeing these murals around that it and then reading something and coming,

I came to something at the library or somewhere that the Pauli Murray project had done and got

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

to know Pauli and some, I mean Barbara and some of the folk from being at things. And part of it
was being a part of the Friends of the Library, the humanity council and the things that were
being done through that arena. And then somewhere I did something about same gender loving
that got used on the website because I described myself in one of those events as same gender
loving. And Barbara liked it and she adopted that language. It turned out that was the firestorm
for the Pauli Murray family who had a Visceral reaction. They said you probably know the story
about that.

SP: Yes.

CL: Okay. All right. So then we needed to have some conversations, and Sterling
Freeman who has been in the leadership of the Pauli Murray project and works for a group called
Open Source Leadership and myself were recruited to design and have this conversation with the
family and the Pauli Murray project. And then moving forward I said I'd rather be a part of the
program and not be a consultant for that. And then joined the leadership team through that
process. So that’s how I got here.

SP: And I my final question to you is how does Pauli Murray inspire you?

CL: Well, for the most part I've been a nomad in Christianity for a long time. And
getting involved and understanding the Pauli Murray who she was as a Christian and not
rejecting that Christianity. For me I took the parts that served me and the parts that didn’t I
dumped them back. But what it has done it has had me reexamine that as a career woman back to
what my grandmother said I have a right to the tree of life. As a career woman I can integrate my
Christian faith that’s been on the back burner some place and that I've been participating in
perfunctory ways, funerals, weddings, baptisms, confirmations, high holidays in the church,

Easter, Christmas, that I don’t have to throw away all that I am and learn to be in my family of

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

origin. So it has helped me reconcile that the literal translation of the Bible, fuck it. That if Pauli
can reconcile then I can reconcile. If Pauli can be loving a woman and doing her fight for justice
and ciVil rights and still worship, I can too. I can too. If Pauli can leave a legacy of bridging the
intersections and contradictions and the complexities of her life for me growing up in a biracial
family having biracial grandchildren, trying to embrace culturally being a southemer, all of that
with who I am the race, the class, the gender, the sexual identity, the region and be healthy and
whole, I’m there. I’m there. So that’s what it means for me is how do you embody who you are
and how you walk in the world and you do that in more than culturally appropriate ways or ways
that a particular historical era dictates for you. And then more importantly though in retrospect
it’s a story that I needed to know about, and I was actually going to come to Saint Titus last
Tuesday—

SP: It was this Tuesday.

CL: This past Tuesday, right, I was going to come to that but the history of drags was at
the library. I don’t know if you knew the library was doing the history of drag. And I’m trying to
work on some of my thinking and language around transgender female to male and what I see as
the disappearance of butch women or the making butch women invisible and the misogyny in
what I see as male privilege in addition to sexual reassignment. Those issues aside there’s stuff
that we can’t talk about in the transgender movement around the misogyny that I’m witnessing
from young females to males who disdain all things women and all things female that is
irrespective of gender reassignment or being in the right body. There’s a male privilege that is
being experienced that means that us butches got to make ourselves small so the M to F5 or Fs to
Ms, I always get them twisted up, can feel not just nondiscriminated against. I don’t want

discrimination for any particular group, but I’m having to find some language on that whole

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

body of work, and I wanted to look at this whole history of drag both drag queens and drag
kings. And it turned out to be mostly about drag queens. So I should’ve went to the Pauli Murray
thing because I thought it was going to be a little deeper than what it was. So I didn’t want to go
to church that night. I wanted to go to the library. Yeah.

SP: Itotally get it.

CL: Exactly. Exactly.

SP: Well, is there anything else that you feel like people never ask you that’s really
important to your story that you would like to add?

CL: Yeah.

SP: Anything at all?

CL: People never ask me it’s more like what you do but how do you be? I would like to
talk about the things I do that sustain me, that keep me walking forward even when society and
this current legislature with the Amendment One that passed. I’m a gourd artist and I’m a
percussionist and I love music and without those things I don’t want to live. And so the beauty of
my being able to when I’m physically able to drum, djembe and conga, all kind of hand
percussion.

But more importantly I used to grow gourds and I do gourd art so I carve and I paint and I
sculpt, and I do all kinds of things with gourds both for beauty and for utilitarian purposes. And I
gift and I thrift. So I repurpose and reuse and I’m always trying to find how to repurpose
something. So my second home are thrift stores because I’m always looking for that one painting
that people don’t realize it’s very important. Romare Bearden collage that was in somebody’s
basement, and they moved and donated everything. Treasure hunting I guess one could say. I get

a big thrill out of that, but more importantly the thrift of repurposing in a consumer culture really

Interview number U-1056 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern
Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill.

matters to me although my partner has put a moratorium on me bringing anything else from the
thrift store until I go on Craigslist or eBay and sell some of the things I've gotten for resale.

But yeah, so what makes me tick are the things that I like to do including reading that
sustains me when I’m feeling down or the hell with it. I’m going to be a greeter at Wal-Mart.
Yeah. Gourd work helps me to see that there’s something I can finish in my lifetime. Social
justice, social change work we often talk about generations to come will benefit from that
particular work. And what has happened in North Carolina in the turn back against the voting
rights and all this, the rejection of the Medicaid expansion and unemployment, everything the
things we’ve fought for are being overturned with the Tea Party or Republican legislature. Even
the Democrats are turning it back so it’s not to me in a partisan way. But I have to do things if I
write some music for the drum is something I can finish in my lifetime, and I can play it and play
it over and over and over and teach it to other people. And so it’s my legacy, the things that I
create will be here long after I’m gone when the justice that I’m fighting for will be overturned at
the political whim of any legislature or Supreme Court for that matter. So that’s it.

SP: Thank you.

CL: You’re welcome.
