
Joey Fink:
It&#8217;s August 11, 2010. I am at the Beck Cultural Center in Knoxville, Tennessee with Linda Upton Hill. Linda, the first question I would like to start with is, if you could tell me a little bit about your childhood, where you are from, what your family was like.  Linda Upton Hill: Well, I was born in a little town called Laurel, Mississippi. It is near Hattiesburg; sometimes people know Hattiesburg better than Laurel. And my mom went home to her mom&#8217;s house, so we share hometowns. My dad was at seminary. He was at Gamman Theological Seminary. And mama told me the story about him being so distracted he kind of drove off the road a little bit trying to rush home the day I was born, to try to get there before I was born. So I thought that was kind of cool [laughter]. You have a little drama right off the bat. But that was also really neat that she could go home while he was at school, that she had a place to go and be safe and not be all by herself. So I get to have a really neat hometown.  JF: Do you have siblings?  LUH: I do. My brother and sister were born in New Orleans. I was a toddler, actually an infant, in Laurel. My toddler years were in Atlanta, Georgia. Then, at four and a half we moved to New Orleans and my brother and sister were born there. Now my brother is in Chester, Pennsylvania, with his wife. His name is Leander Howard Upton and he is married to Elaine Upton--I just realized I blanked on her maiden name, she will shoot me--but he is a dynamic individual. My sister lives in Newark, New Jersey. Her name is Mildred Elaine Upton Sifford.  We don&#8217;t hyphenate, we took our husbands&#8217; last names. We are a little old school about that. We embraced the dignity of being in marriage with the conventional naming format. For me it was important, because I wanted my last name to be the same as my children. That was important to me. All of that, for me, was wrapped up in my sense of dignity and how I wanted to be right on the planet, you know, and right before God. So that is my story and I am sticking to it.  JF: What took your family from Atlanta to New Orleans?  LUH: Well, Dad was chaplain there and Mom was teaching there. One of her career volutions&#8212;it evoluted a couple of times [laughter]&#8212;was teaching home economics in a high school in Atlanta, and then at the university. I am trying to remember, Joey, so I am going to have to call her right quick and find out, maybe it will float up. I am a little bit at the end of my day, so I am little bit slow dial-up. But I think I remember living on Gammon&#8217;s campus at one time, in campus housing, in married student housing or something, for a little while. I am going to tell this story since I kicked it, but you have to let me know if I--. With my flow, I will just go right into talking about memory things, you know. But anyway, I remember that we lived in an upstairs apartment and I remember my--.  JF: Is this in Atlanta?  LUH: In Atlanta, yeah, because we lived in two places in Atlanta. We lived on campus for a little while and then we lived in a duplex that maybe was the married student housing, and the apartment was something else. The present memories I have about being there, a little bit about finger-painting at preschool and graduating with a cap and gown, that memory kind of thing. Getting into a tool shed and getting full of paint, and having to get scrubbed with turpentine. That was not fun. And I remember a pale green wicker doll carriage and playing with that, I remember playing with that. I am just visualizing, seeing the apartment itself and seeing it standing there. I think maybe a time or two I tried to take my bicycle down the stairs and that was not very successful. Apparently, I was a bit of a romper and there was an older lady that lived below us. This is where the story started [laughter]. So I was running around upstairs a little bit too much and thumping about, and knocked the plaster in her soup at dinner one night.   JF: Oh my gosh.  LUH: I was in so much trouble.   JF: Sounds like weak plaster to me.  LUH: [Laughter] Maybe so, maybe so. And I remember playing &#8220;Rock School&#8221; on the stoop, on the steps, and &#8220;Mother May I&#8221; and &#8220;Red Light,&#8221; and I had a friend named Wilhelmina. But anyway, then my elementary school years were in New Orleans. We moved to New Orleans when I was four and a half, because I remember having my fifth birthday there. Daddy was driving a green and white Pontiac and the garage was made of tin and it had red rust stripes on the top. It was kind of fun to climb, too. And the back steps were cinderblocks that were hooked together, and mama had a garden along the chain-link fence, there between the garage and the chain-link fence. There was a brick barbecue place a little further over because our house was the parsonage. So daddy was the preacher, he was the pastor at Beecher Memorial United Church of Christ. That&#8217;s not right, they are with United Church, it is congregation, Beech Memorial Congregationalist Church.  I remember the original church that was there when we came was a wooden, you know, white clapboard siding with the nice stained glass windows, and the daycare was in the back and the baptismal was kind of on a, kind of on a raised stage-esque looking platform, because we could have our nursery school plays on the stage and they could lift the lid to have the baptismal pool.  I remember making tissue paper carnations for the bride and groom, a little sort of bazaar. We used to have an annual bazaar. So those are images that are kind of floating up in my head. I remember vacation bible schools and my first coffin.  JF: Your first coffin?  LUH: Yeah, I did not know--.  JF: The first time you saw one?  LUH: Yeah. We would come in from school, and I don&#8217;t even know if we were supposed to enter the church building through the sanctuary, but we used to go and slide. The pillars, there were four or five steps and then an extended kind of platform and then another three or four steps and you were going into the front door. The banister on the side came out and swooped down. It was just high enough and steep enough so it kind of made a sliding board effect. So we were a little bit being hardheaded and sliding on the banister, which did not work too well that time because I had a skirt on. Let us just say that friction and fabric have interesting interactions [laughter]. I remember noticing that the door must have been ajar, or I just tried it, I may have just tried it, just because, and I went in and didn&#8217;t know that there was to be a funeral that day. So when I walked into the church, I walked into--I mean, there was nobody there, it was some kind of preparations-- and I walked in and the coffin was there. I remember going [gasps] and kind of turning around and leaving and trying to even make sense out of all of that, and I am sure I categorically dismissed it [laughter]. There was a high hedge; if you were looking at the church, then it would be your left, on the left side of the steps. It was kind of narrow. And then on the other side of the church was the driveway it was covered with shells, because in New Orleans, instead of gravel, you will see shell-covered driveways. And I remember trying to ride my bicycle around and around and getting my knuckles scraped with the bricks because they were sort of those stone-looking bricks that came to a point and had a textured finish to it. And I would lose my balance and scrape my knuckles. I am probably way off topic [laughter].     So I remember that, and I remember that the building was up on big brick legs, essentially, because in New Orleans you don&#8217;t have basements because it is the water level and a lot of times things are built up. I started talking about the old church because all I really wanted to tell you was that I remember that my dad was the pastor when they had the building fund to make the new church, so that is how all of that got (12:16) I know we were there some time, several years, after the new church was built, and we moved from New Orleans to Montclare, New Jersey, because Daddy&#8217;s career changed. By the way, my daddy&#8217;s name is Milton Leon Upton and he was born in Sweetwater, Tennessee, just up the road from here in Knoxville. He was orphaned when he was twelve years old. So there were cousins, Mama Lee and Mama Jenny, they would be his third cousins, so they were sort of grandmama age to me. Mama Lee and Daddy Rondo lived in, yeah, Daddy Rondo lived in Sweetwater, and they helped take care of my dad and his two sisters and two brothers.  JF: Were they family, or friends of the family?  LUH: They were like kin, cousins. Mama Lee sort of looked after daddy when he was in Sweetwater, and Mama Jenny lived here with our family in Knoxville and she married a Davis, so she was kind of, she kind of took care of him while he was here and then in Knoxville at Knoxville College. He is a graduate of Knoxville College and Gammon Theological Seminary.   I remember when we moved from New Orleans up to Jersey his new position with the church was as a secretary with the Board of Homeland Ministries and, as I recall, his responsibilities included coming around to visit, doing site visits for grant recipients and helping them keep themselves organized and answer questions and encourage them and so on. He purchased a home in Montclare, New Jersey and that is where I went to high school. That is the next stop on the chain after elementary school and junior high school.    I was at the Lina C. Jones School in New Orleans and years later I got to go back with my theater company and perform at my old elementary school. Isn&#8217;t that cool? [Laughter] We did a five-week tour. I worked with the Carpetbag Theater, Incorporated. I started my apprenticeship with them in 1976 which was also my senior year, the beginning of my senior year, at Knoxville College, and it was the year that I got introduced to theater as an option. I came to Knoxville College. That tells you the story after New Jersey because I went to high school at Montclare High School in New Jersey and my dream high school was Rivers Frederick Junior High School in New Orleans, and it is really gone now.  It had closed by the time we went back in the 80s when the Carpetbag Theater was on a five-week tour in New Orleans through the school system. My junior high school was gone then, and of course Katrina wiped out most of everything else. I don&#8217;t even know if Beecher is still standing, I think probably it is.  When we get through I have to call and see. But anyway [laughter]--.  JF: What brought you to Knoxville College? Were you inspired by your father&#8217;s experiences there, or was it family, having family here in Knoxville?  LUH: College was the next thing to do. I really had no preference. But I thought that being in this area for four years would give me a chance to get to meet my family and interact with my dad&#8217;s side of the family. So just following kin, trying to be where I would have an opportunity to get to know them, really know them, interact with them. My mama&#8217;s people, her mother&#8217;s sisters and brothers and everybody, are from Memphis. My granddaddy&#8217;s siblings and family were from Alabama. So it was a way&#8212;and now, you know, we do all right. But I am not really a person of means, so it seemed like an ideal way to have an extended stay in a place when I did not have money to travel and visit all the reunions and such. Daddy was able to help me get in school, and mama.  I came down here as a music major, my main instrument is bass violin.  So I got to be in the concert band and the marching band with Mr. Holmes. I think I will get it right. Eli Obediah Zedecai Holmes. And oh, he just did so much because he took us all over. We would have trips every year and we would always have breakfast and there would be people, he would make arrangements where people in our visiting cities would sort of host us, so it was always a really positive experience.   We had a jazz band sometimes. My strength is reading the music. I am not that adept with improvisation. So it was very exciting. My earliest trainings were in the classical tradition, so it was very exciting to get to do jazz and popular culture music as part of my program. It would not have necessarily been in my world otherwise. So they made arrangements for a strings teacher to come in, Mary Anne Finnell, and I think she plays with the symphony now. She is a violinist. There were people, Mr. McGuiness taught us theory, boy did he teach us theory, and Linda Merrick. I never will forget Linda Merrick. She realized that non music majors would sometimes look at the course titles and look, and needed some credit hours and they would think that this was the place, you know, music, we will learn something about music. Not recognizing that the major level courses were very involved. [Laughs]. So first day of class we walk in, freshman year, still the quarter system, it was probably about the third quarter class, and that means it was probably somewhere around theory three or four, I can&#8217;t remember. Anyway, this big old word was strewn across the board, &#8220;Proslambanomenos.&#8221; People were walking in and looking on that board and going, &#8220;Oh no.&#8221; Head straight for the drop/add office [laughter].  Of course, those of us who could not leave were sitting there quaking in our boots when she came in, only to find out that proslambanomenos is the formal term simply for the root tone of a tetrachord. Yes, tetra means four, so it is the four chord, the first four notes sequentially, like a ladder. The first four notes of a scale would be classified as a tetrachord. So a scale would be comprised of two tetrachords. In any case [laughter] you could tell there were quite a few folks who dropped the class if they mistakenly signed on, while the rest of us just started praying that we could get through this one [laughter]. But anyway, it is nice memories. It is nice thinking about that stuff.   Well, so we finally got from Laurel to Atlanta to New Orleans to Montclare, New Jersey, and back down to Knoxville for school. I lost focus and decided to stop and regroup. I found a job with the Krispy Kreme Donut Company. I worked there for five years. Started packing on the line, became an extruder operator on the donut machine at some point, and when I left, I had been third-shift supervisor for a time and just had to kind of get life in a balance. I thought I would give school another shot, and at that point, you have to remember, I had begun an apprenticeship with Carpetbag Theater in 1976. Linda Parris-Bailey invited me to do some incidental music on guitar for a children&#8217;s theater production; that was a play to be presented to children called &#8220;Celebration.&#8221; By the time we had done the first performance I realized that I kind of liked this theater thing, and so in the second performance of it I had a line. And the next time we did a performance at all, a whole new production, I was in it [laughter]. That year, 1976, was the year we had an inter-departmental production of West Side Story. Gloria Jean Harrison was the vocal music. Let&#8217;s see, who else was there? Oh, it will float up eventually&#8212;I can see him, I can see him--but in the art department Cleo Lucas was still there. She was kind of a mentor to us Carpetbag women. If you ever get talking to Linda Parris-Bailey, you have to ask her about Cleo Lucas, our founder&#8217;s wife. Cleo Lucas-Martin. Martin-Lucas, I guess would be the appropriate way to organize that.   JF: Was it through Knoxville College that you got the apprenticeship with Carpetbag Theater, or did you just hear about--.  LUH: No, it was while I was at Knoxville College. And Wilmer Lucas was affiliated with Knoxville College and he was the one that anchored--. There were community artists, artists in this community in Knoxville, who needed a place to have a voice. And so the concept of the Carpetbag Theater was an umbrella concept. It is kind of like church; if you have an idea or understand, you are the chairman of the committee and everybody else just rallies, and then you become one of the community members when it is their turn to be the chair and their idea. So when he produced--. Everybody got together, it was a Duke Ellington concert, and there were other jazz concerts. We used to do street theater and then there would be children&#8217;s theater where we would do plays for children to attend, and plays in the school, at schools and in churches. Holstein, companies from out of the country and out of state, Alberto Alberto and oh, a gajillion.   JF: Was there anybody else doing anything like this at the time in the Knoxville community?  LUH: Not like that. You see, the whole mission of the company was a commitment to doing original work. There were people taking plays and paying the copyright fees and producing theater. Knoxville is rich, culturally. Has a longstanding history of it. What we did was come together and form a coalition to give voice to our individual mediums and our work and to give voice to those who are not heard. So we do story circles and capture people&#8217;s experiences, and things would come of that. We would write new pieces. Linda Parris Bailey is a playwright as well as a director, actress. She would script things and we would engage in collaborative process as the core of our script development. That has stages because there is a time when a concept is born.   For example, &#8220;Dark Cowgirls and Prairie Queens&#8221; was born out of an impulse to [pause] I guess, affirm and celebrate the presence of African Americans in this country in the West. The kids don&#8217;t even know they have ownership of those boots they enjoy. They don&#8217;t have to feel like somehow they are crossing a culture line to put on that hat and wear those jeans and coveralls because there were sharecroppers and farmers and there were cowboys. The man who invented &#8220;bulldogging&#8221; in the rodeo was a black guy. I am trying to think what the sister&#8217;s name is. Is it Jane Pittman? Her husband [Joe Pittman] was a bronco buster. That was his job. That was his job. So we romanticize what the Old West was. The kids don&#8217;t know that there are buffalo soldiers, or buffalo riders. There were men who hunted on horseback and when they became military they were still bonded and they rode together. You can look at what they thought was right and who they thought should be targeted and debate that all you want to, but I am saying there was a presence there. We grew up seeing the folks on &#8220;Buffalo Gals,&#8221; and who do you think they were? They were the girlfriends and lady-friends and wives of the buffalo soldiers, OK? [laughter]. They don&#8217;t even realize that their presence is documented in American history even though they don&#8217;t recognize their face. They don&#8217;t know that the &#8220;Yellow Rose of Texas&#8221; was a very fair-skinned black woman who was able to get some critical military information to the U.S. to turn the battle when she was captured by [Mexican General] Santa Anna. We have been--. This is my country [laughter]. But anyway, they don&#8217;t know, the children don&#8217;t know, that &#8220;flat-footing&#8221; and &#8220;buck dancing&#8221; coupled Native American powwow circle dances [beats a steady rhythm on table] and highland &#8220;river dance&#8221; folk steps and formations. People were here working, surviving. When people came to this country it was about the business of staying alive and creating a place and space to raise your family and be healthy and more profitable. Not manipulated by those who had established themselves and were the harbingers of all of your bad news while they were taking care of all of their much wealth on the backs of all kinds of free labor.  I am trying to think of the name of the servitude where you were supposed to work until you had paid off your passage.  JF: Indentured servitude?  LUH: Indentured servitude. Thank you. All of that was about people of very little or no means creatively scaffolding themselves and constructing bridges and pathways and ladders into a life that they could call good. It was not about &#8220;not&#8217;tin.&#8221; Yeah, &#8220;n-o-t&#8221;apostrophe &#8220;t-i-n&#8221; [laughter]. I will just coin it, thank you very much. It was not about &#8220;not&#8217;tin&#8221; anybody. It was about being and becoming and going on, and going through and going through. So if there was a cultural split--. In today&#8217;s world, we see clogging as the evolution of that blend of cultures that remains in folk culture and in African American--. That is, with mountain culture and predominantly European American heritage culture. On the other side, with the African Americans and people of that diaspora, everybody did not come here from Africa.  Everybody with dark skin color did not come here from Africa, they came from a lot of other places and through other places. So you have some islanders and some folks who came here not enslaved and who came through Ellis Island with a lot of the other immigrants. There is a big--. You are a historian, you know what I am talking about. So here is cultural development with that blend of dance and I am going to say &#8220;people of the earth.&#8221; People who were farmers, people who danced the pulse of the earth [beats rhythm on table], the dance that is the pulse of the heart, danced the drumbeats. It is in all three cultures, how present the drum is. [Vocalizes a rhythm] Celtic drum. The Native drum [beats steady rhythm]. The African drum [beats complex rhythm].  All of it is thump, thump, thump, it is all about a heartbeat. All about a sunrise and a sunset and an orbit. It is all about life. And life reborn, life ongoing, life enriched. So [pause] that wing of development ended up on tap, in terms of a sort of culturally identifiable place. The banjo came in from Africa and there was a time in history when the banjo was a parlor instrument as much as the harpsichord and the piano with the daughters of European American women. Now today we think, &#8220;Oh, it is exceptional that a woman is playing banjo.&#8221; No it is not. But now we see it living primarily in bluegrass and old-time and string band music.   JF: I want to ask you a question about that. I am going to pause real quick so we can skip to the next track so that I don&#8217;t lose anything. [Recorder is turned off then back on].  START OF TRACK 2  JF: All right. This kind of cultural work that Carpetbag Theater is doing, it is historical, it is cultural, it is political. It is bringing African American voices into stories and myths and art forms that are so often stereotyped as white. [People say] that &#8220;Hillbillies had that kind of music or dancing,&#8221; or &#8220;There was this very small African American population in the West; they were not important.&#8221; So this kind of cultural work and historical work that Carpetbag Theater is doing, how did that fit in with some of the stuff that was going on in the city of Knoxville, in terms of fights for community development and getting funds where they needed to go and getting citizens and neighborhoods empowered to better their communities, better their neighborhoods?  LUH: I don&#8217;t really know quite how to answer that question dead on point. Somewhere you can fish out what is relevant to the answer [laughter].  I will give it my best shot. I think that standing tall and commanding a presence, being seen, not being disappeared, is something that people will rise to. It does not matter who you are, in every culture you can find examples in history where people stood up and said, &#8220;We are, and we are worthy and we were before you came, and we had a well-developed culture and social structure. You came with your labeling, savagely destroying what you found to reconstitute it in your own image.&#8221; It begs the question, who is the savage? You burned our libraries. Who is the savage? Well, everybody has this vicious savageness. Every culture. A long history. You can just go back and find when somebody decided to dominate control of land and whatever was established is wealth and &#8220;say-so.&#8221; I don&#8217;t know what the formal term would be for having &#8220;say-so.&#8221;   But if you are looking for a definition of having power, in my mind, it is owning material goods that are recognized and embraced in your cultural circumstances, your environment, as wealth. It is having land, quantities of land. That represents, in my thinking, a meaning of wealth. It means having &#8220;say-so.&#8221; When you say &#8220;Jump,&#8221; who says &#8220;How high?&#8221; And how many of them say &#8220;How high?&#8221; That is my definition of power. That is my meaning, perspective, when I use the word &#8220;power.&#8221; Being empowered, then, is having some mechanism infuse you with ownership of land, material things, whether it is precious gems, cash&#8212;that is not as heavy as the gems, so you carry cash around, and stick everything in the mint somewhere&#8212;but it is still about precious minerals and gems. And say-so.  So when we say we are &#8220;empowering&#8221; someone, we have a kind of connotative wash over it so that it meets the nice version of that. So what is that? It is the American dream. It is being able to have a house of your own with some property, having transportation, being able to have children that you can actually keep fed and clothed, and educate. It means keeping lights on and having food enough and having the ability beyond your work ability years to continue that quality in your life. And having, mmm, nice, nice, nice, nice-y dessert.  To have all of the above in sufficient quantities or sufficient low quantities to add travel or collecting art or other things that cost a little bit. Having all of the material things, having access to those material things. Being able to just go across the country and see stuff and see places and come back home and not be in debt doing it for a couple of months. Good old American Express.    But anyway, what else? So when we have these things in ways that don&#8217;t hurt or deprive others, we approve of it. When it gets to where our perception is that others are being traded upon so that my wish is to have it, that is when we kind of get to fussing and saying it is an imbalance. That is when we are about the business of causing the access and possession of resources to be different. That is different, so that means changing from one thing to another, so that is a kind of traveling moment there, a change. And if it is about a group of people who have agreed to a bunch of rules so they can live side by side in the same geographical area and we call that a society, and they set some boundaries on how mad you can get, and how you can show it and where you can go and turn and stop and come up with some ways to be organized together, and agreed-upon boundaries that each of us can respect individually which allow us to exist in that space in a coalescent, genial manner, all right. Social structure, sorry. It is too many words before that.   So now we have got change to make things straighten out, back to what we can be comfortable with to call &#8220;balanced&#8221; within a society. So I guess that adds up to social change. [Social] action, if we are doing something, since it is a verb. And in that case, OK, I will be a social change activist. And if the work of the [Carpetbag Theater] company is making concrete before the eyes and senses of others situations and conditions and emotional and psychological impact as well as the social&#8212;you know, that whole collective, the rules and balances that help us get along&#8212;then in that sense, for me, the work was dynamic. Because when you can hear what you are thinking out loud, when you can take it out of &#8220;ether-where&#8221; and make it concrete because you can wrap words around it, now I can manage it, I can manipulate it, I can change something over here. I can put a name to it and describe it and I can change something over there. That is how I think our work empowered community and individuals.   I have learned of a study that documents that human beings learn from the concrete to the abstract and that as we develop the capacity to manage abstraction, those thoughts and ideas, concepts, take on a body of existence within our perceptible span. And that is concrete, it is perceptible in a corporeal form. With our various senses, we can embrace and make a sense of it. With all, whatever names we give it, for whatever. So that is making it tangible, making it concrete. And from that place we can springboard to new ideas and in new directions. So we are still learning from the concrete to the abstract. Even though it is a little more &#8220;fun-isticated&#8221; [laughter]. I used to spell that, you know, &#8220;f-a.&#8221; But now I spell it &#8220;f-u-n, hyphen, i-s-t-i-c-a-t-e-d.&#8221; Yeah, but anyhow [laughter]--.  There is so much joy in being able. So within your will, you arrive at unction to do.  In your presence, your existence, you are able to act on the doing. It is not hindered or stifled or crushed. That is a victory. I had unction, and I could and I did and I am doing. There is a satisfaction in it, a joy. I think that part of what my work and the work of the company that I see that gives me a great deal of satisfaction is being a part of it. The dynamic part for me is that part that helps people savor that joy. That joy of the victory of acting, of being able to bring to fruition, that unction to do, towards an objective. The objectives that we have selected to shepherd are those of quality of life, hope, recognition of one&#8217;s personal strengths, one&#8217;s value, helping the body social recognize itself as a body with its many parts. I do not minimize in any way the value of this fingernail, as tiny and thin as it is. I have had occasion when that fingernail was ripped away and I learned very painfully what its little job was. When it grew back, I was so careful to never undervalue that fingernail again [laughter].  So there is a place in our real world where we understand that our whole body, no matter what the part or whatever its function, including all those little darling atoms that are bopping around inside those molecules, sticking together, energizing, using all that water as a conductor for bio-electrical functionality--. Oh, my heavens! Alive. A place in which my soul can reside and I can experience being alive.   I think that helping give voice to those things that infuse life as stated by individuals, their perception of what is that full richness of life, taking care of the dilemma, the psychological dilemma of &#8220;unredress&#8221;--. If you think life was rough in &#8220;The Cask of Amontillado,&#8221; you don&#8217;t have to brick somebody in the wall to have them have a sense of justice [laughter].  We are going to think of another way to deal with your crisis and your dilemma of having a sense of &#8220;unredress&#8221;; that is, &#8220;It was not fair and nobody acknowledged that I was wronged and nobody did anything about it.&#8221; So we can tell, and help you tell, your side of the story in its full rich context, and mean it.  That restores your hope, your active trust and your hope of something being different.   Most importantly is drama has--. Did you ever think about why they keep killing all the poets and the artists and the writers and the playwrights for every age if you go back and look? Whenever there was a big political restructuring, the intellectuals, the people who were writing stuff and all that. Because you cannot go around helping people tell their side of the story accurately and the person that wants to say, &#8220;No, you are wrong, I am right,&#8221; has to own up to the fact that they have a rightness worth acknowledging. Got to get it gone. So in that sense I think it has been amazingly dynamic to be a part of it, even as we move into the digital storytelling structures. Our digital team goes around to do another form of story circle and sharing out of that, not the stage performance but the electronic media performance structure. It is moving into its next generational form. It is contemporary age. How is that done? So it is viable, the work we are doing is viable. It is still alive and it is still serving and shielding. Because the other thing is that when somebody tells the truth it is kind of hard to dump on the person without consequence. It is nice for me to think about being a little tiny part of a shield that helps protect dreams, helps make a safe place for ideas to be born, helps scaffold individuals into their potential, helps me climb and approach my own potential.    With the collaborative process, I mentioned forever ago the stages, moving from the [pause] idea to pooling ideas about the concept and beginning to let that take shape. Then there is a time when it moves into the more conventional process of production where it falls to a hand, an eye, a heart, a director, to step back and, with oversight, organize all of the elements of production and the story parts and the characters and the places and shape it into an entity of its own. It is a very comfortable process for me. I contribute what there is of myself to contribute most functionally in collaborative interaction. There is a time, and then it stops and we are active with the director doing it in the more, as I say, conventional form of theatrical production kind of thing, but it is a nice journey. It is a nice sense of making contribution because of that earlier stage where everybody is sharing and such.    JF: This process of helping people to become visible, of helping them to hear themselves or to create a space for them to see themselves--.  LUH: With minimal risk.  JF: I was going to ask, do you think this had particular relevance for women? That this could have been a place for them to talk about things that were not being talked about anywhere else, or to be visible in ways that could not be visible?  LUH: Well, to talk about it quite frankly, there is a reality that there are levels of risk about how you feel and how you think as it relates to cultural paradigm, practice, condition, even legal structures. To explore the nuances of those ideas can cost you your life. We have seen it happen over and over in this country. It is beginning to happen again, if we are not watchful. If this house divides, it will fall. So all that bravado and posturing and pretending like you are in the middle of some sophomoric college or high school sports rivalry with the language and jargon that is being tossed around these days, it is dangerous. It is not that you don&#8217;t need to say what you feel, but there is a way to go about things or you will put a wedge in a place that will crack and spread.   So having a place to explore nuances of thought, feelings, attitude, perspective, beliefs, is critical to our lives. A lot of us enjoy that opportunity with a spouse or a sister or a brother or our running buddies, our parents. But there is a core, a trust circle that we can put together and feel safe, feel shielded from negative consequence, to do those candid explorations out loud with interaction. Why say it out loud? Because you can tell it to God; it is just fine. It can stay behind your eyes where it belongs to you and God. Sometimes as human beings in this body we need to soundboard it, we need to get feedback. I need to read your body language when I am saying something to you as well as hear your voice. I need to see your eyes and what you are doing with them because that helps me measure. Sometimes I need your approval. Sometimes I need your tolerance. I know I am not going to have your approval. I need your acceptance. All of these things are there for everyone all the time. Just don&#8217;t put it on Facebook. I mean, come on. So you have got to--.   But we don&#8217;t teach so much directly. We have not taught broadly enough this generation and the last, and the previous one, the protocols of empowerment, especially as people move away from enjoining their education with the guidance of the Bible which is such a fine anthology of anecdotal presentation. It models, it describes, it guides to solution. Moving away from that, it is so beautifully done. That is the nice thing about God&#8217;s word is that it is so beautifully crafted. Even within our senses of good writing, what is good structure, what is good teaching material, what is good life guidance material, what is good self-help--. Anything you think you need. It just goes out there and tells all the ugly stuff. The guys cheating and jumping around and women goofing up and getting straight and all of it, it is in there. And it shows consequences from those choices and gives you an opportunity not to have to reinvent the wheel. Good grief.  What I am trying to say is that it adds--.   In our cultural center, we began to move away from that beautiful tool that has been given us to help mentor our young ones into functional, whole, healthful life. Then you see a lot of folks running up against a wall. In my mother&#8217;s house in Ocean Springs, Mississippi, now, two of the walls are glass, basically. They had to put decorative fish netting around the outer window because the poor birds&#8212;my mom and aunt, they are good housekeepers, they clean their windows [laughter]&#8212;so the poor birds were slam dunking into the walls. So they very artistically created a way for the birds to notice, &#8220;Oh, there is something there, I can see a reflection.&#8221; [Laughter] But I am just saying that safety netting, which is sort of the analogy I am making, of the word of God being available to us as a teaching tool and guide within our family structures.   With the reorganization of the physical relationships in space and geography of the family unit, we have undone what had been set up in being effective, the school of training.  Colleges and universities did not start when they put them all in one campus, one geography. There were guild systems. The college of smithery, the college of carpentry and woodcraft, the college of masonry. It just was not all on one campus like we have it now. The school of philosophy and the schools of psychology were housed within the family structure. So you sat at your grandmother&#8217;s feet and she would pop [clapping sound] the side or the back of your head and say, &#8220;Uh uh. We are Hills, we don&#8217;t do that.&#8221; So, what did your mama tell you? What did she say, there is always money and books?  JF: Oh, she said there will always be money for books.   LUH: There will always be money for books. Don&#8217;t worry about it; you just read. That is a value. See what I am saying? We have restructured the opportunities for the teachable moments to occur. That is what changed. It used to happen across the time of being in a presence, interacting. Well now if you are in a presence over there and I am in a presence over here, I am not going to stumble. I am just, in the order of life going through, passing that example, passing that teachable moment, passing through that veil. Then you, upon my question or my look of confusion, give me instruction. So now we have to, in a more conscious and deliberate way, do the mentoring. One of the ways I think that happens is in things like plays, when you have a large audience, and in books of poetry, when you distill meaning down to a kind of matrix. You take off all the slough, but you juxtapose the words in ways that allow your mind to reconstitute it, re-hydrogenate it, and all of the contextual meaning is reclaimed when you have got the storytelling.   See, the community psychologists and counselors were the storytellers, because they were modeling a certain stance, articulating causation, looking at different attempts at a solution, and revealing, illuminating a path. An approach to tasks that would bring you to a viable outcome. So now with an example in place, you put that strategy in your war chest and go on. But we don&#8217;t ever put the fancy names on the substantive presence of what is going on and we kind of hamstring ourselves from recognizing what is there. So we don&#8217;t know to do our best to teach my, your grandma, to use that email and you all are talking back and forth, because when she gets to storytelling&#8212;mmm, not only is it entertaining and fun and you get to go pick on your mama for stuff she thought she got away with but her mother knew all the time anyhow&#8212;but once again you have applied strategy to store away so you can generalize some similar occurrence in another situation and construct a viable solution. I think that part of the work of Carpetbag Theater.  I know you thought, &#8220;What does that have to do with anything except you enjoy telling a story?&#8221; The viable work of Carpetbag Theater and its presence is being one of those vehicles for just that thing. For modeling a circumstance, articulating and revealing, or inferring causation, or identifying causation, laying out possible strands of solution and outcome and sometimes showing a guided way out. Sometimes the work is, &#8220;OK, here are the possibilities we saw. Let me know when you figure out which outcome is what. Share back.&#8221; It is funny, I wrote this song one time that talked about the culture and that it could be shared and what that means and just to put it in a tight word--. I have kind of drifted from the question, I know. You have to keep me back on track.   JF: That is OK. The drifting is good. It actually made me think of something else. This was not a question I had planned to ask, but you talked about the definitions you have come to have of power and empowerment, so I wonder if you would say something about your definition of rights.  LUH: Rights?  JF: Rights. What that has meant to you, how that has changed over the past thirty years.  LUH: Well, one of the many perspectives I think we assign to the term &#8220;rights,&#8221; is within citizenry. A status within a community culture. You can be a presence without being a citizen. Citizenry tells not only that you are there, not only that you reap the resources of the culture, but there is an obligatory pay-in. We don&#8217;t think of it in those terms, we think of it as some more, I guess the word is responsibility. So the things for which you are expected, that is your agreement, that is the contract. If you are a citizen then there are things that you give, that you take care of. There are standards that you hold, there is a code that you embrace, et cetera. So, rights. If then, you are a citizen, the contract is that the polis, which is the city structure, that we will tether to a hub, we will call the hub &#8220;entity government.&#8221; The government will be individuals who spend all of their time monitoring, managing, implementing those goods, services, resources that we collectively receive and provide for ourselves as a citizen. When I think of rights, that is the term that I would use as a category heading for those things&#8212;services, goods, protections, resources&#8212;that are part of that contract, and because I am a citizen these things are mine to access. So that is how I think of rights.   I have always sort of believed in my understanding and perspective of rights, it is the general shared perspective. I have come to learn as I have matured and lived a little while that folks can get a little cliquish with their rights point of view. It really was not cliquishness, it is just how a group defined citizenry and it had some little caveats in there. For example, in our history, people of color, who are of the African diaspora and primarily here through the experiment in slavery that was perpetrated in this country, those individuals are not perceived by a segment of our society&#8212;had not been perceived by a segment of the then-society&#8212;as citizens. So they were not on a contract. Therefore, since they were an other, a something other, they did not, they were not to be privy to the resources and such of the citizens, of those who are a part of the contract. To me, that is the &#8220;head game&#8221; part of all of this, defining citizenry. When you get back to core structures, we think of terms such as tribe, clan. If you go back in history and look at what the titles were, the terms we used for the groups on contract in a social group of geographical location who identified themselves with those social and cultural paradigms, that is what I am saying, those words are there.  If you get back to that and if you keep going back in time, what we do and shield to protect that cultural bonding falls under the heading, I think, nowadays, of cultural transmission. A lot of that happens through history, through what you do. There were cultures who had a more refined, tangible, concrete written sense of historicity than others and we have documentation to share about that. The cultures of oral tradition, as generations--. When they were dominated by some other group, we lost the library. We lost the cultural transmission, so we have dead languages. We have scripts that we cannot read. We have musical notation that we don&#8217;t know what it really means and so we can&#8217;t sing the songs exactly. All of these things going on, including cultures who tracked the bloodline identity through the mother&#8217;s blood, you know, matriarchal culture is that way, and those cultures who have tracked the father&#8217;s bloodline in naming.  So all of these things together were functional in tagging. You know that thing when the bank robbers, stuff blows up and it won&#8217;t go off your hand, you can&#8217;t get it, and they take a black light and find you? [Laughter] Mister Clean Erase. (17:16) can take you away. KPD [Knoxville Police Department] will. But OK [laughter]. So there are markings, there are ways that we imprint to identify belonging on this particular contract and so when we talk about standing up for rights, I think, in what has come to be known as activism and contemporary activists&#8217; voice, I think there is the assumption first that human beings on a land base are citizens of that place. It is an extremely broad definition of citizenry. I think it is extremely accurate. However, there is a part that has &#8220;by right of birth.&#8221; And there begins the flow of knitting things together. So if you are not here by right of birth then there are stages of you demonstrating that you are prepared to embrace the contract and so you go through that whole thing and you can become naturalized. [Recorder is turned off and then turned back on].  START OF TRACK 3  JF: It is August 12, 2010. I am at Carpetbag Theater in Knoxville, Tennessee, doing the second part of my interview with Linda Upton Hill. Linda, to start off this part of the interview, I was wondering if you could tell me--. Knoxville College brought you to Eastern Tennessee in 1972.  LUH: Indeed.  JF: In a broad sense, I would like you to just tell me a little bit about what it was like being eighteen and in your twenties and coming to a new city and living on your own, and maybe we could start with when you came to Knoxville. Where did you live, who were your friends, what were the politics of Knoxville College like?  LUH: Well, for me, coming to Knoxville was a kind of renaissance. I was pretty much what I would characterize as a card-carrying dork in high school [laughter].  Nobody knew who I was here. There was nothing of me here as I was and there was an opportunity to literally start fresh, as far as socialization was concerned. So I was very excited all the way up until the time I stepped off the plane at McGhee Tyson airport. When I got off the plane the sun was shining, but that didn&#8217;t last too long because while we waited for our luggage it started to rain. As we were driving down the highway to Knoxville College, the rain turned into sleet. When we got to the campus, I promise you, I am telling you the truth, there was hail coming down on the car.  JF: This would have been like in August?  LUH: I don&#8217;t remember now.   JF: I mean, it wasn&#8217;t the cold winter months yet.  LUH: No, it wasn&#8217;t the hard winter.  JF: So you were having a pretty serious storm.  LUH: Yeah, some kind of yeah, it would have been&#8212;.  JF: In an otherwise seasonable time of year.  LUH: In September. It was back in the day when school started in September, like normal-brained folks think, instead of all this contemporary digitized scooching up the time to August stuff. But anyway [laughter], so it was probably mid to late September. In any case, it actually snowed. After we got what little I brought with me to the dorm, suitcases and such, maybe a couple of boxes, before the day was over, I am telling you, the sun came back out. I looked at my mama and said, &#8220;Don&#8217;t leave me! [Laughter] This place is possessed. Don&#8217;t leave me.&#8221; She said nothing back, so I knew what that meant. Get over it [laughter]. But that just struck me. I am telling you, it went through the whole gambit and came back around and I understood clearly Knoxville was in charge. Period. [Laughter] So that&#8217;s fine.  Anyway, I guess freshman orientation was smooth. I actually had a group of people that I got to hang out with and some of them were in my dorm. How-some-ever, it got to the point where music majors had to start being what music majors have to be: in rehearsal. [Recorder is turned off and then back on]. So then once you had to put in the time at the practice room, it was cutting into what during freshman orientation would have been social time. And I never will forget, it was so painful, one day I came to the cafeteria and as I sat my tray down, everyone, all the guys and all the girls at my table, stood up and left. At first I kind of shook it off and kind of kept a poker face and decided it was just one of those odd timings, like the first time you actually see the rain coming to you down the street, you have that experience of &#8220;Oh, wow, it is not raining right here, it is raining right there, OK.&#8221; There was one individual who turned around and said to me, &#8220;I am really done. I really have to go. I am not in this.&#8221; And then that let me know that my instinctive feeling was correct. Turns out that it was decided that I thought that now my music people friends were &#8220;in,&#8221; I was being snobby and cliquish and rejecting the others. And I am like, what people do I get to see? I just go in the practice room and come to the dorm. So that was kind of a moment, it has value later on, that was a moment when I really really understood how selfishly-focused a culture of clique becomes and it is sort of a micro-society. If you are not in compliance or if you are not clearly doing things within the approved behavioral choices of the group, and if you are not demonstrably indicative of the group-think as priority, that they will hurt your feelings and do it hard [laughter].  JF: What were the politics of students like at Knoxville College when you got there in 1972?  LUH: Well, after we got through all of the newbies, kind of getting in and getting our feet on the ground, there were--. The juniors and seniors were the voices of thought with respect to the larger world.  JF: They were sort of leading the intellectual trends of the college?  LUH: Well, first of all, when you are in an all-black college, for the most part at that time, KC [Knoxville College] was still all-black, you are living the events. There is no seeking, finding, stepping up to go correct, you are in the middle of it. You are it. Your existence is the cause of ugly behavior coming toward you. We were dealing with issues, just city kids versus the campus kids issues and trying to have access to library resources at UT&#8217;s [University of Tennessee&#8217;s] campus and being welcome or not. Those were some of the days when some of that bridging was happening. Even though the administrators were setting up programs and such--. Because I was weird. First of all, I came down here playing bass violin and there was no formal strings program at Knoxville College. So automatically it caused us to have to do some bridging between UT and Knoxville College. People had to come in, I had to have my teachers come in and help me. Ed Meyers, Sr., was one of my teachers, and his son plays a mean bass now and is recording. As I say, Mary Ann Fee Finnell, she was a Fee when she first started teaching me, came in to teach. She was my teacher through preparation for my junior recital, I recall.   JF: And was she on staff at Knoxville College?  LUH: No.  JF: She was brought from the community or was she teaching at UT?  LUH: I think she was, she may have been in grad school at UT, I am not sure. She was a--. You know, I never took time, in that youthful place, it never crossed my mind to even ask her. She was the teacher. She was good [laughter]. Is good. So I was done asking questions when I recognized that she was someone that could feed me and bring me further along in my stuff. I can see my other--. Actually he was a sociology professor but he was a really good bass player. His daughter&#8217;s name is Edris, she worked at Carpetbag [Theater] for a time; she is a professional performer now. Cooper. OK, Edris Cooper is her name. Her dad, Mr. Cooper, was I think teaching sociology here at Knoxville College. But he was an amazing bass player and I think he covered little transition places on occasion. What was nice about Mr. Cooper was he was jazz and blues improvisational style player, and that was not something to which I had been introduced. I was classically trained. So that opened up a whole other side of playing the instrument and that was really lovely.   So anyway, I think, too, I did not notice the specifics of how things were going on. We would get together to work on quality of food or access to things in the city, things at UT campus, to kind of broaden--. We had a pretty decent library ourselves on Knoxville College campus, but also in certain fields, UT had more in-depth science library. So there is history, social studies, literature, psychology, pretty solidly covered. When you got into the sciences, the math and in sciences, there were good materials, but UT had the much larger student body in that field that they were training, so they had way more stuff and state-of-the-art technology to go along with it in the labs and that kind of business. So tackling the &#8220;&#8211;isms,&#8221; age-ism, racism, all the &#8211;isms, territorialism, were more subtle. It was a part of our everyday, or my everyday. I ran smack into it a few times. It never [laughter], it never dawned on me not to ask a question or not to expect to go somewhere. I just--. It never crossed my mind that there would be a barrier. So once or twice I would find myself in a place where people were not friendly back or they were very reserved in their action and their response.   JF: Can you remember a specific time or an instance that sticks out in your mind of that?  LUH: I am trying to remember. I didn&#8217;t leave campus very much, I was not driving, and I was so incredibly young-minded. I was a young eighteen. I was na&#239;ve.   JF: Do you think maybe part of that was because you had grown up, well you had grown up in so many different places, but then in your high school years you were in the North? Was it a bit of a change for you to come into the South?  LUH: No, it didn&#8217;t bother me coming to the South. I guess that is--. I grew up in New Orleans. I spent ten of my years in New Orleans. I was born in Mississippi and when I was a toddler and preschooler I was in Atlanta, Georgia. So I was pretty acclimated to Southern social comfort-ness. My grandparents, Professor L.T. Ellis, was the principal at Oak Park High School in Laurel, Mississippi, and my grandmother, Regina Ellis, was the history teacher there and very active in her community. You want to talk to the activist, catch up with my uncle and my mom and ask them about their parents and the things they were doing. I found out just this past week that my uncle, who passed away two weeks ago now, L.T. Ellis, Leander Theodore Ellis, Jr.--who was a practicing psychologist in Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, when he moved his young wife and family and young son up to Swarthmore in their early years--do you know somebody burned a cross on his front lawn?  JF: In Pennsylvania?  LUH: Yes ma&#8217;am. So there is this little myth about what is North and South. What is comfortable about the South is that you know who doesn&#8217;t like it and you know why. And you all choose to disagree and stay on your side of the line or just shut up and get the work done and go on about your business. There are other places away from here, and many of them in the North, where the racism is vicious because it is so subtle. It is undercover. The first lynching I ever heard of happened in South Jersey. So, how North is that?  JF: Yeah.   LUH: OK? And it was in the early 90s. So I am not talking about deep history here, I am talking about somebody got me.   JF: So what was unique about Knoxville for you? What was something that you had to get used to or maybe you didn&#8217;t notice at the time, but now you look back and realize [pause] there was something going on in Knoxville in the 70s that--.  LUH: Well, I will tell you what I learned, reflectively. Because again, I think my experience was a teeny bit unique because what I did was so different that sometimes it shoe-horned me into access and places and tutelage that might not otherwise have been available if I had part of a more general population of learner.  JF: So you mean specifically as a music--.  LUH: As a music and as a female bass player in this college setting that did not have a formal strings program. So it became necessary to link into the university programs because that was the only place there was to go. And the people with whom I was working were just down right decent folk. So they never, whatever &#8211;isms they were harboring, they kept it to themselves, and I think out of the development of our relationships, if there was something there, it went away. But it never cost me--. Or perhaps they joined in and shielded me. I was saying that my grandparents--. Grandaddy&#8217;s farm was in Summerland, Mississippi, which in city we would think of as a suburb or something, but it was out in the country, and he would go out there and load up his car and bring young gentlemen to Laurel High School now, there was campus housing, half of the house was a dormitory, and they would bring those kids in from the country and let them live in town to go to school. Granddaddy used to do that. Before they had a place for them, they would just do it and bring them anyway and take them back. Voting and--. My grandmother worked with, well the Delta, what am I going to call it wrong, I am going to say the Deltas, you find out the other two letters, because if I call it out of order I will be documented messing it up. But grandmamma received from the Deltas sorority a lifelong honored membership, I am not sure exactly how the title is phrased, because she had worked so diligently with them in helping get education, get the kids through high school and in to college.   See, this was a time--. One of the things that integration I think has really done is made it very much more difficult for young people to be managed into formal education. As the broader national culture becomes more and more casual about how they go about doing any business, and this whole culture of ridicule and put-down is just raging and renting us to shreds, now it is to where anybody with any sense doesn&#8217;t want to go into politics because they don&#8217;t want to be slandered and just harangued and harassed. Their younger children are going to hear people talking about their parents in all of these awful ways. That should have been gone with the 50s, because that level of classism should have been left with the end of World War II. But it wasn&#8217;t. It is back. And people are doing a lot of work to try and divide and splinter the people-groups in our country, believing that they will have the largest body count in their people-group to manage and wrest control of whatever.   So [pause] back then, there was no argument that you were going to school and when an adult told you to sit down and do your homework, you did it. There was none of that--. Backtalk will get you knocked from here to next Sunday. So some of the informalization of authority and family unit and how one pursued one&#8217;s education was diluted as we lost cohesiveness as a unit apart. Now a whole lot more is gained and all you have to do is notice it is happening and restructure so that it is not an issue. But it did happen, and it began happening before there was notice of it. Now we are rebuilding and restructuring and we are doing, all these programs are coming in. But it&#8217;s--. So, my mother and father are--. My mom is an amazing educator and now a visual artist, and was instrumental in developing two curriculums for daycare and designed a project when it became a focus of the New Orleans Board of Education to do some early childhood development projects for the kids in the projects and make it happen. There was, before that, when we were in Atlanta, she was teaching home economics in a high school once and also on campus and at college level, home economics, and then--. So she is going back to school, changing, refining her credentials, going back and doing this and she ended her career as an educator in a New Jersey school system in Montclare, New Jersey. She taught magnet kindergarten for years and years and years. So again, I am in the midst of people who are professionals. My father was a pastor, but then he became a secretary at the Board of Homeland Ministries and again, professional situations in my house--. My other uncle, Gerald Ellis, was Dean of Chemistry at Grambling College for a number of years. He is a retired chemist.  JF: So how did this history of professionalism and activism as part of the professionalism in your family, how did that influence you when you were at Knoxville College? Did you feel pressure to complete your degree, or did it inspire you to seek out like-minded people that could help you achieve your goals? Or did you feel kind of isolated from the rest of the student population like you may have had a different agenda or track?  LUH: No, socially I was just klutzy. I was very self-conscious, I didn&#8217;t really feel pretty, I didn&#8217;t feel particularly bright. I was solid. I was different, so I was a little guarded, like I would get, socially, you kind of get smacked on the hand if--. I kept trying to prove that I didn&#8217;t think I was a snob or that I wasn&#8217;t snobbish. So that was just klutzy. But I think what I guess I am trying to say with all the--. That&#8217;s why I feel I was shielded, because there was a culture of learning that was always a part--. It wasn&#8217;t something that you did heroically, it simply was, it was who you are, you were picking up books, you were reading things. You were being curious, you were using inductive or deductive reasoning just to play, it was all these things that were happening just as a part of my daily life. I didn&#8217;t notice in the same way that I think some others did that there was no access for many. I was just trying to get there and cope with--. I found out years later, second time I went back to school, I found out I was undiagnosed ADD, so I discovered some of the learning challenges I had, and of course when I figured out what was going on I said, &#8220;Wow, if I made these many gains,&#8221;&#8212;because by this time I had been acting and I have gotten recognition in my field of choice and lots of neat things are happening in my world&#8212;and I thought, &#8220;Oh my, if I had only known what kind of help that I needed, what to ask someone to do for me, it would have been so different.&#8221; However, when there were people who were expressing a complaint or a concern I could put it in words and I could go with them to our professor and say this that or the other.   JF: So you served as sort of a translator?  LUH: In a way. It was available because I could understand what you were getting. I could glean from you what you were saying, at the core of what you needed, what you wanted, and I could express it in ways that matched this kind of thinker or this kind of person.  JF: What were some of the things that you felt like your peers were coming to you, talking to you about that you wanted to translate to get them help or to help them work through what they were going through?  LUH: Well I think a lot of kids were intimidated by the level of the work. I think I told you the story of &#8220;proslambanomenos&#8221; on the board for the non music majors. So they didn&#8217;t necessarily feel that anybody would help them, so I would say, &#8220;I could do that, wait a minute, let me go ask Ms. So-and-So.&#8221; And so we would go together and I would help with tutoring issues and help to establish a rapport between an individual and a tutor, helping them think to go and look for a tutor. With the city, I never felt allergic to the city because I had family in the city somewhere. I wasn&#8217;t a party-er, per se. I had my days, don&#8217;t get me wrong, I had some loop-de-loop and needed to recognize that I could choose to walk the high ground that made me feel comfortable after all, believe me. But the thing is that when we needed resources for things, I didn&#8217;t mind going up to a shopkeeper and ask them for something, or if we were going shopping for books or clothes and people weren&#8217;t really wanting to wait on us, looking back I recognize that I simply didn&#8217;t notice that they were trying to be rude to me [laughter]. I just didn&#8217;t notice they were trying to be rude to me. So I would just walk over to them and start asking this that and the other and so on, you know. So in the context of the moment they would be responsive.   I think maybe by my junior year I was more cognizant of body language and attitudes [laughter]. But I don&#8217;t even think that happened until the end of my sophomore year. I was walking back from the strip, the food row, the main street on Cumberland Avenue that runs through the middle of UT campus, pretty much, or one of the boundary streets. In any case, my boyfriend and I were walking back to campus and a truckload of white boys came roaring by and they threw the contents of their drink cup on us. Called us out a name and all kind of stuff, and I was kind of standing there stunned. This is something you see on a bad TV movie, this is not real life, not my life. That was the first time&#8212;I am trying to make sure I am telling the truth&#8212;yeah, that was really the very very first time I had experienced, perceptibly experienced, a flat-out racial abuse. Just straight up racism. I should say prejudice. When it gets to the &#8211;ism stage it gets to talking about the power to stop you. And it unnerved me because I realized that could have been a cupful, a container full of acid, as much as it was melted drink or Sprite or whatever soda it was that was in there. It could have been something that I couldn&#8217;t be safe, from which I couldn&#8217;t be safe. It could have been anything. And we still had about a mile to walk back to campus. It was very unnerving. After that, I think I started noticing shopkeepers differently, and then I did my roly-bug thing, I would just kind of curl up and don&#8217;t go where it was not safe, primarily. I was having enough issues just with socialization on campus so I was thinking, &#8220;I don&#8217;t have to deal with that.&#8221; [Pause] It was after college, as an adult, that I began to get tastes of racism or racial bias against me in Knoxvile. I remember once walking into a&#8212;in the last six years, maybe it was six years ago&#8212;walking into a health club, I guess you call it. I stood there maybe ten or fifteen minutes and nobody ever came and asked me if they could help me or whatever. So I sort of got that message and I went on about my business.  JF: For people in the black community talking about these kind of things, were your friends, amongst your friends did these kind of situations come up? Or was it just so much a part of everyday life--.  LUH: I think it was just embedded in language. When you find yourself making reference to people as &#8220;white folks do this&#8221; or when you start with the sweeping generalizations, every people-group has their little body of sweeping generalizations that they assign to others and they only speak it when they are quote-unquote &#8220;in the house.&#8221; They have manners enough not to use it widely or broadly and certainly when you are home with your children and you have to prepare them to be shielded, you need to sometimes describe things so they can recognize them. If someone is cheating you like this or saying these words, you need to know that those are not kind words, those are not meant to encourage. Those are put-down words. You need to determine whether you need to be very still if you are alone and don&#8217;t have anyone to protect you, and whoever is bothering you is bigger or there are more of them, or if you need to, you know, battle strategy. Survival strategy. When is an opportunity, what are the conditions that allow you to exercise the opportunity to stand up for yourself and protect your dignity, claim it.  JF: So you had to kind of learn these battle strategies on your own in Knoxville in the 70s, that--.  LUH: I did, I did.  JF: It was just kind of trial by fire?  LUH: It was for me. Now that was, I would plug in and out, stay in isolation a lot. I really loved the practice room, it was a good place to be productive and not under attack. It was safe.  JF: Did that change, your response of plugging in and out, did that change, and if it did, why, how?  LUH: Believe it or not [pause] when I went back to school&#8212;. I quit school in &#8217;76 because I thought I am messing up my transcript, we were still in quarter systems, that is how old I am. I just stopped taking classes in the spring. So my junior year I didn&#8217;t take classes in the spring and in my senior year I was about to do the same thing. So in &#8217;76 when I should have been graduating--.  JF: Why did you choose to stop taking classes, or was it not a choice, was it--.  LUH: I couldn&#8217;t focus. I couldn&#8217;t find the will to do my work, and rather than flunk the class, I just unplugged. It was available for me to stay on campus, I had some cousins here, so I could have some shelter and caregiving. My freshman year was really special because my dorm mother recommended me to a job in Marblehead, Massachusetts, to the then-president of Children&#8217;s Hospital or a wing of it.  Dr. Kronkite had younger girls, and there was a young lady that had been sort of an au-pair for them for years who graduated, and my dorm mother recommended me to that job. So they were much older and my responsibilities were just more companionship and light house-keeping. That was the year I learned to play the guitar because Dr. Kronkite played guitar and I would overhear him in his office at night, and I come scooching around the corner trying to be invisible, trying to eavesdrop on him playing the guitar [laughter] and he saw me and invited me in and taught me how to play guitar [laughter].   JF: Wow!  LUH: It was wonderful. Their house sat on a bluff. You could hear the waves. The ocean was just crashing against at night, and my room was the attic floor. It was in the attic and there was nobody else there with me, so the little portal-shaped windows looked out over the ocean and you could--.  JF: You said this was in Marblehead?  LUH: Yeah.  JF: Massachusetts?  LUH: Yeah. It was amazing.  JF: So you were there for the summer?  LUH: For the summer, yeah, my freshman year. That was sort of my first job.  JF: By your senior year you were still living on campus, but not actively taking classes?  LUH: Well, I say fall and winter quarter, I would do it, I wouldn&#8217;t do summer quarter anyhow, I mean I just did three and went on, and I was just, I couldn&#8217;t really--. I slept. The first time I chose to change, I slept the entire--. I never saw the sun for a whole quarter. I would be up all night. I just couldn&#8217;t--. I dropped all the classes. That was that first spring. I just dropped everything. I just, I couldn&#8217;t manage it. I couldn&#8217;t figure out what was going on. I couldn&#8217;t rest. The will to focus--. I just had this big kind of shutdown, academically. Now, just because I was messing something up or struggling with something or not figuring that I was going to have a hope of getting it done, it never stopped me from being in the middle of doing something [laughter]. So I would go and visit with professors and tell them, assure them that I was coming back and ask them for a reading that I could do that I never found the focus to actually do. I just kept trying to stay tethered to going through. Of course I needed to finish. I was going to be like the only grandchild that didn&#8217;t have a degree. The thing was, when I look back, there was no one scaffolding me. There was no one that looked at that behavior and said, &#8220;This is a big switch. How did somebody that came here with a 3.8 average disappear? What is going on?&#8221; I guess the assumption was that I was just being a brat. So there was no intervention.  I never was popular. I wasn&#8217;t, please, I wasn&#8217;t one of the pretty girls, and I certainly wasn&#8217;t any of the social savvy women. The sorority to which I applied wrote me back a letter and listed the fees, and I was like, &#8220;Fees?&#8221;  I just didn&#8217;t know, I didn&#8217;t have any experience of it. So I didn&#8217;t know [laughter]. I was like, &#8220;Wait a minute.&#8221; Because I am listening, this is like maybe my junior year&#8212;if I say &#8220;like&#8221; one more time, I am going to hit myself&#8212;it was maybe the beginning of my, no, it would have been the beginning of my sophomore year, because I got my letter of acceptance while I was in Marblehead, and I thought--. I sat there, I read the letter, all of the little stipulations. Then it got down to the money, and I was reflecting on all the stories I had heard about the lines and pledging and such and so and of course the news reports you hear about the hazing that can possibly happen, and I looked at that thing and I said, &#8220;You want me to pay you to kick my butt for x weeks and turn around and try to call me soror? I think not.&#8221; So we didn&#8217;t do that. Now, people who can handle that who were smart enough not to be intimidated and humiliated and manipulated because they knew instinctively where to put people in check, where there was enough ego or enough training from their sorority before their mom, they were fine. The sororities and fraternities have a valuable place in culture and society. But I was not a sorority girl [laughter].  JF: I am going to pause real quick to skip to the next track. [Recorder turned off and turned on again].  START OF TRACK 4  JF: So where did you live after you were no longer living on campus at Knoxville College?  LUH: I bunked out in the city for a little bit, and then I came back to campus. One of the deans who did have a sense of who I was, when he found who my family was, he said, &#8220;Something is wrong here. This is not characteristic behavior. I have met this young lady.&#8221; The fact that I had manners and had a sense of protocol was how I got the job in Massachusetts because people knew I knew how to carry myself and handle myself. So a way was made for me to have campus housing during that stretch of time. In the interim part, I had found a job and worked for five years before I returned to school, so there was a little gap of time in between leaving and working and I came back on campus, because that living situation--.  JF: Where did you work?  LUH: At Krispy Kreme Donut Company, yeah.   JF: What were you doing for them?  LUH: Oh, I was packing donuts off the line initially and I got a little responsibility before I left. Got to cover third shift eventually, and prior to that actually make the&#8212;the little cake donut machine is a bit smaller&#8212;and I ran that extruder for a little while. Oh, it was like being in a playground. There was conveyor belts going up and around and stuff was looping and it was silver and there was stuff floating across the grease and the grease was reflective, and then it would pass under the glaze and it would be like wonderful, and there was sugar everywhere [laughter]. It was so funny because I think they must have had some of the most productive years they ever had in Knoxville because I remember we were over when the Magnolia store was still there, and we got robbed one night, that was not pretty.    But the way the extruder system works is the dough has been through a steam chamber and done its rising, and literally instead of punching out the middle, the ring is extruded around a form and it plops into the water there, into the grease, the oil. It floats onto a screen that then flips it and lets it continue and so on, and there are probably a couple other rinky-dink things in there that make it work. I am sure that is under the patent and in the family safe somewhere. The thing is, you had to heft a one hundred pound sack of flour into this thing on to&#8212;. Oh, I could run that machine, too, but this is when I was 116 pounds, OK? [Laughter] By the time I was a shift supervisor, my hard hat had &#8220;The Hulk&#8221; on it because this young man named Joe Bonsoo, he was African, he was in school here&#8212;anyway, I was losing my temper, I had a pretty rocky little temper [laughter]&#8212;and Joe said to me once he said, &#8220;Linda! One minute you are just fine and you are nice and the next minute you just blow up like the Incredible Hulk! You are just like the Incredible Hulk!&#8221; [Laughter] So my hard hat ended up with &#8220;Hulk&#8221; in Sharpie marker on the back.   Anyway, you heft up this hundred-pound sack of flour on to the lip of the mixer. Well, you hit the mixer on and let it start to close and you dump the flour, put it down, you muscle up the sugar, shake it out. The sugar runs fast so you can put it in last, and you toss a certain amount of yeast in there, and of course the mix itself has all the blended stuff. That is the recipe stuff. And it begins to knead, whip and spin, the dough and so on, and when you get it finished and you pop it out and it spins one last time, and you&#8212;. Did you ever see a pizza person dealing with the nice, the perfect elasticity in the dough? So there was, and then you do that and you turn and there is a whole dance, a whole choreography for getting the dough from the mixer into the extruder, the hopper. Slap down, seal it off, pump up the pressure [makes sound &#8220;pssh&#8221;], send it on its way. It gets extruded on to a tray, runs through the steam chamber, comes out on the other end, floats away and does all its other little things.   Well, the breaks, whenever you were waiting on the dough there was a natural break. And we kind of noticed there might be a way we could have longer breaks between batches. So it was on. We would pack those donuts and you pick them up and put them in the box, there was a whole technique to picking up two stacks, slip-slap one, fold, and put it in the stacked tray.  It used to be that there was one time that we would do it in the tray and somebody would take it away and so on, and I was like, &#8220;Let&#8217;s stack the trays as we go.&#8221; So instead of sending the tray, or stopping, sending the tray away, we would reach back to the tray, fill it, stack it on the wheels, clean ones, stack it on the wheels. So we cut out the middle step of the re-stacking, stack it on the wheels. Whosever job it was to get the stuff out to the dock would then maybe have to take part of [the boxes], because it was only so high you could get, standing right here. [They would] get the last three trays on top, and roll that one off and you start a new stack. So we got a little collaboration going there and we would, as far as we could, we would pack we would walk up that thing and pack those donuts because we were so fast with it we would pack it all the way up to the bin [laughter] where we could reach, and make ourselves a two- or three-minute break.   So the donut guys got hip to what we were doing because we were laughing at them, teasing. That is when you have to learn to shut up, don&#8217;t be mocking people, bragging on them. &#8220;What are you doing?&#8221; [they said]. &#8220;Ha ha ha,&#8221; [we said]. So then they started closing the gap between doors, so they would get one in, out of the hopper, hit the pressure while they were getting that sealed down, thump the bag, turn up the pressure over there, put in the sugar, (2:10:39), slap the cake, desk about to finish closing and [makes sound &#8220;pssh&#8221;] they took it off. Then they would get it to, they were trying to get it down to five or six trays before the next, and they got that timing going, that overlap timing going. We kept [laughter] having a race. For me, it was like a big playground in a lot of ways.   JF: What were the people like that you worked with?  LUH: Oh boy, from one end of the gambit to the other. First of all, that kind of an assembly line situation has a hierarchy, so there is a chain of command. That is the end of that story.   JF: Who is at the top of it?  LUH: Oh, the manager.   JF: So like a floor overseer?  LUH: There is somebody who is there, too, but I mean like the store executive manager is--. The next voice is home office, and he had the two or three shifts. There is kind of a supervisor over everybody, supervising, and then the drivers are there and then there are floor managers and so on, so it is just a little tree. That has value because when you have a structured command system, the &#8211;isms don&#8217;t get to play quite the same way. They are under control through the system there. Although, when you have got something as a pastry product, as a bakery product, there is only so much time you plan on spending being mean to people. This is no time for it, it is about the business. I think in a lot of ways--. Now who got to be a manager, who got to be a supervisor, that sort of shook down along the racial lines of the day.   JF: So there were white men at the top?  LUH: Yeah, mostly, but like I said before, when I left the company I was doing--. I delivered a van and helped to open a store in Memphis, and so it was more about, &#8220;You have a knack for this job, you can handle this responsibility.&#8221; One thing I will say about that company, when I was with it, is that it promotes. If you were on the floor and you had a time, an experience, and you learned to do something new, something additional, then the natural place for that&#8212;. People were brought in, certainly, but they promoted from their ranks as well. So I thought it was quite functional. Now, pay scale? I don&#8217;t know. I don&#8217;t know how promotions went.  JF: Did you and your coworkers ever talk about your paychecks?  LUH: Oh no, that is not done here. This is Knoxville, Tennessee. You don&#8217;t talk about your business.   JF: Yeah. So you wouldn&#8217;t know if there was a white guy who was the same level as you, in terms of--.  LUH: Making more money?  JF: Yeah.  LUH: I just assumed that.  JF: Just assumed it?  LUH: Yeah, I mean, I just assumed it, and it may not have even been true. I really don&#8217;t know. It may not have been true. You could look at company records and maybe find that it wasn&#8217;t. I say it probably was true that the guys made more than the women. But that wasn&#8217;t what was available to--. We didn&#8217;t have time to gossip a lot.  I am sure there was some that went on, and I knew that, actually I know there were a couple of things that got a little gossipy going on. But the work, I think if there was an &#8211;ism that had play there, it would be male-female. Period. No matter which race, the hierarchy was split that way, around gender. I would say there was definitely a network. Again, the team under which I worked was more about business. I got called on the carpet for assuming, becoming too casual about time management, when I was delivering to the other store from the Kingston Pike store. I learned how to drive straight shift&#8212;no, I was driving by the time I got there, I didn&#8217;t learn how to drive until I was a junior in college, but&#8212;I learned to drive straight shift on a Krispy Kreme donut truck.    What I don&#8217;t know and has been put to me before is, is my world different, my experience in the world different, a lot different, because of what I bring to the table. I was sharing with you earlier that there were times when I just didn&#8217;t have sense enough to know that I was being disregarded [laughter].  So I was just puttering right on in there and doing whatever I was doing. I have just felt so mentored.  I think God has lifted me up, and walking with Christ has helped me just be so shielded. So I don&#8217;t know if my experience is different, or if my preference of receiving even harshly delivered flat-out criticism has shaped--. My first thought is that I need to connect with core intent, not the mode of delivery. That is, I have got to hold until I hear what is being said. What is there of substance within what is being said. It is another conversation for me, about how you talk to me. Now I have learned over the years to go ahead and kind of deal with that on the front end. I am sure that earlier I felt a little intimidated and didn&#8217;t feel that I could do anything about someone talking to me and correct them. But that is my first place, even if it is rudely delivered, it is reasonable for someone to expect you to keep a schedule. So if you are taking advantage of a situation that has less accountability and not keeping a schedule tight, that is a reasonable thing to get called to the carpet.  JF: Did you, or do you know if any of the women that you worked with, ever feel threatened or fear for your safety among the men?  LUH: Not in our shop. Not in our shop.   JF: Were you aware at the time that was something was that was positive about where you worked? Because it could have been--.  LUH: Different?  JF: Or, at the time was it again, just one of these things that you didn&#8217;t notice or think about?  LUH: No. I appreciated those nuances later. Like I say, everything did not always go well for me there. It became difficult for reasons that had to do with my contribution to the situation. Out of that place, I found the resolve to go on back to school and redirect things. So it wasn&#8217;t that there was always peace in the valley, as it were, but I had some responsibility in what was happening when things became not pleasant. So you have to eat that one and live with it, move on. Again, there was a kind of buddy system that was there. I don&#8217;t think I was particularly well-liked, especially as a supervisor, because I was--. What I considered my matter-of-fact voice, and about business voice, and my bossy-ness, I learned, was tolerated because I was supervisor.   I met a young man, just amazing, two guys that worked with me that taught me two of my best life lessons. One of them, I was mouthing off, I was being bossy and such. When I say bossy, what do I mean? A tad arrogant in my authority. Do this and so and so and so. I wasn&#8217;t condescending, or maybe I was condescending, but I was just, &#8220;Do this now, do this now.&#8221; I wasn&#8217;t asking them; I was bossy. One young man stopped and looked at me, he just stopped, deadpan stopped, and he happened to have a hammer in his hand, he had been working on something. He stood there and suddenly he flipped the hammer around, with the head of the hammer to his hand, to hand it off to me. That was the end of the story, just to hand it over, to give it to me. But when I stood there after ordering him about&#8212;this is what I was looking for&#8212;I would order people around at times, not all the time, but that would do it, and [makes noise &#8220;shoomp&#8221;] he flipped it around to hand it to me to go do whatever it was that was next. For my own personal ego, I managed to not totally flinch, I sort of kept a poker face going. Looking at him in his absolute stillness and self-control, I said, &#8220;That is the kind of leader I should be.&#8221; He did not allow me to provoke anything ugly in him. I wasn&#8217;t trying to provoke him, I just didn&#8217;t have any finesse. I was maturing into being a reasonable leader. But when I saw his face, no tension, absolutely still, no insubordination, absolutely still, whole self-control. Now I think he took a little dig at me when he flipped that hammer around.  JF: I think so [laughter].  LUH: I think he was very clear about how that would read [laughter]. Handed it off to me.  JF: But it was important to you that you stood your ground, too. Like you said, you didn&#8217;t flinch.   LUH: Well that was an ego thing. Yeah, I did but that was an ego thing.  JF: You are his boss and you do have authority over him.  LUH: Yeah. But [laughter] when I think back on it, I say &#8220;Uh huh. Well, I am glad you didn&#8217;t cower and fall apart.&#8221; Because indeed, I did need to be able to continue to exercise responsibility in my position. I was like, OK, you just stood here, I didn&#8217;t throw up my arm or anything, just stood there, prepared to perhaps receive a blow, rather than defending, but I said, that is OK, because I learned so much from that. He modeled what would have been an appropriate response when you are in an un-empowered position without options. That was a situation where his option would simply have been to comply with the directive or to relinquish the position. He wasn&#8217;t working for me, he was working for his objectives. So he kept his job. He also helped me grow up a lot.  Then there was another, there was a guy I met again, years later, and I asked him about how I was as a manager. Oh, I thanked him that I could always rely on him to do what I asked him to do no matter what was going on, and I said, &#8220;I recognize that I was learning to do this job and treat people more respectfully,&#8221; I said, &#8220;and you always managed it.&#8221; He said, he told me flat out, and I forget how I framed the question now, but whatever it was, he said, &#8220;No, you were a straight up bitch. I hated working under you because you were--.&#8221; I apologized, I said, &#8220;I am so sorry, but that makes me even more want to thank you, that you were so way much more grown up and more mature and had more about yourself and your dignity than I ever had in the time when I was supposed to be your leader, to be your manager.&#8221; Again, that model, that particular young man walked ten miles to work every day and he was never late.   JF: Was he from Knoxville?   LUH: Yeah, he was from Knoxville.  JF: So where did he live and where was the factory? To give me a sort of mental picture.  LUH: That was when we were working at the Kingston Pike store and he lived over, oh gosh, what is the neighborhood called? I think he lived over in what they used to call Mucktown. But, north Knoxville, out past, well anyway. Now he was European American. The first young man, the one that I told you stood there and I had the poker face, he was African American. The other young man was this tall, slim, European American guy. When you witness somebody walking high ground, you need to pay attention, you need to embrace that. That launched me into a serious little piece of education because I needed to figure out how to be there. Where were they that they were there?  JF: And this would have been the late 70s?  LUH: Yeah, very late 70s, because--.  JF: Maybe &#8217;80?  LUH: Uh huh.  JF: So do you think some of the men that you were supervising, this would have been their first experience being supervised by a woman or having an African American woman in a position of authority above them?  LUH: One of them, yes, the other I don&#8217;t think so. His mama was a woman of authority and she was African American. You know what I am saying? But the other young man, I think so. But that was the way he was raised. There is still a kind of old school code of what it means to show respectful behavior in different arenas and with different people and most of the time you can invite someone to call you by your first name only, if they are a child much younger than you, but probably when they call your name they will leave your last name alone, but they will say &#8220;Miss So-and-So.&#8221; Miss So-and-So. Because they have been taught that people who are in this relationship to you are addressed with a title. OK, there is the &#8211;ism. OK, we found the one that I saw regularly. You don&#8217;t know me that well to call me by my first name. You didn&#8217;t even extend the courtesy of asking if you could invite--. I have seen, and I think corporate America went through this thing--. Here is the assumption, that if I call you by your first name then you receive the gift of me including you as a peer. But it is still all about me. So they go in a store and they say &#8220;Oh yeah, we are going to get down with our customers and you are going to call them by their first name ten times in the first five minutes of waiting on them.&#8221; And a grown man old enough to be their father comes in there and you start calling him by his first name? Excuse me? The name you may call him is the one he gives you permission to call him. Just like anybody else in your culture. In your culture. Your European American-based culture. When I say that, which &#8220;your&#8221; are we talking about? OK?   There was a time in society when letters of introduction, you didn&#8217;t even just go up and talk to people, if you were a business man, or people of stature socially or politically, you carried your letter of introduction from someone to them, to their secretary, and then you made a connection and so on. How are you going to call a grown man--. You are 20-something years old and you are going to look up to a grown man and call him by his first name the first time you have met him. If you are going to do something, call him by his whole name, and ask him, &#8220;May I call you &#8216;Such-and-so&#8217;?&#8221; Or you listen, because you really shouldn&#8217;t even invite yourself, what you should do is listen and wait to see if they say, &#8220;Oh, you may call me So-and-so,&#8221; or &#8220;Just call me So-and-so.&#8221; It has meaning.  JF: So are you identifying changes that were happening in the 70s and 80s, or are you speaking more of like recent times?  LUH: It is settling back now. It was raging through the 90s and again, even back then, you see, the thing is this. With African Americans, I can remember when I was a little girl a friend of mine being told that her mother didn&#8217;t know how to spell her name, it didn&#8217;t matter what the teacher thought her name should be. It is the name on her birth certificate. That is her name. It is none of her business to comment on whether her mother knew how to spell her name. She knew how to spell it just fine, she spelled it the way she wanted it to be.   JF: Oh, I see.   LUH: OK?  JF: So the little girl, her name was spelled a certain way and the teacher was trying to tell her that that is not the right way to spell her name.   LUH: To spell her name, yeah.  JF: Oh, my.   LUH: OK? We have lived through things that. I can remember, goodness, I haven&#8217;t thought about that, I remember [pause] being sent to the office or told to tell my mom--. Anyway, darker skin in cool weather, the ashy-ness of the exfoliated skin from scratches or whatever is very very noticeable because the contrast ratio is very high. Oh my gosh. [Interruption, recorder is turned off and then back on].
JF: We were talking about, you were about to tell me something and you were explaining about the ashy-ness of your skin in winter months.
LUH: Oh! You had reminded me, we were talking about names. I guess my, one of the things about personal dignity is your name, your family name, who you are, what you do. In my family, especially the Memphis wing, we have an expression that we say, &#8220;We be Plinks.&#8221; Now Private Plink is a political cartoon character from the 50s, I think. He would write letters home to his mom or whatever. But this particular cartoon had Bob Hope on the stage, the USO stage, and you see little arches representing this sea of heads and way at what would be the back of this auditorium full of young soldiers is one full-face sketched in. And that is Private Plink. The cartoon caption reads, &#8220;Dear Ma,&#8221; and I mean there are just hundreds of kids sitting here at this concert with Bob Hope. &#8220;Dear Ma&#8221;--hundreds of people--&#8220;Bob Hope came and did a concert for me&#8230; and a few of the boys.&#8221; And the cartoon image is like hundreds of kids in this auditorium and way in the back is Private Plink. Private Plink was on the planet. He was. Of course he did. Of course it was for him. Of course the rain took a break while he got from the car to the grocery store and didn&#8217;t start back up until he was in the building [laughter].
Then I think that kind of manifests in my personality. It just doesn&#8217;t occur to me until I think about something, it just never crossed mind--. Oh God, it is like when I auditioned for the Knoxville Symphony. I had just finished my junior recital, I had made it through. I said, &#8220;OK, you little rascal-ly self, you got a piece, it is up, apply for an audition, go for it.&#8221; Well, first of all, I was too silly to understand that Knoxville Symphony was like a big-deal symphony, like New York Symphony, anybody else&#8217;s symphony. It was the symphony. It was just my Knoxville. You can go play band and you can go to the community chorus and you can sing with the Sweet Adelines, you can get with the Jubilee Fest and play a bunch of old-time sitting around with the string bands and stuff. That is how it is here. People come together and make art and culture; it is warm and inclusive and stuff. So Miss Clueless [laughter] goes trotting off to get an application for the Knoxville Symphony. Later I had somebody tell me, she says, &#8220;Well, some people might think it was rather presumptuous of you to think to ask for an audition just on your junior recital.&#8221; And I said, &#8220;Would they now? Hm. Never thought of that.&#8221; [Laughter] Anyway, I just didn&#8217;t, I honestly, it wasn&#8217;t until maybe 15 years later that I understood how na&#239;ve I was in that moment, because I didn&#8217;t think about it much.   Anyway, I get over there with my little music and my bass and I am ready, and as I enter the space, I get it. I am like, this is not church. This is not just folks who played ever in their life to get to play together. This is a professional orchestra [laughter]. Now you would think people who go to college and study stuff would understand these things. Well, they didn&#8217;t have the name Linda Carol Upton. Anyway [laughter] I wish to heaven, I have got to back and look at history and learn that man&#8217;s name. He was the most beautiful person. I walked in there, my little na&#239;ve self. I think he just, he didn&#8217;t even question. I had met him, and I brought my little piece and I explained, I said, &#8220;Well, I don&#8217;t have an accompanist, but this is the piece I am doing.&#8221; He looked at it and said, &#8220;Oh, don&#8217;t worry, I will play that for you.&#8221; Girl, that man sight-read the accompaniment better than I played that day. Again, and that was like the nail in the coffin, I said, &#8220;He is getting ready to sight-read the accompaniment, he is getting ready to--.&#8221; And you know how concertos go, it is like [makes a series of rapid note sounds] and there is the other solo instrument that comes in and then they have this little contrapuntal thing going and it is all wonderful and magic. The accompaniment has it, you know, high five to him, he has got as much work to do as the soloist. He certainly cannot go bad, because then the soloist doesn&#8217;t look good. He sight-read that accompaniment. When he said that, it was all over. That was the first time in my life I ever knew what stage fright was. The debilitating kind that shuts people down that they make jokes about in movies and stuff. It was amazing. It was amazing. I can feel my chest constrict now as I am sitting here. I can feel the butterflies in my stomach. I started to&#8212;. I couldn&#8217;t, I couldn&#8217;t stop the strings effectively. I couldn&#8217;t get enough pressure. I couldn&#8217;t play.
JF: Oh my.
LUH: [Laughter] I was so--. I was like, can you at least latch on and be vibrato? [Laughter] You know, make some use of yourself. Couldn&#8217;t get it. And I started to cry and I stopped and I said, &#8220;I really do know this piece. I can&#8217;t play it now.&#8221; I don&#8217;t think I said another word. I think I stopped, I think I looked at him with my eyes just pooling with tears and I said, &#8220;I really can play this piece.&#8221; And he just gently shut the music and got up from the piano bench and came over and handed it to me. He may have said something like, &#8220;I know.&#8221; Or nothing at all. I don&#8217;t remember. It felt like, &#8220;I know. It&#8217;s alright.&#8221; I don&#8217;t know if he spoke. I don&#8217;t. But it was so gentle. It was so gentle. And I packed up my bags and I went on my way.
So I am just saying, I think that I keep expecting to do things and I just do them and people are often nice enough not to fuss at me when they realize, I think maybe they get tickled at how na&#239;ve I am [laughter]. So they just go, &#8220;It&#8217;s all right, darling, it&#8217;s all right.&#8221; All of that is simply to say that the naming, the dignity, the dignity, it is the times that are dignity--. I remember getting sent home one day to put a slip on. It is not that my garment was see-through, but it was clear in some kind of way either by how it draped or didn&#8217;t, that I didn&#8217;t have a slip on and it was not done and I was just sent away.
JF: Was this in college?
LUH: No, that was in elementary school, junior high school. I can remember [pause] it was about the names. The name and calling by your first name, assuming--. Today I have adults who allow their children to call me by my first name without a title. When I have an opportunity I work in a way to establish a preference and first usually it is by venue, what arena are we in, so I will say, &#8220;You realize that it is school now. You need to be more formal in the way you address me.&#8221; And then if things go smoothly and there is another moment that allows it to be information-sharing, not a criticism, not perceived as a criticism, I will say, &#8220;I really feel a little bit old-school about that. Can I just be Miss Linda? Is that OK?&#8221; Oh sure, you know, they don&#8217;t care. The kids don&#8217;t know. They are not trying to have any stuff with it. But people mess with your name. I heard a news reporter the other day make reference to the President by his first name. When did we cease using the protocol of Mr. President? It is talking to him like he was, speaking of him as if he is some football jock, call him only by his last name. Not in the phrase &#8220;the So-and-So&#8217;s administration&#8221; and such and such and yada yada, but you know. That kind of thing.
JF: So the sort of na&#239;vet&#233; that you describe, willing to jump both feet, feet first into the ocean before you realize, &#8220;Oh, it is the ocean I am jumping in to.&#8221; [Laughter] I wonder how that, did that sort of influence the way that you approach Carpetbag Theater because it seems like they were doing some pretty radical stuff in the 70s.
LUH: I didn&#8217;t realize it was radical.
JF: Yeah, so you just sort of, can you describe--.
LUH: It was the truth.
JF: Can you describe a little bit about your first interactions with Carpetbag Theater and your first impressions of what they were doing?
LUH: Well the first thing that happened was, my first involvement was that I was simply invited to do some incidental music for a children&#8217;s production. It was a play of four children called, &#8220;Celebration.&#8221; With it I could say the name of the writer because it was a delightful piece. It was a delightful piece. She needs her kudos. After I had been at a rehearsal and done the music and done that first performance, the next time they did a performance I had a line. I did a little guitar stuff and a little bass stuff, I guess it was the tree music [imitates bass music]. But anyway [laughter], soon I had a character. I had launched an apprenticeship with Carpetbag Theater.
JF: This was in 1976?
LUH: Yeah. It was in &#8217;76, sure was. There was also an interdepartmental production of West Side Story that came available, so my first real acting role was as Anybody&#8217;s, the little tomboy girl in West Side Story. Talk about your typecasting, but anyway [laughter]. I remember I had this old railroad cap with the bib rolled back, that was my cap. I used to like to, well, bass violins are very big and I was a little bitty stick person, so I would hoist my bass up on my head and carry it on my head when I was running through the airport or going across campus and people thought that was really weird [laughter]. These two little legs going under this bass. Ant and a rubber tree plant had nothing on me, buddy. Anyway [laughter] so I had my baseball cap and my cuffed-up jeans and my little skinny legs sticking out between the sneakers, and I was a Jet. It was so amazing.   It just so happened, it must have been shortly around Easter because Easter Sunday was my first day at work for Krispy Kreme Donuts in &#8217;76, I remember I had been out on the tennis court too long and I was stiff as a board and I could barely walk, but let me tell you I went--. They called me to come into that job, I showed up. Anyway, I was working third shift. So the night that we did the show I helped with costuming, I had helped with choreography, I had helped with the set, it was all of us together making it work, and it was amazing, we had all these lines and we were storytelling and all of this stuff.  That morning I found out that no one had, we had not gotten gifts for the guest vocalists, and so I had a job, I had a job and I had me a credit card [laughter], so I took my credit card and I bought a metronome to give to the gentleman and a bouquet of roses for Ms. Harrison and some roses for Miss Frasier who was the department secretary and kept everything running. Oh yeah, I had a credit card [laughter].   That morning I got up, I was helping, helping everything get ready, and I was running around trying to get gifts and then it was time for curtain. OK, did the show, we are carrying on and well, I was working third shift so that curtain was closing and I had about thirty or forty minutes to get to work on time. Went to work, worked third shift all the way through the night, came the next morning. Oh, that was when I found out about the--. The first day was just getting set up. Then the next day was when they found out they didn&#8217;t have gifts. I remember I was having a vanilla milkshake sometime that morning and then when I looked around there was no time to sleep, it was time to straighten the costumes back out and get everything reset and then it was time for curtain. We were so enthusiastic in one scene we knocked the scenery over, so everybody reached up and caught it, set it back up [laughter] and everything.    But we did it. It was dynamic, it was fun, it was big. We danced. Oh, you have not seen a Lindy Hop like we did that night, and everything was wonderful. Absolutely wonderful. It was alive. It was--. And right about then I remember walking backstage in Colston Auditorium and it was the stage right side behind the legs, the long curtains, the side pieces that frame the stage are called legs. I remember I stepped out of sight, we had had our curtain call and I walked around and I remember looking at Ms. Harris and I said, &#8220;We did it.&#8221; And that was all she wrote. Next time I woke up I was on the floor. I just fainted. I had not eaten in forty-eight hours.   JF: Oh my goodness.  LUH: I had not slept in forty-eight hours, and I just fell out. They revived me and I fell back out. They finally stabilized me enough to get me to where I was living and I got on the sofa and fell out. That was the first thing ever in my whole life that I had spent all of me without hesitation, without reservation. Everything. Everything. I said, I can do this. This is what I can do right. OK. And I fainted again [laughter]. So I traveled with the company, I worked for Krispy Kreme, traveled with company, apprenticed with the company, moved in, carrying on, and then finally the time came when I knew I needed to make some choices. I went back to school, in theater this time, at the University of Tennessee. I had a great experience. It was nice being with people--. No more competition to study, right, because the people I was with were trying to get the major roles in the shows and party hard and have the highest grade point average. It was just a different group, a different mindset socially. We played hard, we worked hard. I didn&#8217;t play, I went home. That was my second time through school. I had a house in the city to go to [laughter].  JF: Did you own your own house at the time or were you renting?  LUH: Oh no, no. I am trying to remember what I was even doing, I was renting an apartment.  JF: What neighborhood were you living in?  LUH: Over in 4th and Gill. Over in 4th and Gill. I remember I bought a Sears Roebuck piggyback washer and apartment-sized dryer and I would walk in the door in the morning and just roll into the washing machine, turn it on and go collapse and when I woke up that afternoon I would throw it in the dryer [laughter] and put on the new fresh uniform&#8212;I had at least two uniforms&#8212;so I would have a fresh one to go and when I would wake up, before I would leave the house, I would throw that one in the dryer and the next day that one would be ready [laughter]. Oh gosh.   The drama gave me my music back, because I used the music and I was not a musician who was occasionally telling a story or something, I was an actress-storyteller who was using music to enhance that work. That was the mix that worked for me, that kind of business. It ended up being pretty slick. So naming and dignity and all of these things are connected to arriving at a place of dignity. The thing is that we were telling the truth. It was not anything controversial in my mind, in my perception, because the things we were saying were simply true. It wasn&#8217;t laced with vengeance or anger. It was about declaring the dignity. We talked about people being abused as a slave, having been--. In &#8220;Dark Cowgirls,&#8221; Bitty Mason says she was not interested in walking back east, walking back west to Texas behind a hundred head of cattle. Oh, it was back east because they had migrated to California and the slave-owner rancher wanted to move back eastward, and she was saying, &#8220;I don&#8217;t want to, I am not interested in walking back east behind a hundred head of cattle.&#8221; At that time, California was still Mexican territory and it was under those rules, and slavery was not permitted. So rules were quickly made to let people keep their slaves or go catch them if they got away, but Bitty Mason was one of the ones that applied for her freedom in the courts with assistance from mainstream community members and was successful, and ended up opening a school and doing a lot of dynamic social work.   But you see we think of that as activism and social change. They were surviving. They were making a life. So that is the part that I was thinking about in terms of how I was characterizing it. I didn&#8217;t see it as something outside of a norm. We were just telling the stories and saying, &#8220;Look at the heroism. Look at the strength. Look at these warriors of life who battled forward and made it work. Made it work.&#8221; Look at the entrepreneurship. Mary, Black Mary, and right now I can not call her given name, there was a nickname for her. She was a big buxom woman. She had opened a laundry. She was a freight-wagon driver. She had another business; I can&#8217;t remember what it was.   JF: Are you thinking of somebody here in Knoxville, or is this a character?  LUH: No, that is a character from the American West. I cannot call her last name right now. But anyway, so Black Mary was an entrepreneur and a small business woman. Bitty Mason was a small business woman. We don&#8217;t call them--. So we were celebrating them in spite of all of these obstacles. Focus. Diligence. Moral correctness. [Singing] &#8220;And the wheels went round and round, oh, and it came out sunshine.&#8221; OK, you know? I guess in response to your question more succinctly, I am saying that the things that we were saying were truth, and enlightenment. We were saying, here is why such-and-so happened. Here is what was done about it. And yeah, you get angry when you realize how things were. But the point of it was, &#8220;And we stand tall today, and you stand tall because you are somebody, you are from something.&#8221; There were libraries, libraries in Africa. Scrolls were burned, but the libraries were there. There was culture that was developed.  JF: What were reactions from the black community in Knoxville like to Carpetbag Theater in the 70s?  LUH: I think it was mostly welcoming. I know one time we were&#8212;. When was that when we did that, I was trying to remember, maybe that was the 80s. In the 70s, in the early days. Think, think, think, think. Alright, at Knoxville College. Carpetbag Theater was doing street theater. There was the jazz festival, the Duke Ellington Festival. Carpetbag Theater published a book; Bottomfishing is an anthology of short stories written by Wilmer F. Lucas who was the founder of Carpetbag. He was the anchor person, and Aisha and I, we were, well Aisha and that crew, they were writing. A lot of poetry and that sort of thing. So there were places, the writer&#8217;s workshop, I was trying to remember the specific name of the writer&#8217;s workshop. Garland Thompson, who is a notable playwright and director in New York, Garland was down here as the guest clinician for the writer&#8217;s workshop. And women like Viney Burroughs were coming, we brought in internationally recognized artists in their field and in their genre who were coming down and doing training workshops and master classes with people. Oh gosh, so many, so many, so many. [Pause]. We created an incubator for ourselves and for others yet to come, and that has been the focus. Then the road company evolved out of trying to finance our programs here. The &#8220;Show What You Know Festival,&#8221; earlier than that, we would have summer plays for children to come see every summer.   We had the first youth--. We were sitting in the office across the street, the back side of the campus of Knoxville College. We were in that building once for a time, and we were sitting around kind of regrouping, it was another planning stage, time for new ideas. We looked at each other and said, &#8220;You know what, we do this for a living, don&#8217;t we?&#8221; &#8220;Uh huh.&#8221; &#8220;You reckon we ought to be making summer jobs for somebody, so they can have some experience in this kind of work?&#8221; So we had the first summer youth troupe. There were programs that had teenagers that were fourteen and up able to have summer jobs, and they would find businesses who would bring them on. So it was like little internships. Parks and Recreation hired school kids, and so we said well, send us some. The kids created work. Well, this first one, one of the first ones [was] Peter Holland. [He] has written children&#8217;s plays and he is a musician, and we did his play, &#8220;The Story Tree.&#8221; I think I directed that one, and we actually got to do that one at the Knoxville Zoo for a little while, and that was something we experimented with one summer. I think that I would like to see a shape of the youth program come together that we might have another opportunity to do something similar. But that was their work, that was their work.   JF: So Carpetbag Theater was breaking a lot of new ground with the kinds of program they were doing and performances.  LUH: I imagine so, because when we were having the Youth Theater Festival, we would bring in people locally, it was a time we would really try and identify and have workshops for the children. Storytelling, dance, other movement, drumming [drums on table], drumming, drumming. I am trying to remember what the specific title was for that particular workshop because the kids helped create a song called, &#8220;Who is telling my story?&#8221; They contributed lyrics to the song. It is a neat song. It goes, [singing]:    &#8220;Who is telling my story? Are they telling it right?   Who is telling my story? Are they telling my life?   Are they telling my generations the truth about the way things are?   From L.A. to South Africa, my brothers and sisters are scarred.   That&#8217;s why I am asking you, who is telling my story? Are they telling it right?  Who is telling my story? Are they telling my life?   Do they know my music? The way I like to move?   Do they know why I do what I do? Do they know how I choose?   I am asking you who is telling my story?&#8221;    But my favorite verse out of them, I think we wrote about 6 verses to that one, or something. The last one goes [singing]:
&#8220;Are they calling out my heroes? Men and women and strong?
Are they calling their names out clearly? One by one.&#8221;    And then I would vamp on the guitar, and then I would say, &#8220;Who is telling my story?&#8221; And I would point to a child and they would say, &#8220;My mama!&#8221; &#8220;Who is telling my song?&#8221; &#8220;Mr. So-and-so!&#8221; &#8220;Who is telling my story?&#8221; &#8220;Frederick Douglass!&#8221; &#8220;Who is singing this song?&#8221; &#8220;Such and so-and-so!&#8221; And we would go around and as they would get ideas there would be family members and people of note that have already been achievers, that have already been gone, and we would come on and we would finally have the last chorus and we say [singing], &#8220;Who is telling my story? Are they telling it right? When I am telling my story, I feel power in my life.&#8221; You know? What is radical about that? Nothing. The children were learning to look and see that you come from--. This is who you are! This is what you come from. You are of good stock. Stand up tall. Pull your britches up. Snug that belt. Walk straight. And learn those time tables [laughter]. That was, we were just telling them, all of it was simple history, cultural transmission, so anyway, that is how it felt in my perception of doing things. So we would have songs and I loved doing them. So I came up with the melody and the arrangement and would invite the kids to contribute little ideas and we would look at what we were talking about.   In another year, that was a workshop one time where we had a contract out of which &#8220;Who is telling my story?&#8221; was born. We were visiting--. We had kids at the Knoxville College site in the dance studio there and the K&#8217;umba Watoto Dancers were happening. There were some, Malika Guthrie was running a dance workshop. Malika had been teaching previously so I am only reporting when that got--. I don&#8217;t know that was the year that the K&#8217;umba Watoto Dancers was born. You would have to check with them for clarification and how all of that fit together. I want to believe that that incarnation of the dance troupe was born in that year that we were doing that workshop and was a spinoff from coming. But I know Malika was teaching West African dance before that and I think it just happened that we were occupying the space at the same time and coordinated the programs at the same time for this.   Then Adora Dupree [-Awoyomi], who has passed on, and I were going out to centers a little bit, too, and working with the children and so on. But another year the summer youth troupe created a piece called, &#8220;Call Me By My Name,&#8221; and Linda Parris-Bailey wrote this song, [singing] &#8220;Somebody is calling me by my name. Somebody is trying to think we are the same.&#8221; And it goes on to talk about, [hums] it talks a little bit about teenage angst, about people making up nicknames or not learning to speak the name, like choosing not to use the name, and it says, [singing] &#8220;Everybody, nobody, somebody call me by my name. Everybody, somebody, nobody calls me by my name.&#8221; It goes on through this whole thing, it kind of deals with social politics in middle school age and trying to not be bullied and trying to get these (3:10:56) to pull together. But I am saying those lyrics in those songs were born out of dilemmas that we gleaned from talking to the children, getting them to talk out loud and think out loud about what they are doing.  So the kids created a script through the collaborative process that we use. There is a system of collaborative development where there are phases of input, and as it moves closer and closer to needing to be in performance format, then it shifts into the more conventional structure of being directed. There is a time when the input becomes minimal to nil and now we take what we have collected, what we have decided is valuable, and shape it. And shape it. So someone scripts it, usually Linda, she is our resident playwright. So someone scripts, creates the script, and then we shape the characters out of all of this full immersion of interactive, collaborative play-making. Lots of different ways. One approach was to have people go off and be writers independently and come back and try and knit it together. Another time we had a play where we would establish a scenario and then role play improvisationally and go back and look at what was created and see what needed, what was going on, let&#8217;s go try this a different way. So lots of different ways of getting at it.   The show that is opening tonight on the 12th of August in 2010 in the greenhouse at the Botanical Garden on Wimpole Street, &#8220;Swopera: Spoken Word Opera,&#8221; the storyline weaves into spoken word poetry being delivered at different phases, different times and different ways. A family finds themselves having to manage the business after the will, after they have inherited the family restaurant. They go about the business of figuring out what to do about that. The sister that had gone off into the world to make her living and the one that stayed and anchored everything and helped mama and daddy through all the hard work while they were listening at her sing praises to the sisters. So it is good drama included, good comedy in ways, and lots of good poetry going down. It is &#8220;Swopera.&#8221;  [Recorder is turned off, then back on].  JF: A lot of the names of people you have mentioned who were involved in these projects in the 70s and 80s, they are women, and I was wondering if there were projects that came up or initiatives that came up that dealt specifically with issues important to women, things like beauty, women&#8217;s health, domestic violence, poverty and family survival. Does anything stick out in your mind? Especially coming out of the 70s when there was &#8220;Ms.&#8221; magazine and there was this sort of national women&#8217;s movement. Give me a sense of what is going on amongst the women that you are hanging out with and doing these great projects with.  LUH: Well, I don&#8217;t know. &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221; was one of the early pieces and oh, what is that style called? &#8220;Everyman&#8221; is the style of drama. Is it allegorical? Where there are types, the different characters represent a type. Sometimes the characters are named literally, Man, or Hope [laughter].  JF: OK.  LUH: I am trying to think if that is, I can&#8217;t remember the form, I have not used the formal terminology in a while so I am rusty.   JF: That is alright. Is that kind of like &#8220;Godot&#8221; kind of stuff?  LUH: Well &#8220;Godot&#8221; is a little bit different than what I am trying to communicate. It may well be that genre.  JF: I mean that theater style.  LUH: But no. &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221; was out there--.  JF: Tell me about this.  LUH: Terry Collins was the--.  JF: What year was this? Do you remember, around?  LUH: Around, let&#8217;s see if I can ping it. I was not married. I was still in school. Alright, that puts it in the 70s [laughter]. I did not get here until &#8217;72, so it is someplace probably between &#8217;74 and &#8217;76 [laughter].  JF: OK.  LUH: It was the age of the red van. You can ask Linda.  JF: Age of the red van?  LUH: Yes.   JF: Is this a personal joke?  LUH: Well, it was our mode of transportation. We had a red van [laughter]. And we had a blue van after that that had a cylinder switch that was flipped and we kept a broom handle in it so we could lift up the hood and pop something back in place under there, which is not fun to do in the West Virginia high mountains on the way to Pipestem, West Virginia, thank you very much. But even that was not as bad as the green Volvo when we were headed out to Whitesburg, Kentucky, and had to push the Volvo up the side of the mountain, and of course we got to the top of the mountain and what is at the top? The AAA office. Nobody was there so it didn&#8217;t matter, but it did not help morale [laughter]. Oh, gosh. I tell you. And being a nursing mom on the road, ha ha. Boy, that will put a different spin on feeling like somebody is calling you a cow [laughter]. If you are exhausted from the road and you fall asleep and don&#8217;t wake up early enough to get all your milk expressed, because see, I used to pack up the baby and a babysitter and we hit the road. My deal was I would split half my earnings with the babysitter and take care of all of their expenses and per diem, and they only had to watch the kids while I was onstage. I did not have them to leave them or give them to somebody else. So at that time like I said I was a nursing mom, so my husband--.  JF: When were your kids born?  LUH: Well let&#8217;s see. My older son was born in 1989. He is 21 now, and my baby boy was born in 1992. The baby is leaving for MTSU [Middle Tennessee State University] this year so I am about to become a serious empty-nester. My older has decided to take a break from college, he is a junior at UT right now, he has junior standing at UT [University of Tennessee], but he decided not to take classes this semester. He wants to go into the Marines.   JF: So was &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221; before you started having kids?  LUH: Yeah, it was before I even thought about being married. It was when I was still on KC [Knoxville College] campus. I remember it was in the Laurel Theater, we did it in the Laurel Theater and there was scaffolding and all kinds of stuff because there was like a little trapeze thing. Because in the circus and in the carney [style], there was a carney feel to it, and so there were, what is the lady, the bearded lady, and the one that was the hugely obese person, and just a lot of--. Like I said, we had a section of scaffolding up so there was somebody that was swinging on a trapeze.   JF: Did you have actual circus performers involved in this, or were you mimicking the bearded lady and the--.  LUH: No, we were mimicking. And all the gymnastics, we were learning [laughter].   JF: Wow, that is commitment. That is commitment to your craft.  LUH: But it was amazing. That was one of the times--. We took &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221; to one of the prisons. We were just doing lots of different things.  JF: What was &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221; about? What was the--.  LUH: How do I synopsize &#8220;Circus Maxim&#8221;? You know there are the &#8211;isms that come at you, and then there are the &#8211;isms that you are. It was kind of a look at confronting life angst and so if you have got obesity and &#8220;size-ism&#8221; I guess is the &#8211;ism nickname for that one. And you have got--. It reminds me a little bit of Commedia Dell&#8217;Arte where there is the ing&#233;nue and the so-and-so and the soldier, so there are all these types of characters. So each of the several circus characters were a type of social entity that had to cope with the paradigms and such from the era. So when you hear their voices and their voices and their interactions with each other, they are working through coping strategies and naming what society is doing, limitations. Then in the end, they choose life. They choose to like who they are. They choose to continue to be a community, which has in it the notion that people network, sharing skills, using resources from within the circle, and make a life together, and survive. There is probably stuff in there that I am not saying that Linda would find very important, too. that is one of the pieces that Linda Parris-Bailey wrote. Those were things that stood out for me. That is what I recall now.   I am sure I told you about all this, I figured out what gray hair was about, right? I didn&#8217;t tell you? Girl, all that stuff we used to have in our brains in the gray matter, it is leaking out. Why do you think your hair turned gray? It is gray matter, it is leaking right on out. But anyway, all my stuff is about gone because I am nearly