Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  My name is Tanya Finchum. I am with the Oklahoma State University  Library and we are doing an oral history project called    Women of the  Oklahoma Legislature, Past and Present.    And today is January 26,  2007 and we are going to be talking with Betty Boyd who was in the  House of Representatives from 1991 to 2000. Is that correct?  Yes, elected in 1990 but actually started serving in 1991.  And finished in     The end of 2000.  Okay. So we are going to get started. Tell us a little bit about your  hometown, your family, how you got started.  Well, you are in my hometown  Tulsa, Oklahoma . I am one of those  rare oldies who was born in Tulsa, not very far from the OSU   Oklahoma State University -Tulsa campus, as a matter of fact.  Actually, I was born in a house close to Owen Park in 1924. That has  been a while, if your math is good, you can tell. I lived there, was  married, and continued to live there after I was married for a while with  my husband. Then we built a home not far from that location. So now I  live way out east but I have always lived in Tulsa and always intend to  as far as I know. (Laughs)  Do you have siblings?  No. I am an only child and I grew up in a house with all women. I was  not real sure there were any men around (Laughs) until I got married. I  had my mom. I did not have dad from the time I was just about a year  5  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  old. I did not know him at all. A mom, an unmarried aunt, a  grandmother and I all lived together in a great big, two story house  where I was born. So I did not really miss a person because I did not  know my dad. I missed a lot of father and daughter banquets but had a  great life, a great time   probably did not do as many things as most  families do because there was no man around. So, I never went camping  out. In fact, I still consider camping out going barefoot in the Holiday  Inn (Laughs). So there were lots of things I did not do, but there were  many things I did do.  I guess you learned how to cook with that many women in the house.  No, except that was my major in college, university. Well, you see, I did  not have to. My grandmother was the best cook in the whole wide world,  I am quite sure. My mother, who was a first and second grade teacher all  of my young life and older life too as well, was a good cook and my  Aunt Margaret was a professional nutritionist and dietician so why  should I cook? But home economics was always one of my favorite  subjects and when I went to the university I intended to get out and edit  Better Homes and Gardens because I took journalism and home  economics in combination which is kind of unusual or was then. I got  married instead. Handsome ole    Bill Boyd came along and I got married  and that was that. (Laughs)  But you did graduate, correct? From Iowa?  No. I do not have a degree. I am one of those   well I do have a degree, I  forgot. My husband was a B-24 pilot in World War II. He flew fifty  missions out of Italy when he came home. After the war, we had been  married for about four years when he had polio. He and our daughter,  who was about a year old, had it. So I did not finish school. I was really  sort of a caregiver, although he got around rather well. He had been  totally paralyzed but came out of it pretty well and got along pretty well.  But anyway, I did not go back to school but Bill did and in 1950, he  graduated from the University of Tulsa. And that was their first year of  having a PhT degree and I got one. It was called,    putting hubby  through.    (Laughs) But I do not have an official degree. With all the  varied careers I have had, people always think I have one I guess  because now you need a degree to have the jobs I had, but you did not  then. As long as you could do the job that was all that was important.  What was your early career?  Well, as a Momma. But my first real career was as a television  broadcaster in Tulsa which I started in winter of 1955, in December. I  started with a CBS affiliate here  Tulsa, OK  and stayed there ten years  6  Finchum  Boyd  as an on-air broadcaster. Then I moved to the ABC affiliate in Tulsa for  a better job as their community relations and for a while promotion  manager   mostly community and public affairs. I was still on the air. I  worked there for fifteen years. So I had a twenty-five year career in  television in Tulsa and it was wonderful. I left television because the  marketing director job for the   well it was called Vo-Tech then, but it is  now the CareerTech system in Tulsa, became open because a lady  retired. I applied because I had always wanted to work in education. My  mom and all four of my old-maid aunties were school teachers and I  always kind of wanted to do that   but not really because I did not want  to go in a room at eight in the morning and not come out until four in the  afternoon. But being a marketing director for a school district sounded  wonderful because I could be a gypsy and I had been a gypsy in  television. So I became their marketing director and stayed there until  somebody asked me to run for the Oklahoma legislature, and I did. I was  elected and stayed ten years in the legislature. Now I do consulting work  and I am on lots of boards and things like that.  How did your television career help you with your political career?  Well they either love you or they hate you. I do not know whether that  jives very well or not. (Laughs) I am quite sure that name recognition  had something to do with my first year of being elected. I do not think it  had anything to do with it after that. It was, in a way, a hindrance  because I had trouble walking. That is one of the big ways you get  known if you are running for political office is to run and knock on  doors or walk and knock on doors. When I would do that, they did not  want to talk about politics. Even after I had run several times, they did  not want to talk about politics by and large. Right off the bat, I would  knock on a door and they would say,    Oh I know who you are. You are  Betty Boyd. You have been on television. Well how is Bob Hower?  How is   ,    and they would ask about all of the personalities with whom  I had worked with locally and some of the folks I had interviewed not  locally. I could not get anywhere walking and so in that regard it was not  a help. And like I said jokingly, they either love you or they hate you  and they are very free to tell television personalities about anything they  do not like about you in public or in private or anywhere else.  I really do not know any other occupation except maybe politics that  does that but I will say that television and the media kind of steeled me  and made my skin just a little thicker to any criticism. I understood that  everybody has a point of view and it is not always going to be favorable,  although usually it is. I never did have any trouble talking on my feet or  thinking on my feet in a debate when I was in the House and that makes  a great deal of difference, I believe, because some of the obviously  brightest people in our legislature are not very good on their feet. If they  7  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  can have it here  gestures to her hands  so they can read every word of  it, they are alright but when you have to get up there and answer  somebody in debate or explain something to a committee, I think it is  easier if you have been used to explaining it to the folks at home. So in  that way, I think it helped. Otherwise I do not think it makes any  difference.  I think the biggest thing about being in politics and being successful is to  have some common sense and I am not sure where that comes from or  when it comes. I also had an advantage in that my children were grown  by the time I got into politics and my husband was not retired but he was  almost retired so he could be in Oklahoma City with me almost  whenever he wanted to. I was not like a woman traveling   like a  traveling salesman being away from home and a family four days a  week. I do not see how the fellows do it or want to do it, the young ones  in particular. Also, since there were no term limits when I started, there  were before I finished down there, you could start older and stay as long  as you wanted to probably.  How old were you when you started?  Well, I do not know. Do the math, 1990 from 1924.  In your mid-sixties     I was not very young but that was not a factor, you know, as long as you  have the energy for it. I could still do it. As long as you have the energy  for it, the interest in it and if you like people and do not mind listening to  them. There is a lot more to being a legislator than getting up and  talking. You also have to listen and that was my job on television. I was  an interviewer. I did not do news. Women did not do news when I  started and I would not have wanted to anyway because I would not  want to ask you something that you do not want to tell me. I only want  to ask you things that make you pleased to tell me or something you  wish to promote or an idea you want to get out. But I do not want to ask  you something that you do not want to tell me.  And if I had, for instance, when I was in television, for a few years, one  of the big things was trying to ratify the ERA  Equal Rights  Amendment . Obviously there were two very strong points of view on  this, but I would not have opponents on the same show   ever. I would  have one on one day and one the next day or soon. I did not want people  yelling at each other. I do not like yell radio or television. I want them to  inform me about something and let me get my own ideas from it and  draw a point of view. But controversy in the media is not my thing. I  don   t like to do it, won   t do it, and don   t like to listen to it. So, I think  8  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  developing common sense, developing listening in the media probably  did help me although I kind of got a dose of that being a mother to two  children (Laughs) and a wife to one husband for almost sixty years  before he died. So this was neat.  What was it like the first day you were sworn in?  Have you ever seen great mountainous goose-bumps? That happened.  You know you have to be sworn in every time you are elected and in the  House, you are elected every two years. So every two years I wore a  nice warm sweater and held onto myself because I almost never walk  into that House chamber now still and do not feel   oh, oh   those  goose-bumps. And when I watch the President of the United States  giving a speech, I just get   you know, I am a patriotic junkie I guess  and those things just make me feel extremely excited.  The first time I was sworn in, my family, well each time, my family, my  husband, my children and part of my grandchildren were there and I was  always sorry my mother was not. Mother and I were extremely close  since no daddy was present or around to take any of her attention. She  never remarried and so Mother and I were very close and she had great  expectations for me, almost none of which I ever lived up to and I  thought,    Now, Mother would like this.    But then I thought maybe she  was somewhere up in there anyhow but I still get goose-bumps when I  go into the Capitol, always. Always. I like it.  What about the first time you presented a bill on the floor?  Well, let me think. I will have to think. I remember my first debate but I  cannot recall my first bill. I do not have any trouble getting up in front of  people and talking, never have. I have, in addition to doing the television  work, one of the things I did, and still do is a lot of public  speaking   always have. I do not have any trouble getting up in front of  people and talking. Yes, I get the jitters once in a while, every time  really, but it does not last. I would lose my breakfast every morning  when I first started television. Well, I got over that. But you still kind of  get excited. The adrenalin goes. So I am sure I was anxious but to be  honest, I cannot tell you what my first bill was.  I can tell you what a lot of them were later but I did not present a bill  very early in my career. I have always thought when you go into a new  job you need to listen and learn what you are doing before you just start  blurting out that you know it all. So, for a while I sat and listened. The  procedure, although I knew Roberts Rules of Order, the procedure was  very different. The House rules are different from the Senate rules even.  I did not know the path of a bill. I did not know what happened to a bill  9  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  except that somehow it became law. And so I sat and listened for quite a  while. I am sure I was not frightened of presenting a bill to a committee  or on the floor. And I know I had a good experience the first time  because I never lost a bill, ever, in my ten years. I never lost a bill in a  committee or on the floor. Never. Now, I had one vetoed by one of our  governors. Ticked me off (Laughs) but that is the only one that did not  get passed and signed that I ever ran and I ran a lot of them once I got  started.  I do remember my first debate   it was in favor of parents as teachers. It  was someone else   s bill but I thought,    My goodness if we teach our  young people everything except how to be parents why would anybody  not like this measure?    Well, there were some people with very different  ideas about this bill thinking the government would take away their  children and all of this kind of junk   which I knew better than. And that  was my first debate. But I was kind of used to debating those on the  other side of the aisle. My husband and I were in different political  parties and he was very active in his and I was not as active in my party  but just as active as a legislator. So I did not have any trouble debating it  but I do not remember what it was, the first one. I can tell you what a lot  of the others were.  Well did you chair any committees?  Yes. My first year there I was vice-chair of the large Education  Committee which includes the three branches: Common Education,  CareerTech, and Higher Education. Then beginning my second term I  was chair of the Common Education Committee, part of Education, and  I was always on Appropriations and Budget. I was not chair but I was on  the Appropriations and Budget small committee for Education and total  committee, General Appropriations Committee. And I chaired the  Community and Family Relations Committee and also served on the  Public Safety Committee and Public Health Committee all the time I  was down there in addition to the Appropriations Committees.  Were you the only woman on some of them?  I was almost the only woman in the House when I first went. There were  five ladies in the House when I was first elected and I was the only one  from outside the immediate Oklahoma City area. And I used to wonder  why until I thought about it a minute. Younger women, I think I said this  earlier   younger women with children do not want to go away and do  that. Well, I was not in that boat and it was easy for me   we kept an  apartment year round in Oklahoma City because with my husband   s  polio it was a little difficult. We needed to be on the ground floor of an  apartment. We needed not to move furniture back and forth very often  10  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  and this kind of thing so we kept an apartment there and I lived there  four days a week. But women who did not live there did not want to run  for office at that point. There were two senators from the Tulsa area  when I went into the House but no other members in the House.  Numbers still have not grown very much but I understand why. Unless a  woman is my age, they really do not want to leave home that much or  that often and     well if they want to, I guess they should. I think you  can have a career and a family. I did all my life, really. But I think the  conditions have to be right for you to do that. A   you have to have an  understanding husband and B   you have to have children who do not  mind being in a fish bowl if you are in a public career because they are,  always. It does not matter if they scratch their head wrong. Somebody  says something about it, you know and maybe the children do not like it  so you need to work that out. You also have to consider your time and  what is it that you do in your career. I never did have a career that if I  needed to be at a ballgame to watch my son get clobbered or to be at a  swimming meet that my daughter was in or watch a play that either one  were in. Because they both did that a lot or if my husband wanted me to  do something with him, like cook dinner, (Laughs) I needed to be  available. My careers allowed me to do that except for very specified  periods. I had to be at the television station when I had to be there.  And of course when I started television there was no videotape so you  did everything live. I got up many, many Saturday nights, got in my car,  drove down from my house to Channel 6 which was probably about, not  far, three miles away, something like that, went in, did a minute  commercial, got back in my car, went home at 10:30 at night. I did this  because everything was live. Christmas morning was never celebrated  until noon at my house because I had to be on television in the morning  and had to do it live. Thanksgiving, same thing. You just had to be there  live. But those times I knew about, so it was not like the boss suddenly  said,    Oh, you need to be here,    or,    This job runs from 9:00 to 5:00 and  you sit there all day.    I have never had a job like that. So that is why I  am very cavalier about saying that you can have a job and a family and  do them both just fine. Maybe not superbly but I do not do many things  superbly. That does not really wig me out. But I think you can. I think I  did. At least everyone survived me, even the republicans. (Laughs)  Do you think being a woman was a bigger issue than your age or age a  bigger challenge?  Neither.  Neither?  11  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  No. One of the most frequently asked questions from the media to me  when I was in the legislature      Media : Are you playing in the golf tournament this weekend at  whatever  golf course ?   Boyd : No.   Media : Did they not ask you? Is it because you are a woman?   Boyd : No. It is because   if I hit something and go chase it myself you  are going to have to send me to the funny farm. I do not play golf.  That is why I did not go. But that was it. Then for a while, this did not  go on for very long, I would drive into the parking lot down at the  Capitol into the House parking lot where I had been assigned a spot and  the nice, nice, wonderful sergeants    I just think the world of every  sergeant that has ever worked for the State Capitol of Oklahoma. They  are great people but they would come up very apologetically and say,    I  am sorry M   am. This lot is just for legislators.    I would say,    Yes, I  know.    And they would say,    Well are you someone   s wife? Are you a  legislator   s wife?    No. I am a legislator. Because they were not used to  seeing women so if that is a drawback I guess that was it. I do not think  anyone knew or thought or cared how old I was. It is how energetic you  are. And the Oklahoma Today magazine and Tulsa People were nice  enough to give me the award late on in my career of having been the  most productive legislator from Northeast Oklahoma. So, I have a lot of  energy. I do not think anybody thought about the fact that I was in my  seventies a good bit of the time I was down there, if not all. (Laughs)  You put a lot of us to shame, I am sure. (Laughter)  No, no, no. Whatever I do, I generally go at it and try to do it. I wish I  could please everybody but my Momma told me a long time ago that if  you do not want to have anyone disagree with you go sit in a closet, shut  the door, and do not come out. Otherwise, people are going to disagree.  Learn to deal with it.  Going into office, did you have any particular goals in mind that you  wanted to definitely accomplish?  I did not have any agenda which is different than goals. Many people go  into the legislature with a preconceived agenda      I want to do this.     Now yes, there were things that I wanted to get done. Basically areas in  which I wanted to do well. I did not have anything in particular   no, not  in mind. I wanted to do something good for education. I wanted to do  12  something good for the disabled and I was able to do both of those  things. I wanted to do something good for the health of the people in  Oklahoma and in the country if I could, as a trickle down effect. I was  able to pass legislation in all those areas that have proven to be pretty  successful. So, I had goals but I just wanted to do well and those were  my areas of concern.  I did not know anything about banking and finance regardless of the fact  I told you I served on the Appropriations Committee. My math is okay.  My husband kind of laughed when they put me on that committee but  that is okay, what did he know? I cannot balance a checkbook but with  other people   s money I do pretty well. I did not know about banking and  finance. I did not know anything about agriculture. For having been and  being a native Oklahoman I knew nothing about the oil business so I did  not know much about the energy business. I had lots to learn because we  would get bills and have to read them and vote on them in all of those  areas. So I did not want to try legislation in any of those areas but I did  know something about these other things and I knew I wanted to do  something, if I could, that would help in each of these areas.  Where we are today, OSU  Oklahoma State University -Tulsa, I was the  House author on making this OSU-Tulsa. That was a BIG undertaking  because the rural areas fought us like crazy. They were all afraid we  were going to take away from the institutions in their areas. Well as a  matter of fact, NSU  Northeastern State University -Broken Arrow got  started because of OSU-Tulsa   s coming in here and we had to have, you  know, some other things. And Rogers State benefited because of OSU-Tulsa.  So that was a real pleasure for me to work on that and it was  tough. I have never had more meetings or more bill changes in my life  than on that one and I was not the principal author, the author was in the  Senate, but I was the principal House author and you have to sell it in  your own chamber, of course. And so that was a tough one.  For Common Schools I started the Reading Sufficiency Act which has  brought our reading levels up considerably from where they were. I  think they have done a little back sliding in the last few years but that is  strictly local control so it is up to the local folks what they do with what  we put in place. The Teacher Preparation Commission, I was very  instrumental in getting that started and keeping it sustained. And we  have so many teachers today who have the national award in education  because, I think, of the Teacher Preparation Commission and because  with their formation, the Department of Education suddenly hyped up  their efforts. You know you get some ancillary affects from whatever  you do. I started the fund for the breast cancer research and services to  uninsured and underinsured women which is still going as the Breast and  Cervical Cancer Commission now, and I serve on that. I was really  13  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  pleased about that and just really pleased to carry the legislation that  helped get it started.  I was very helpful in several other things as far as school matters are  concerned. Nepotism on school boards, funding for textbooks   lots of  things you would be really interested in because you and everybody else  in the state of Oklahoma would be affected by health and education  issues and that is why I liked to do it. It was my bill that set up the  Department of Rehabilitative Services separate from DHS  Department  of Human Services . It was a step-child under the Department of Human  Services because DHS is so big. The Department of Rehabilitative  Services needed to be by itself, the agency. So we finally got that set up  and it is working beautifully. Everybody is happy and DHS is glad, I  think that they do not have all that responsibility and the department  itself is doing well. And people who need those services are getting  them. So, all these things were fun.  You must have had to get up at four o   clock in the morning and stay up  till midnight to get all of this done.  I read fast.  That is a skill that helps.  Books are my thing, always have been and still are in my retirement  which I have not done. Retire is not in my language. (Laughs)  Can you describe a typical day from sun up to sun set?  Now?  No, then.  Then?  When you were in office.  Oh.  You lived there you said.  Yes, I usually went down on Sunday night just because I did not want to  get up quite as early. I am a late stayer-upper. I still do not go to bed  until two or three in the morning and I do not stay in bed late, but I do  not get up at six o   clock. When the rooster crows he might as well quit  that because I am not going to get up. But I am not a late sleeper either. I  14  did not want to drive to Oklahoma City particularly if I did not know  what the weather was going to be doing and I do not exceed the speed  limit although I sometimes come close. So I would go down on Sunday  night and stay in Oklahoma City on Monday through Thursday nights  because we did not have session on Friday until the last week or two.  Then, particularly because of my work on the Appropriations  Committees we had some Friday meetings. Usually though I would  come home on Thursday.  But the time I was down there, from Monday through Thursday, I would  be at the Capitol no later than eight o   clock and sometimes earlier than  that in the morning. I would read bills and look over material assembled  by our administrative assistants as they are called now, we called them  secretaries then, but they are wonderful and if you have a good one  which I was lucky enough to always have a real good one and as far as I  know there are not any bad ones but I always had good ones. They  would have all of your letters, all your correspondence, your telephone  calls from the Friday before there, and today they would have emails,  they did before I left too as a matter of fact. And I would go over those  and see if there was anything that needed to be returned right away.  On Monday, we did not have session usually until around noon so I had  all the morning on Monday to do that. On the other days of the week I  was there no, no, no     because we would have session usually at eight-thirty  so I had about thirty minutes to do this business. Then you go into  session and stay for however long you needed to and when you are  supposed to be in session I think you should be on that floor. Now, you  get called out a lot by people in the lobby wanting to visit with you  about their interests and why you should vote for or against it, and so  you take some time out there but you do not go any further than the  lobby. We did have our own ladies restroom which was just adjacent to  the chamber. First time in my life I had ever visited a restroom in a big  building like that I did not stand in a line but down there they made  things very convenient for you to be able to stay on the floor. And I do  not think you should be off that House floor when you are in session any  more than absolutely necessary. You are there to listen. Yes, you have  heard a lot of it before in committees if you happen to be on the  committee that heard that bill. If you do not, you need to hear what the  author of the bill says, what the debate is. You do not make up your  mind from the lobbyist out in the lobby and anybody is a lobbyist  whether they are paid or an advocate whether they are paid or not. You  make up your mind partly from that but you make it up mostly by what  is said by the members interested in it or against it on the floor.  So most of my day, then, was spent there. I did not ever go out for lunch,  if I could help it, because of parking and un-parking the car. Also, here  15  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  again, I had enough to do to answer phone calls during the lunch hour.  Most of us had a microwave in our office and we would do something in  the microwave which, by the way this aunt I mentioned real early on in  our talk that lived in the home where I did, or I lived in her home,  however that goes   the professional dietician, is the lady who  developed how to use the microwave in this country so I always patted  my microwave when I walked by it because it let me stay in the office  and eat (Laughs). But I would eat my lunch there and I know I sound  like       Oh, terrible,    I do not mean to and most everybody did this.  Now we had a few flakes that did not.  We had a few that were on the phone more than they were on the floor,  or they were gone. They may have been somewhere in the building, I do  not know but they were not there to vote and this kind of thing. I just  think you should not be gone most of your days. My days were spent  there. By five-thirty or six I would pack it in and leave, generally, unless  I had a committee meeting late and I would stay. There were nights  when I was there until midnight in committee meetings, particularly in  Appropriation events long toward the end of the session. But whatever  time I got off and went home, I got off and went home.  Any social life, like with other members of the House or Senate?  Well generally speaking there was an event in the evening. This is  another reason I did not get home until late. The events are important for  you to go to because this is where you can exchange ideas with senators  and members of the executive branch, there is that branch that we do not  ever want to forget about too, because the ultimate end is that bill has to  be signed within that branch. So you can sort of socialize and do some of  your business talking at the events that were sponsored by companies  and the like. We had sandwiches and something to drink, soft drink or  not, which ever suited you, generally both. So you could     nobody has  to get drunk unless they want to. But at these events or dinner,  sometimes a bunch of us went out to dinner together and this is where  you do your off-the-cuff talking and a lot gets done there amazingly  enough. It is not just a social event. Oh, there were parties too, fun  things to do but it was all fun to me, all fun.  Was it usually a mix with the women and the men?  Oh yes. In fact when the women of the House would get together, and  we did this just for orneriness sometimes, when we would all get  together in a little bunch going,    Yep, yep, yep,    we would sometimes  not talk about anything. It was sort of like the umpire and the baseball  players getting together or the manager running out looking like he is  really talking. And they are probably really saying,    Where are you  16  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  going for dinner.    (Laughs) The men would say,    What are they doing?  What are those women up to?    (Laughs) It was really   we did that for  orneriness some. But we women in the House did get together some. We  were not all in the same political party. That did not matter. We all got  together occasionally, not a lot, but occasionally. But like I said,  sometimes just for orneriness. (Laughs)  Was there time to develop any close social friends, I mean good friends  with the women, that you still stay in touch with or just no time really?  Not the kind of time that you would have if you were not doing this. I do  not think anyone hesitated to make good friends just because someone  was across the aisle from you, men and women friends. Some of my best  friends sat on the other side of the aisle from me. In fact, I was called the  best republican the democrats had while I was down there. But they did  not know that my husband was a republican, well they did know too.  All they had to do was look up when he was in the gallery and he would  be doing this  thumbs down gesture  and I would vote green and go   thumbs up gesture . (Laughs) But I did not vote just because it was a  party issue. I cannot say that I never did. If it really did not matter to me  and did not matter to my constituents and I was asked by my party to  vote just because it was a party issue and it turned out ninety-eight to  nothing anyhow, you know   I have done that so I cannot tell you I  never voted just because it was a party issue. I did, but only in matters  where I did not have strong feelings. I really do not care what party  gives a bill out, who is the author. I do not care what party they are in. I  care, I cared, and I still do    is it a good idea? Can we make it better by  taking something from over here and something from over here and  putting it together and making something really good out of it? That is  the only reason I cared where it was. What can we do with it? I really  did not care which party put it forth. I played wife a lot, too. Wives learn  early on to ask for a cashmere coat when all they want is a wool sweater.  You do that in the legislature. You ask for more than you can possibly  get and then you have something to bargain with but you do not give up  your ideals or ideas. You just play wife. It works. (Laughs)  Sometimes or all the time?  All the time, almost. Anyway, there are lots of little things you learn as a  wife and mother.  Did you have to share an office space?  Only my first two years. My own office was private but it was about as  big as this table  three feet by six feet  because I was brand new. But  mine was not any smaller than anyone else   s who was brand new. I do  17  Finchum  Boyd  not mean that, that is just the way that works. Seniority plays a great  part. I ended up on the fourth floor which is where everybody thinks is  the place to be. When I was in the legislature, the party I belonged to  was the majority party all the time. There are advantages to that. One of  them is what kind of office you get. But it was always adequate. I did  not spend a lot wad of time in there. My time was spent basically in the  chamber and in reading bills which I did in my office, of course. I tried  to read every single bill and that is a bunch. I at least read all of the new  language, all of the new amendatory language and all of the new  sections even if I did not read all of the current statute that was being  affected by it because we were not trying to do anything to that part. I  tried to read it all but when you have eight or nine hundred or a thousand  bills out of each chamber and of course they do not all get as far as the  floor because they do not all get out of committee. And if they do not  come out of committee then you do not see them unless you are on that  particular committee, you do not see them. But you still end up with   I  would say, three to five hundred bills out of each house that you need to  read, digest and know what they say and what they are going to do.  Some of them are two pages long and some of them are a 102 pages long  and it is legal paper so that is a bunch.  Well when you are preparing for a debate do you do your research  yourself or is that something your assistant would do?  No, I would say 99  of the time I did my own and I am assuming that  others did too. If I got a real hicky or if I needed something in a hurry  and I was on the House floor I might use the phone in my desk to call  my secretary/administrative assistant and say,    Can you look up  something for me real quickly?    This happened particularly when they  all got computers. When I first went in everybody did not have  computers, the Senate did but everyone in the House did not when I was  first elected. You would call a staff person. They do all of the bill  writing anyway. House and Senate members do not do their own bill  writing. They make suggestions and approve what has been written but  staff members do the writing because they are attorneys, or most of them  are, and it is all written in pretty legal language.  And I would not have known at all how to research a bill to see what  you needed to do to it to even make it the way you would like to have it.  Most everything that   well the cancer stuff was new, just because no  one had done anything about that. When we got the diabetes supplies  approved for insurance or insisted insurance companies carry this  coverage   that had to be researched. We did not have any legislation  about that so something that is brand new   it is different than something  that you are amending like the nepotism for school board members, for  instance. School board qualifications were already in statute but the fact  18  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  that you could not have anybody within the first or second degree related  to you if you were on the school board and they were working for the  school district   that was not in there so you had to have somebody  research,       well what is in there? What do we have to fix?    But that is  staff members doing the research and the writing and so forth and then  you have to read it to make sure they said what you wanted said, and  how. Also, you may need to ask,       okay, tell me why I would suggest  this? What is the rationale for my wanting to do this?    So, it is kind of  complicated.  Did you have the same administrative assistant the whole time?  No, no. Not because I was ornery or not because they got fired just  because, let us see. The first one I had moved to another agency. We got  along fine. I do not think either one of us was glad she moved. She just  moved for a better job frankly. Administrative assistants did not, I do not  know about now, get paid all that amount of money for the amount of  work they have to do. Also, it is kind of a part time job because unless  you are way up in the hierarchy you do not have a permanent one in the  summer time and you do not have a staff in your hometown. So when  they talk about all this great pay that Oklahoma legislators get remember  you have to do something about having somebody help you back home  when you get home to do all the secretarial work unless you can do it  yourself. I could do it myself, so I did. But I do not know what the guys  who had two left feet for hands for the keyboard   I do not know what  they did. I guess they hired somebody out of their own pocket because  we did not get money to do that. Then let us see, I had the same one then  for two sessions and a different for two sessions. She moved, the one I  had for two sessions that I just flat out adored, moved to Missouri. Her  husband built a retirement home up there and she was not old enough to  retire but she was narrow minded and went with her husband. Can you  believe that? (Laughs) Then I had another one for the rest of my time.  Well did any of your campaigns stand out as a more difficult one than  the others?  The last one.  The last one?  The last one   that I did not win. First time I was ever fired from a job in  my life. My husband had just died that spring in March and I was not  going to run. Not only because of that but, I do not know, that point in  my life how old was I? Let me see. That was six years ago and I am  eighty-two now. So add it up.  19  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Seventy-six.  I was not going to run again. I was not at my term limit yet. But when  Bill died I thought,    Oh shoot,    because he was my campaign manager  plus a great supporter, a great supporter and organizer. He was the  organized one of the Boyd family. I am kind of,    Let   s do it and get it  done,    and he was,    Let   s organize it, do it, and get it done.    And I got  talked into running again and that one was hard. That one was hard. I  spent more time, spent more money and lost, not by a lot, but it does not  matter if it is one vote or a 1001. And I live in a district that had  become   actually it is about even as far as registration for the two main  parties is concerned but it was and still is quite right-wing and I am  neither right-wing nor left-wing and so it is hard to please anybody. It  was difficult. It was difficult.  Did   in all, you ran five times, right?  I won five times and ran six.  How many of those were your opponent male verses female?  Oh, the person who beat me was a woman and she had run against me  before and lost. Other than that they were always men. The first time I  ran, because it was an open seat, there were five of us in the primary.  They were all men and I did not have to have a run-off which pleased  me with that many in the deal. But then the person who ran against me  in the general election was a man and two other times it was a man and  two times   three times it was a woman   no, once I did not have an  opponent, two times it was this woman who ultimately beat me. I told  her if she would just take a deep breath and sit down I was not going to  run again after that time she could have it but she did not believe me.  (Laughs)  Compare how much you spent in the first campaign and the last one.  Was there a major difference?  Oh.  In a ten to twelve year time span it probably did increase.  Well that is really not a fair comparison Tanya because the first time  anybody runs you do not get nearly as much money as you do if you are  an incumbent because a great deal of your money comes through, or  because of, lobbyists. They work for you to get money for you from the  people they work for. They do not give you the money, I do not mean  that, but the people that they represent do   which brings up another  20  Finchum  Boyd  point I want to mention to you in just a minute. So the first time I  probably spent, I really do not remember, but I would say something in  the neighborhood of, let us say, ten to twelve thousand dollars. The last  time, and it has gone up, way up, since my last time even six years ago.  The last time I spent almost sixty thousand dollars, so that is a lot of  difference and I spent almost all of it. I had a little bit leftover which I  gave to charitable organizations of my choice which is one of the legal  things to do with what you have leftover. But at that point I knew I was  never going to run for anything, there was nothing else I really wanted. I  never wanted to be in the Senate. I loved the rowdiness of the House  because of the numbers, 101 as opposed to forty-nine. You know, I liked  that, I liked the diversity rather than the rowdiness I should say, although  it was rowdy sometimes. I never aspired to anything higher than that, if  higher is a good word.  But the other thing I wanted to mention to you when we are talking  about money, never, ever, ever, did I promise anybody anything except  that I would do my best on everything, for a contribution. Never did I  say,    I will vote for you if I have money from your people.    No, nor did  it make any difference to me. I thought it was nice and I wrote them     thank you    notes but I do not believe in trading your ideals for dollars.  That is not statesmanship. It may be politics if you want to be loose with  the wording but I do not play semantics like that. And I do not think  most legislators do. I think there are some, obviously there are some.  There are some at the national level who got into a big huli-a-wap for  doing that and I am sure there are some locally who would say,    Well, X  gave me dollars. I will vote for X.    But not many, not many. It is,    Does  X have good ideas?    I do not know if whether they gave money to me or  not, not really although when you have to make out an ethics report, of  course, you do know who gives you money.  Is there any one particular memory that stands out in your mind?  Anything during those ten years where that is the first thing you think of  when you think about your time there?  Yes, yes. Several, but one in particular. I mentioned that the House was  rowdy. Anyone whoever sits in the gallery must think that none of us on  the floor know at all what is going on because we do talk to each other.  Mostly about what is going on but not necessarily. We do get up and go  out and talk to people in the lobby or to take a phone call or to go to the  ladies room or whatever. We do not seem to be paying any attention and  all even when people are debating which I think is wrong. I think you  ought to be quiet. I could have never been a nightclub performer because  I want you to hush if I am performing. If I am not performing you do not  have to hush but you hush when I am standing up there. (Laughs)  21  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  But one of my dearest memories was the day, the last day that I, and it  took several days worth of being on the floor, that I was presenting my  idea for funding the breast cancer fund to help underinsured and  uninsured women and set up a way for the general public to easily  contribute to this fund since it was a public fund and so forth. We had  one gentleman who, and I use that word loosely, who was pretty  difficult. Anytime he got up you knew you were going to be in for it.  And he got up to debate   well, first of all the Speaker said, after I had  explained the bill and what it was again because I had done this a couple  of days before, the Speaker asked, as always,    Does anyone wish to  debate against the bill?    And this one man held up his hand. Several  people spoke for the bill and they were very passionate about it and no  one moved or said a word. I have never seen that House chamber like it  was. In fact, Frosty Troy wrote a column about how he had, in all his  years in covering the House, he had never seen such attention to  anything as happened during the explanation of that bill and why we  needed it and why it was so important and why it was not just a  woman   s issue because it is not.  Everybody in the family is affected when a momma or sister or grandma  or aunt has breast cancer. At that time it was just a breast cancer bill. We  had not gone into the other part of it yet. But anyway, so, when the man  raised his hand and wanted to debate against it, the Speaker said,    Is  there anyone who wants to debate for it?    Almost every hand in that  chamber went up. They wanted to debate for this bill. That is a moment I  will never forget. All those moments   the quietness when the people  were talking and the fact of the support from everybody on both sides of  the aisle except for this one man, I will never forget that, never, ever.  And it was tough. I had even had some trouble partly in the background  and partly out in the public with some women on this because I was not  going to try to get the funds the way they wanted me to or they did not  want me to the way they thought I was going to. Well, I was not going  to do that anyway. But, it was tough and the support that I ultimately got  was just wonderful. I will never forget it.  I was going to ask about obstacles. Any come to mind that really stand  out as big obstacles in the whole process?  I do not think so.  Being a woman was not one?  Actually, no more than in any other business. I had toe-stumblers in  television. When I started in television there were not many women at  all, at least at this level. And I do not think there probably were very  many nationally. And everybody cannot be Barbara Walters you know.  22  It is like not wanting to be in the Senate rather than the House. I never  wanted to go to a larger television market than Tulsa. I had several  opportunities because Tulsa is a market that is a stepping stone in many  things and television is not the least among them. But number one I had  a husband. I was married and I was not about to run home and fling open  the door and say,    Honey, I got a wonderful job in Los Angeles. We are  moving.    Yeah, sure. He had his own business here. Also, I did not want  to audition for my job everyday.  Now, the obstacle in the House that was not true in television for me. I  did not have to audition for my job in TV everyday. I knew if I behaved  myself and did a good job and did what I was supposed to and got fair  ratings at least, I would still have a job. The obstacle in the House is that  you have to run every two years which means your term is only two  years long. The first year you are learning, now that is not true after your  initial term. But you are doing your work anyway that first year. You are  learning or you are doing your work in the House. But the second year if  you do not spend a good part of the time, and the session is only in the  spring remember, so if you do not spend a good part of your time at least  thinking about your campaign, if not actively doing some stuff about it,  you are way behind when June, July, and August comes around and you  have to suddenly do all of this campaigning. That is a big obstacle and I  do not know how to overcome it because I understand the idea of a  revolution every two years so you can throw all the old bums out and get  all new ones who will become bums the next year. I understand that but  I think that is an obstacle that I have no idea how to overcome but you  do, not necessarily by choice, spend a good deal of that second year you  are in office in the House thinking about or actively running for the next  time. And I would rather spend those two years entirely, even up till  November when the election is, doing my work for the House and  getting ready for the next year in the House not having to think about  door knocking, having to think about doing mail-outs, having to think  about the additional public speaking that you do or must do.  As far as being a woman, I am not now nor have I ever been a feminist,  per se, whatever your definition of feminist may be. Some people   s  definition is different than others but it never occurred to me that it was  not okay for women to work or that whatever they could do, they should  be able to do. All the women in my family worked, and my mother had  five unmarried sisters, and then Mother had no husband about a year  after I was born. They had been married several years before I was born.  What does that tell you? Whoops. My grandmother always worked  because my grandfather died long before I was born so all the women in  my family worked, always. So it was natural for me to think women  could work and raise a family and do the house work so that was not an  obstacle. In my mind being a woman was not an obstacle at all if you  23  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  chose the right things to do and at the right time in your life. It would  have been a terrible obstacle for me to have been in the House of  Representatives in Oklahoma City when my children were in school. I  just could not have done it. But I could be on television. I was right here  in town and except for that fifteen or thirty minutes of day that I  absolutely had to be at the station because I was on the air. I worked all  day there but I could leave and go to a meeting or leave and go to a  football game or leave and go to a play except for that one small window  of time and I could work around that. I do not think there were any  obstacles because I was a woman, really. I just never felt that way.  Nobody laughed at me. If they laughed at me at least they were polite  enough not to do it to my face. Yes, I had some arguments particularly  with one adversary as I mentioned but that was because he was a little  strange. He did not even like for us to have a Women   s Hall of Fame. I  thought,    Well ding dong, why not?    (Laughs) Oh well.  And another thing that someone had asked us to ask about too was about  attire. Did you notice if you changed the way you dressed when you went  to the legislature?  No, because I was in television and I had to dress up everyday and this is  one thing that I like about working. My mother taught school until she  was way passed retirement age. When the school system finally decided  at age seventy that she really could not teach anymore, because that was  the law I think, she did part-time teaching in schools for exceptional  children with learning disabilities and she could do that. So until my  mother was almost as old as I am now she got up every morning,  combed her hair, put on her make-up, got dressed nicely and went  somewhere to work. Well I have always done that and I still do. When I  went into television is when I changed my way of doing. I would not go  to the grocery store with curlers in my hair. You girls do not do that now  anyway but I would not do that. I do not think I did it much anyway but  I would not dress sloppy.  My mother would have a hissy fit if she knew I had trousers on today  but we dress differently now. But I do not wear jeans with my knees out  of the holes in them. I am too old a lady to be doing that but I do wear  jeans some but not to church, not downtown, not on the job. We could  not do that in the House but I could not do that on television unless I was  going to sit down all the time and you could only see me from the waist  up. So no, being in politics, being in public office did not change the  way I did anything as far as I can remember. I did not grit my teeth  anymore there than I had being on television or public speaking which is  the real love of my life, by the way.  I can tell. You do it very well.  24  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  No, I just talk a lot. (Laughs) And I serve on lots of boards now and you  have to get along with people and do stuff the same way.  Do you have a particular political philosophy?  Actually my political philosophy is   take the best that everybody has to  offer and see what you can do with it to make it better. My political  philosophy does not go along party lines. The reason my husband and I  are in different political parties is when we built our first home it was  not in Tulsa County. It was in the city of Tulsa but not in Tulsa County.  And that particular county never had anybody running locally that was  not a democrat so we were both registered democrats because we wanted  to have a say in the primary. That is not the only reason because I think  my family was all democrat and probably all of his were too at that  point. But we were both registered democrats.  When we moved back to Tulsa County we decided we would register in  different parties so we could go to both precinct meetings. We could  vote in both primaries and vote as we dog-gone well pleased in the  general election. We drew straws as far as I know. I do not know why  we decided, whatever decided us, it was right. He was basically the  republican. I am basically the democrat but neither of us, or he said he  did not and I did not follow him into the booth to see, but neither of us  ever voted a straight party ticket by marking the top. If you voted for  everybody under one column you still went down and marked and  looked to see if you were sure that was who you wanted to vote for or  you cherry picked back and forth. Now, my party probably would not  like to hear me say that having been an elected democratic official but  my political philosophy is   do the best you can for the people you live  around and the people around the state and the people around the  country and let it go at that. It does not matter which party   s name is on  it.  Did you have a mentor or role model, anyone that sticks out in your  mind?  Oh, a lot of people I have looked up to in these particular areas. We had  a lady here in Oklahoma who was from Owasso who was long before I  ever had any idea    I did not have any idea of running for office until  filing time the year I did and somebody called and ask me if I would do  it. But this lady   s name was Alene Baker and to me she was the  antithesis of the perfect person in public office because she was  intelligent. And if she did not know it, she would look it up. She was  never afraid to say,    I do not know. Let me find out for you,    which is  also a good political thing to remember. Alene had common sense out  the ears, just all over the place. And she was a lady with it. She did not  25  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  tell you that you owed it to her. She did not play the,    Poor, weeping  woman,    whatever that is. I do not know what that is. But she just  simply went about things in a common sense, good, ladylike but take  charge way and I looked up to this lady a great deal. I knew her through  the work of the March of Dimes which I did partly because of my  husband and daughter having had polio and I worked with the national  organization a long time as a volunteer. And I knew her in that way and  then I watched her as a member of the House and visited her down there  some and saw this pile of stuff she had to go through and read and  digest. And I was convinced that she did. So that is what I tried to do as  well.  Is she still with us?  No. She passed away a number of years ago. In fact her son was on our  city council. He is the mayor   s chief of staff, I believe. He was fire chief  for awhile. That was her son. So she mentored a lot of people. But in the  political field I would say that. In television, no, I did not have any  mentors because I did not know any women in television then. I just had  done so much public speaking and was asked to audition for this show  they had and the lady who was doing it moved and you know   I just fell  into it. (Laughs) I did not have any training in it which is obvious I  guess. But I did not.  You must have been doing something right.  Well my hubby had another saying: Be at the right place at the right  time but chance favors the prepared mind. I had done so much public  speaking I think I was ready.  Two more questions.  Okay.  What have you been doing since you left office?  Well, about the same thing. I am a member of the Silver Haired  Legislature and also on their executive committee which keeps me pretty  busy. And we take five issues each year where we prioritize what we  want to advocate for and attempt to have bills written, carried, and  attempt to have them passed having to do with seniors, of course. I serve  on the Tulsa-Tech School Board, the City-County Board of Health,  Friends of the Library in Tulsa board, and the Friends of the Library in  Oklahoma board, and Gridiron Trust of the Tulsa Press Club board.  So when do you sleep?  26  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  (Laughs) And my whole family, except for one   my oldest grandson  lives in Florida now just recently, but everybody else lives here, all my  grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and children so I spend a lot of  time doing that. But mostly I just enjoy serving on these boards and still  attend the Breast and Cervical Cancer Commission meetings. My  daughter is on that commission because we both have had breast cancer.  Are any of these children and grandchildren politicians in the making?  No, I do not think so. But I was not either. Somebody just asked me to  run. I am quite sure because they thought my name   the man who had  the seat ran for the Senate. He moved out of the district but he also  decided to run for the Senate so the seat was open and this happened,  sure enough, right at the end of June. And the first part of July was filing  time and I think probably they were looking for someone whose name  would not be totally strange to people. Although I had been away from  television for ten years I still continued to do commercials and did until  just the last couple of years, as a matter of fact, through my consulting  business. That is another thing that I have done. I do not do much of it  now. I have done consulting on public relations and marketing and  public speaking. I still do two, three or four speeches every week. It is  fun.  It is amazing actually.  And I do like to cook. So I do that.  You will have to share your recipes.  Well I did with my family for Christmas, as a matter of fact. I made an  old family cookbook for them with all my grandma   s, aunts   , mother   s  recipes. They thought it was spiffy. They are pretty good.  And the last question, this is a tough one but probably will not be for you  though. When history is written about you what would you like for it to  say?     We are glad she was here,    probably. I just want people to, and I know  they will not all   some of them will say,    Wow, I am glad she is gone.     But not many, I do not think. I do not think I have alienated that many  people, certainly never on purpose   well, once or twice. (Laughs) But I  want people, for whatever reason, it does not have to be for a specific  reason, to be glad I was here. I am glad I was here. I am still here    I am  not going    I am not ready to catch the bus. (Laughs)  Is there anything else you think we need to discuss?  27  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  I have worn you out now dear heart. No, not that I know of.  Any advice for women going into politics, we may have already covered  that.  Do not just do what you like, but like what you do is probably as good  advice as I could give. You know I have been able in my lifetime to do  things I never thought I would do. I was bashful, a part of the wall, all  through high school. I was much too young to be in high school when I  started   just barely thirteen in the tenth grade in Tulsa Central with  5,000 other children and lost because I was just a little girl. Real bashful,  always, very quiet   never had any idea of doing anything that I ended  up doing. Never had any training to do what I ended up doing. But I sit  down and stop to think about all the people I have been very privileged  to be with, to interview, celebrities and non-celebrities, the whole book  full of them and one of the first three women, in fact, to land on and  catapult from a aircraft carrier, knew two presidents and their first ladies  in the Capitol of our nation. For a little girl who was part of the wall  growing up on the northwest side of Tulsa, which is the wrong side of  town supposedly, with a single, school teacher mother   single when I  was growing up, married before I came along. But one income in the  family and that was of a school teacher during the depression years   to  get to do all those things   wow  So I want other people to be glad I was  here. I am glad I was here and could do all those things.  Future generations will be able to look back and read this and listen to  this and will be glad you were here too. I am sure they will all say that  hope they have your health and your spirit when they are your age.  You are very nice. Thank you.  Thank you very much for your time.  Any time.  ------- -------  
