Finchum  Dennis  Today is July 14, 2008. My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with Oklahoma  State University. This is the project Women of the Oklahoma  Legislature, and today I   m talking with Patricia Dennis regarding her  great-grandmother, Mrs. Lamar Looney, who was the very first woman  to serve in the Oklahoma Senate, from 1920 through 1928. She was  there four terms. So thank you for joining me today, and let   s just start     this is several generations back so how you are related to her   just the  family tree, so to speak.  My great-grandmother died before I was born, and so I know nothing  first-hand, but she was born in Talladega, Alabama in 1871 and the  family moved to Texas   I   m sure it was Reconstruction that helped that  along. She married a man whose family was quite prominent in Texas,     Doc    Tourney Looney. The two of them married and moved to  southeastern Oklahoma. Greer County was originally part of Texas and  later became Oklahoma, and I don   t know exactly when the change  occurred. They had six children, one died in infancy, and when the  oldest boy was ten, she lost her husband. He had been the postmaster, I  believe, of Hollis, which was the town that they lived in, and she  succeeded to his job.  The United States government was giving land allotments. The  requirements were that you had to move to the land itself and live on it  for five years and then they would issue you a patent and the land was  yours at that point. So she moved out there with her five children. They  dug sod bricks and they made one of the little huts that they called     soddys    that had sod on the roof. They were partly underground. The  side walls were made of planks, and I think there were planks on the  floor but I couldn   t be sure.  5  They sold her organ, which was how she had gotten money, besides her  postmistress job, by teaching the local children organ lessons, and she  bought two mules in order to put in the crop. When the first crop came  in, she bought another organ and bought two little cabins that she put  together to make a house with a little breezeway in the middle, and she  lived on the land with the children as her only helpers   and the mules     four or five years. After that, she sold the mules, moved back to town so  the children could have a better education, and became county clerk  of   I think it was Harmon County, it could have been Greer   I   m not  sure which, because it had split into two counties at that point.  She was in county offices for several years, and then when her children  got a bit older and women   s suffrage was on the horizon, some of her  friends got together and said,    You would make a fine senator for the  state of Oklahoma.    So she apparently bought a car (Laughs) and was  driving it around in 1918, 1919 with her children in tow and was going  door to door and to meetings trying to elicit votes for her senate race,  which she won. In 1920, she was seated and she won four terms in the  Senate before heart disease shut her career down.  She was   I think you   d call her a Populist at this point. She was for  universal suffrage. She was for taking care of the elderly, taking care of  children. She was fiercely honest, and she had a lot of causes that are  still issues in today   s campaign that she really fiercely believed in. She  had a very keen steel-trap kind of mind, and the other legislators never  had to give way because she became   oh,    poor little feminine me.    She  wasn   t that way. She was strong. She knew what she believed in.  Everyone trusted her, and since she was so scrupulously honest and so  above-board in her dealings with everyone, she was universally admired.  She was quite active also in different organizations, charitable  organizations   Woodmen of the World   you name it. If it was a good  cause, she was a member of it.  She wanted to be lieutenant governor, and the state constitution forbid  women at that time to hold any office except State Secretary of Charities  and Corrections, I believe was the term, and she didn   t want to do that.  She wanted to be lieutenant governor, and she had quite a few people  who were supporting her candidacy for lieutenant governor. However,  she realized that the law said that she couldn   t until there was a  constitutional amendment passed in order to allow that. So she decided  to run for the United States Senate. She was running against a very  firmly entrenched democratic Senator Gore from eastern Oklahoma. He  was blind and he was very heavily into democratic politics, and he ran  and won several terms for the United States Senate. He was kind of the  perennial Senator Gore.  6  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Of course she lost, but she made a good showing, and after that she  devoted herself to other charitable and political causes and generally  something that would do good for the population. When she died in  1935, her casket was put in the rotunda of the State Capitol building and  the flag flew at half mast during this time. We   re all very, very proud of  her.  She had five children?  Yes.  Okay, and do you know what happened to each one of those five, just  generally?  Well, generally, the oldest one was in business here in Oklahoma City.  Another one was in forest conservation in Colorado. Another one was  secretary and general    Girl Friday    in Chicago for a long time, and she  married and moved to California. My mother was always a homemaker.  She married a man who had just completed law school and was working  for the state as a surveyor building roads all over the (Laughs) state  because in the Depression it was very hard to get a job of any kind, and  if you found a job you just did whatever it was. And her youngest child,  Mabel, was a very well-known school teacher in the Oklahoma City  school district. She had gone to Columbia University for her degree, and  she went when she was quite young so that she came back to Oklahoma  City and taught at Webster Junior High School or High School, I   m not  sure which, when she was only 19 years old. She went on to become the  head of the English Department at Classen High School, which was the  main high school in Oklahoma City, and later Northwest Classen until  she retired.  None of them went into politics?  (Laughs) No.  Could tell a little bit about when she became a lawyer?  Oh, yes. Her father was a lawyer, and she liked to read law from her  father   s books   and at that time, you could read law under the direction  of some attorney and sit for the bar, which she did, and she became a  member of the Oklahoma Bar Association while she was in the Senate. I  have her certificate from the Oklahoma Supreme Court hanging in my  home.  In reading a little bit of background on her, she had some trying  moments when she first moved in, when Cole hurt his hand and he was  7  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  missing a finger, according to this.  Oh, yes. Yes.  Some interesting trials, I suppose, when she first moved to Oklahoma.  Well pioneer life was pretty hard, and one of her children was sitting on  the fence at their farm one day and he fell off into the hog pen. A hog bit  off two of his fingers, and she dashed into the hog pen, grabbed the  fingers, washed them off, wrapped them in a cool towel, hitched up the  buggy and took him to the hospital. They re-attached his fingers and he  was able to use them all of the rest of his life. Another time the boys  were hoeing the vegetable garden, which they needed for their  subsistence, and a rattlesnake appeared and coiled up looking at one of  the children, and she was in the house wearing some cloth bedroom  slippers. She came out when he yelled and killed the snake with that  cloth bedroom slipper. We still don   t know how she did it.  Let   s move forward a little bit since that   s pretty much all you can tell us  about that time period. When they decided to do the portrait for the  Capitol   do you want to talk a little bit about that?  Well I didn   t find out about it until the portrait was almost done, and my  mother found out (Laughs) about it from me. So we came down to the  Capitol and added all the input we possibly could. At the unveiling of  the portrait, my family was there and my mother was so proud. I  addressed the Senate and told them a little bit about my great-grandmother,  and then they had a reception afterward and took lots of  pictures with all of the women legislators at that particular point. This  was April 19, 2005 which was the 10th anniversary of the Murrah  Building bombing.  And had you been to the Capitol before that occasion?  Oh many times. I used to visit my friends there all the time and use the  Capitol library for research because I   m a lawyer and it was a handy  library to use.  Have you been back since to see it actually hanging?  Several times. A couple of years ago, we   Canterbury Choral Society,  in which I sing, did a number   I call it a number, it   s a song   that was  commissioned for the state centennial, and we performed it for the  people at the Capitol. I saw it then and I   ve seen it on three or four other  occasions, and I go back and visit her from time to time. She needs to  keep tabs on us. (Laughs)  8  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  Dennis  Finchum  I visited her today actually before I came over here. I would like to have  known her.  In the portrait, she looks like she is looking at you and studying you.  Doesn   t she?  She does. Yes. She doesn   t mix words, I wouldn   t think, and she knew  what she wanted to do and no bones about it.  And she did it.  And she did it. Well if you don   t have anything else, I thank you very  much for sharing what you do have.  Well you   re quite welcome. I   m very happy to know that she will be  included in this historical project.  Thank you.  ---  ---  
