Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Today is October 11, 2007. I   m in Oklahoma City at the Capitol with  Susan Winchester who was elected to the House of Representatives in  1998. My name is Tanya Finchum and I   m with the Oklahoma State  University Library. We   re doing an oral history project called    Women  of the Oklahoma Legislature.    Thank you for having me today.  Thank you.  Let   s start with having you tell a little bit about your childhood.  My childhood   well I was born in Chickasha,  Oklahoma .  So you   re a native.  I   m a native, grew up there, and graduated from high school. Grew up  on the farm, lived on the farm until I was eleven. Then moved to Main  Street which was an experience in and of itself, very different. But we  kept the farms and everything. So I always say I   m a farmer at heart, a  rancher really, rather than a city person.  And where did you attend college?  The University of Oklahoma, not very far from home. In fact I came  home in the afternoons and worked (Laughs) for the family.  How many brothers and sisters?  I have two sisters.  Older or younger?  Younger.  5  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Have any of them gone into politics?  No. No, one is no longer living the other is in the oil business in Texas.  What got you interested in the political arena?  My grandfather was a state senator from Colorado, and being there at  Christmas or on the holidays he talked about history and political events  constantly. He would have all kinds of Christmas cards from like the  President, and I was so impressed. I know now that everybody gets  them, but I didn   t know that at the time. He was just a very strong  influence in the overall political arena. I also had a great aunt who I  spent a tremendous amount of time with who was very much into local  politics   not elected, but she worked at the election board, worked on  the polling on election days, was actively involved in all of the local  elections, did phone calls, and all kinds of polling. It was very different  then than it is now, very grassroots, but she was actively involved.  One of my most favorite stories was from my 21st birthday. She called,  and you had to be twenty-one to register when I first registered. And so I  came home, I was in school, and I came home and she says,    Happy  Birthday time, I have your angel food cake and we   re going to go  register,    and we went to register. I registered as a Republican, much to  her horror. (Laughs) She sat in the car like this all the way back home,  and she said    You   ll never get to vote, you   ll never get to vote,    and I  never got to vote in a local election until two years ago, so a long time.  What did you do before you got into politics?  My family had an aerial spraying business until I was thirty-eight and  then I bought part of it at one time. I ran that until 1988-89 and sold it in     89. I also have a master   s degree in human relations and an education  background. I worked part time at the CareerTech in Chickasha. Aerial  spring is seasonal, so you had the time to teach part time. I taught some  of the night classes. They offered me an opportunity, a job, to put  together a beginning business and office program and I did that for one  year, and then was hired as the adult coordinator and developer. I  worked in the business services part of the CareerTech.  The aerial spraying, that   s crop dusting?  Crop dusting, yes.  Were there very many women in that business?  No. (Laughs)  6  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  One of the few.  One of the few and I say my very first real job was driving a chemical  truck. (Laughs)  Did you fly the planes?  No, I didn   t. I have a pilot   s license but I didn   t fly. No, we had  commercial pilots that did that.  That   s interesting.  Yes.  Well tell me a little bit about the events leading up to your decision to  run.  It was just through interest. I   d helped other people run, raised money  for them, held fundraisers, licked envelopes, put on stamps, put out yard  signs, everything like that. In    97 my husband was appointed as a  federal administrative law judge and assigned to New Orleans.  Unfortunately, with all of the child welfare acts, that   s where they  needed people, and that   s where he was sent. I was homesick and going  back and forth from New Orleans to Oklahoma City, and called a friend  of mine at home. Before we left I   d done a fundraiser for Mary Fallin,  and I   d helped with one for Governor Keating. The House seat re-election  was coming up, and I called to see what I could do to help the  current representative, and he said    Well let me think about it, we   ll call  you back.    And then he called back and said come home and run in my  place, I   m not going to run again, so I did. (Laughs)  Did you have someone running against you?  Someone that I say was a twelve year incumbent. He really wasn   t, he   d  been defeated. There   d been two other people in office since he served  but then he came back and ran. I felt like I was running against someone  who was obviously experienced, had a lot of opportunity in office and  was very up on the issues and what was going on so.  Who was your campaign manager, did you have one?  I didn   t really have one. It was a family and friends effort. When you  first run you don   t really know that you need to have all (Laughs) of  those things. My predecessor was probably the campaign manager, I  don   t think we actually gave him that title or he didn   t take that title. But  he was very helpful in helping me put the campaign together,  7  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  introducing me to people, making sure I did all those things that he knew  at that point that I needed to do.  Did you have a slogan?     She gets the job done,    yes. (Laughter) I need to send you some of my  earlier campaign materials. (Laughs)  What about the second time?  When you campaign that intensely, and we did the first time, I was in  the minority as far as party registration   very, very hard to overcome  the numbers. But we have at least enough swing voters in my district to  have made that happen. You think,    I campaigned so hard and it was just  yesterday, no one surely would run,    but someone did from one of the  smaller communities in my district. I was scared to death and ran just as  hard the second time as I had the first. And won with, I think, 68  of  the vote. We decided in my district there   s 32  that you never get  anyway, so (Laughs) I felt very good about having won with that  particular margin.  Knocked on a lot of doors, or did you have a different strategy?  Knocked on a lot of doors, yes. We do a lot of direct mail. Direct mail, I  think, is the most effective I   ve been told. It gets into someone hands.  They may or may not throw it away. If it lays around you play with it  and look at it again, so you have more opportunities than a phone call.  Newspaper I think is the least effective.  Any favorite campaign stories?  I know one, but I don   t want it on tape. I   ll tell you after (Laughs) you  quit doing this. I had one man up in the Bridge Creek area, a farmer,  who came up and said,    What do you think of kids and farms or people  in farms.    I said,    Well, you know, my background is farming and  ranching and I like farms, and I like kids.    He was actually saying     firearms    not    farms.    As soon as it clicked what direction we were  really going, we got on the right track. I think the best part of a  campaign is the people that you meet and the opportunity to meet so  many people that you   ll be representing, and to hear first-hand what  their concerns are. Having been here, I know a lot of the things we  worry about and spend so much time working on are really not that  relevant to the everyday person in your district. They are important but  they   re not as significant as we sometimes think they are.  What about the night of the election?  8  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  The first election was the best. After that it   s kind of ho-hum. No one  got really excited. But we have all the volunteers   I have, fortunately, a  great big house in Chickasha, and it was full and everyone was excited.  The numbers were very close. I lost in Chickasha, which was very  humiliating. I said,    I grew up here. My opponent was a transplant from  Colorado. I was very well known, very well thought of, so that   s not fair.  It   s like you   re mine first.    I lost in Chickasha but carried the northern  end of the district by enough votes, I think almost 56  of the vote the  first time.  Do you know if a lot of women came out to vote for you?  I hope so. We had trouble and that was real surprising to me. Republican  women don   t always think that a woman should be in office. They  would tell me I had a young child and I needed to stay home with my  baby. My baby can come to work with me and he has. You know, it   s  interesting. I had a lot of men say they   d vote for me because I was a  woman and they felt they could trust me and what I was saying far more  than they could a man. But I had tremendous, tremendous female  support, particularly in Chickasha. We did phone banks and we did a lot  of mailings. Everyone came out and wanted to help that   s very  rewarding to see.  How about the day you were sworn in?  All my family came (Laughs) and I didn   t know you had to introduce  them from the gallery. With a last name starting with a    W    you get to  wait till everybody else has gone around. It was exciting. It was fun to  be able to thank everybody and to know that your family was there and  supportive.  Do you remember the first bill you presented on the floor?  Yes. I remember the first one was a tax credit for the Oklahoma City  National Memorial. I got into a sparring war with the Chairman of the  Tax Committee because they were passing tax credits for chicken  manure in Eastern Oklahoma and he wouldn   t hear my bill. And part of  it was the minority party at that particular time. So we did a little bit of  fussing back and forth in the newspaper, and on the radio, and  eventually they heard the bill and it passed.  Media has some     Media has a tremendous, tremendous influence.  I   m learning that too.  9  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Mm-hmm.  Did you notice any difference in treatment between the genders?  No, not really no. I was the only woman in my freshman class. I   ve  been the only woman with a lot of men for the majority of my life, so I  don   t think about that very much anymore.  Was your office always this?  Oh no. (Laughs) My first office was I   d say about three foot wide, and  about five foot in length. It wasn   t a closet but it was pretty close. It did  have a window and I did say that they gave me the office with a window  because I was female. Now whether they did or not, I don   t know. We  were in what they call a fish bowl which is a series of offices on the  third floor on the north side. I think there   s one window in the whole  suite of offices and they put about twenty-five or thirty people in this  real small area. It was part of the freshman year, part of the experience.  And then you moved again? How many times?  We move every two years.  Every two years.  Mm-hm. From what I   ve been told, it   s like the fraternity or sorority  house (Laughs) in college. The older you are or the more seniority you  have   we pick offices purely by seniority.  Well, describe a typical day.  What I tell the kids, when they come up to talk to me, is I get up early.  When we   re in session most of the day   s work starts around seven  because you generally meet with people before committees start at eight.  That gives you a chance to talk one on one with people. We have  committees usually until noon. Traditionally we go into session at one-thirty,  and work until the bills are heard. Then there are receptions and  dinners for people. Everyone wants to meet you and have access and  feed you and feed you and feed you. And then after that, you go home  and do your homework. I read the bills. Not everyone, I don   t think,  reads the bills. You take home a huge stack of reading material to look  over before the day starts over. I   m fifty-five miles from here. If I drive  home, it   s a pretty short night. So generally I stay in the city if we   re in  session.  You rent an apartment?  10  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  We bought a duplex.  It   s been interesting how people have handled that part.  Yes. I would drive if the hours were such that you could leave and there  were a couple of nights that I went home and my toothbrush was still  wet when it was time to get in the car and come back to the city.  In your first couple of years how did you manage having a younger  child?  Having a young guy at home?  Mm-hmm.  Having tremendous family help. My husband   s hours were such that he  could pick him up if I had to work late, and I have nieces who are great  sitters, and grandparents and aunts and uncles. Everyone chipped in to  make it work. He   s in the sixth grade. He was two when I ran. He was  little-bity. He   s in the sixth grade right now     Fun years.  Oh yes. We   re learning that homework is for real now. (Laughs)  It   s been a challenge. If I can make it through the sixth grade for the  second time I   m going to be real excited.  Do you have a mentor?  The person that I relied on tremendously was Larry Ferguson, he was the  minority leader when I was elected, had a district somewhat similar to  mine, at least with the rural influence, and some of the metropolitan area  as well. Pretty good guide as far as deciding where you needed to be on  issues, and a lot of good advice on how to work with people. He knew a  lot of people, was able to give you insight before you met with them,  too. He would say,    You may not know this, but you need to before you  go in.     Have you found yourself playing that role with freshman?  I have with some, particularly in the last two sessions with term limits,  tremendous turn over with huge freshman classes with very un-proportionate  numbers of people coming in.  Forty-something one year     11  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Yes. I think we have seventy-one people right now that have been here  three years or less, out of one-hundred and one. So yes, you do. A lot of  times you   re able to tell them we   ve tried this before and this was the  repercussion, or this is already in place, you may not know that. I know  last year, a lot of bills were filed in situations where there didn   t need to  be bills. I heard this on the campaign trail,    I have to take care about  when I get there,    and really you don   t. You just need to be able to  research it, look into it. Perhaps it   s already been taken care of.  Has there been a bill that you   ve been really pleased to have seen go all  the way through that you   ve authored, or co-authored?  I will always remember my second bill, (Laughs) which I like to call the  Safe-Haven bill. It has also been called the Abandoned Baby bill.  Legislation came out of Texas saying that if you have a child you can   t  care for, give it to a medical provider and we will take care of it and not  prosecute you. I thought it was a good piece of legislation and filed it  here. It had a tremendous amount of controversy the first year that it was  on the floor. I brought it back the second year and it passed. But during  that time a little girl put a baby in a book bag, and threw the baby in the  dumpster. I hate to say that that helped, but it brought to reality the fact  that this does happen, it does happen. And you know I came into office  thinking that I only cared about the business issues, that was my  background and that   s what I had always lobbied for the most in private  life. When you have a child or you come up here and see the many,  many things that impact children, your direction begins to change. I was  excited to have that pass and it has worked.  Any disappointments?  I   ve never had any bill that I particularly cared dearly about that hasn   t  become law. I   ve been very disappointed to see the gambling laws come  into play in Oklahoma, but that   s a personal belief. I   m on the  employment assistance board for the Office of Personnel Management,  and you hear that they serve in a helping capacity for all state employees  or as a psychologist or a social service. You hear the tragic stories that  are happening. I think we will begin to see very quickly, we   ve not  really seen in the few years that gambling has been in place, the  addiction and the cost and the destruction that that   s going to create.  There's the monetary side of it  gambling  but there's a very personal  side, as well.  You   ve made some of the first     I made history, yes. (Laughs)  12  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  I may have missed some so why don   t you tell?  I was the first woman to serve as Speaker Pro Tempore, yes.  And a Minority Whip, too?  Yes. I was a Minority Whip.  First woman to do that?  Probably. Yes.  What was that like?  Very much an honor and a surprise, it   s a bipartisan vote, to know that  you won the confidence of the entire house. You work in that capacity.  You come out of your party role and serve everyone. And I think that   s  hard for your own party to understand, that you have to be fair for  everyone, until they   re in that position and they see how it runs. They  still think that you ought to give them preference and I didn   t always do  that. (Laughs) I think I   ve been able to cross party lines, and have good  relationships with everyone in the House.  What committees are you a member of now?  Now? I   m chairing Banking and Economic Development and Common  Ed.  That   s your background.  Yes.  Any other women on those?  Yes.  And most of the committees now have a mixture?  They have a mixture, yes.  They try anyway.  They try.  Do you have a particular political philosophy?  13  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Oh I think I   m pretty conservative fiscally and probably pretty moderate  with the social issues. (Laughs) I   m not a huge tax fan. I   m one of those  that really favors letting people make their own decisions with their  money rather than have government make all of them. But, on the other  hand, I still see that there is very definitely a need for dollars to run  government because there are services we have to provide.  With you being one of nineteen women, do the women cluster together?  The first year we were here, we would. They told me ahead of time that  they did this, we would call for a Women   s Caucus with no purpose in  mind other than to make the men nervous, and it did (Laughs). They   men  were always trying to find out what we were doing or where we  were going, or what we were planning, and really nothing other than to  make them worry. Three years ago we did start a Women   s Caucus. The  idea is that you would come up with certain legislation that you really  wanted to work on, but the issues that we   ve had are not gender-based.  They   re pretty universal, and you don   t want to exclude having everyone  involved in it.  In the evenings when you do the reception and such, do you go in pairs?  No, I usually go by myself. Because my son is still so young, I   ve done  the receptions and rarely do a dinner. If I do a dinner its maybe one a  week. You   re among friends, and most of the places that you go are  pretty close to the Capitol. Good security support if you leave your car  here and come back late the guards take really good care of you in how  they watch out for you. But there are some places I wouldn   t go without  someone to go with me, but a lot of times we just go in mass groups  anyway.  Have you made close friends with any of the other women?  Odelia Dank and I, she term-limited out last year, but she and I were  good friends, a lot of similarities in our lives and we still stay in close  contact, which is good. Kathleen Wilcoxson and I share districts and so  we   ve done campaigning together and door knocking together. It totally  confuses people. We have names that sound alike. We both have blonde  hair. So they never know which one (Laughs) they   re actually talking to  and if we come together it is even more confusing.  Several women have said that they lost weight while they were  running   .  Oh, absolutely. I   ve said the campaign diet   s terrific. You lose weight.  You get a great sun tan, but then you come up and you sit. Everyone  14  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  wants to feed you and there   s not much opportunity to exercise. So  maybe it   s a good thing we run every two years, you get to work it off  (Laughs).  Do you lunch in most of the time?  Either you lunch in, or there will be someone here that has a lunch or a  lot of times, I work through lunch. That   s one of the few things that I  know is probably a gender thing. Rather than network, I have a tendency  to concentrate on real work instead. That   s pretty universal.  If you were giving advice to women who were interested in going into  politics, what would you say to them?  I   d be excited for them and know how much work it is. My favorite  quote is the one from Margaret Thatcher,    If you want something talked  about elect a man, if you want something done send women,    and I think  if we commit to something we are going to work on it and work on it  really, really well. So be willing to do that. Know that it   s a strain on  your family. Know up front that its very, very hard when you are gone  so much and either be able to work out something where you are  together when you are in session, or have understanding family members  at home. That is a strain. Know that opponents are not going to back off  just because you are a woman. The campaigns are probably going to be  just as tough, regardless.  And campaign finance, I know it   s difficult that first year.  It   s hard. I know it   s really hard for women traditionally to raise money  in the same capacity as a man. I think I had an advantage because I   d  done so much fundraising for other campaigns, so I had a good list and I  was pretty well known with the donors. And then I   d done fundraisers  for state wide candidates, so they were willing to help as well. For a  woman running for the first time, I would say, particularly if you   re  from a rural district, you   re going to have a hard time. I   d say work on a  very careful campaign budget. Put together just the basics of what you  want to do, and then expand it as you have money come in. There are  people who are willing to help too, and people willing to help are all  over the state, not just in your own community. Money is wonderful,  volunteers are even better. Money can get direct mail out, but going door  to door having people show up all the places you need to show up, you  need lots of people to help.  Did you have a campaign office or run it out your home?  I ran it out of my dining room (Laughs) which I think most people do. I  15  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  have a garage apartment at my home and that   s turned into my office.  My husband bought a fifty-five gallon trashcan for me and said move it,  and so I moved it.  Shredder?  I have a shredder (Laughs). You   d be amazed at how much paper work  you accumulate.  Well it   s getting to the point when you   ve served your twelve years, what  do you anticipate doing next?  I don   t know. You know you keeping hoping that something wonderful  with one of your causes would walk through the door and say,    Please  come help us.    Or it might be a good opportunity to just sit back and  decide what I really want to do at this time.  Any aspirations to run for Senate?  The U.S. Senate?  Yes, or even if you switched before your twelve years were     No, because I wouldn   t have time to serve a full term. State-wide office  is appealing in some ways. Congress would be appealing if my family  were at a point that they could go with me. Congress or the Senate, we   ll  see what happens.  When you were initially considering running, the Senate for your district  wasn   t   ?  It wasn   t open. They were in an off year and I just felt at the time I had  more opportunities in the House than I would have had in the Senate.  People that are in the House prefer the House?  It is (Laughs) more rough and tumble. I   ve always thought the Senate  was a little more serene and reserved which I really like than the rough  and tumble in the House but I think we really deal with the issues on  more of a gut level sometimes than I think they do. I mean we really get  into them more and I sometimes think the Senate isn   t, maybe. I   ve not  been over there so I don   t really know what goes on in their committee  meetings.  Have there been any major obstacles?  16  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  I really can   t think of any. I think one of the challenges that we   re going  to have, and I   m not going to be able to see that much of it, but I think  others will, the term limits. With the constant turn over, I think you   re  going to see a whole new direction in the House in your ability to get  something done. It may become easier. It may become harder, I don   t  know.  Do you have the same assistant as you started with?  No, she's been with me for four years, and she's wonderful, but before  that I   ve had different assistants. I thought it was me, but I don   t think  so. I think there's high turnover (Laughs). And until I had more time  under my belt as a representative, I only had part time help. I think the  outside world thinks that you have full status and we   re like Texas, we  have a home office that   s fully staffed and a Capitol office that is. I said  for several years I had one half of a part time secretary (Laughs). So you  do a lot of your own work, which is probably better anyway.  And your own research?  And your own research, yes.  How do you decide to do a bill?  Constituents ask for things, and you always try to do those or something  from your district. And I   ve done a lot of work for the Fit Kids Coalition  and because I   ve done some children   s things DHS  Department of  Human Services  has asked me to carry several of their things. So, I  think you begin to develop a nitch of where you fit, where you are the  most comfortable, the research that you now have personally that makes  it easier to present something. I do a lot of work for the state chamber.  They laugh that I always call and say,    Okay, what are we going to do  this year?    So (Laughs) they have a legislative agenda, and always ask  me to carry part, which is fun because I enjoy that as well.  And you did something in regards to vending machines?  Oh I   m the one that took the candy out of the vending machines  in  schools , the snicker bars and the cokes (Laughs) away from the little  kids.  That was good thing.  It has worked. They really complained, and it really didn   t go into effect  until this fall. But people and the schools began to transition.  17  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  It   s just elementary schools?  Yes. What's so funny   I   ve laughed   I was asked to be a board member  of the Fit Kids Coalition, or the advisory board, and prior to that they  had given me the Citizens Legislation Award for having done that  particular bill. I   d gone to this luncheon to get this, and they had salad,  steamed carrots, steamed potatoes, steamed celery and boiled meat for  lunch, and fruit for dessert. Then they did exercises. They called to see if  I would come to the next luncheon, which was the board meeting, and I  said,    She who eats snicker bars for lunch, is not interested in eating  steamed celery ever again. I don   t want that,    but they   re very strong in  their beliefs and carry it forward at every level.  I bet not too many kids would eat the steamed celery.  No, they won   t.  Then you had a part to play in the formula of State Aid that allowed  libraries to do a more?  To increase the funding for them.  Thank you.  You   re welcome. I have a real strong, real active librarian at the  Mustang library in my district. She   s again presented the idea to  Kathleen  Wilcoxson  and I, and helped us work on everything which  really makes a difference. I told a group of people Tuesday,    We can   t  read minds, and until you come to us with problems, we don   t always  know they exist. And we   re more than willing to help you solve them  but we have to know that they   re out there to begin with.     Have you traveled much as a legislator?  I   ve traveled some. We have a lot of educational opportunities. I got to  go to Puerto Rico this Spring, a lot of trips to D.C. You fly in, go to  meetings, get back on an airplane and come home. So, as far as a lot of  opportunity to vacation and see things, no I haven   t but wonderful  learning opportunities. I   ve been very fortunate in that I   m on the  Executive Board for the Council of State Governments and for the  Southern Legislative Conference and particularly with the Southern  Legislative Conference. Its sixteen southern states and their issues are so  similar to ours, that you   re getting ideas or seeing legislation that you  can truly put to work. You know a lot of times if you hear somebody  from New York or California, it doesn   t always work in Oklahoma.  Those have been real meaningful to me, to pick up on other ideas and  18  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  run with them.  Kind of build a network too.  Yes. You do you really do.  Are there many women at those?  It   s probably about the same.  We   re working on it.  We   re working on it. We   re what, eleventh from the bottom still. Now  we finally sent a woman back to congress which has been nice, only the  second time. The numbers in the State Senate have always been very  small unless there   s a year I can   t remember. But House numbers, I  think, have increased, but not much.  And you   re doing something for Breast and Cervical cancer prevention  treatment; you   re on that council or have been     I have been on it, yes.  You have been active in this office and you   re out in the community  doing things too. And then the center for the Oklahoma School for the  Deaf?  We   re trying to locate a professional center on the campus of USAO   University of Science and Arts in Oklahoma . They train more teachers  for the deaf than any other college west of the Mississippi, and we   re  trying to do a project in conjunction with the Oklahoma School for the  Deaf itself where we do the education and have a day care facility.  There's a lab school in conjunction with a teaching opportunity, so  hopefully we   ll get that done this year. That   s one we worked on for  two or three sessions. I got the money for the building, now we need to  get the money to expand the program.  That   s not a one year thing.  No, you keep working on it.  And you still have the Winchester Group?  I still have the Winchester Group, but not much time to do anything with  it, (Laughs) unfortunately. Maybe that   s what I   ll do when I term limit  out, is go back to doing that.  19  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  And your husband is a Supreme Court Justice?  Yes.  And you two have to work in tandem I guess     Governor Keating always introduced us as the person that made the laws  and the person that threw them out (Laughs). But there's not really been  much conflict. I think there were two times that he excused himself from  a case because I   d been involved with the legislation. Out of several  years there's not much conflict. He could care less about what we do  and vice versa. (Laughs) He   s not much interested in the process that  goes on up here.  I had read something that your grandmother had a large influence on  you.  Yes.  Do you want to talk a little bit about that?  Oh, the grandmother that had the most influence on me I lived with  growing up and just a stellar model for all women. Had her first child  when she was sixteen, ran a grocery store, did almost everything. I   d  always laugh. She drove a pick up, now it is no big deal, but when I was  growing up it was sometimes humiliating that you had a grandmother  that drove a truck and wore a baseball cap. Then she always wore velvet  house shoes with rhinestones on them, and painted her finger nails and  went to the beauty shop each week, but did a lot of very non-traditional  things that I know had a huge influence on me and my perspective of  being able to do anything you wanted to do.  And she was the maid of honor at your wedding?  That was my other grandmother. She was ninety, when we got married  she was ninety. She was a neat lady. I just didn   t spend as much time  with her. Married when she was twenty-eight, had her first child at  thirty and then thirty-two, and had two children in her forties. Her  husband died very, very early. Was left to raise my two aunts by herself,  taught school, raised them, sent them through school and through  college. Just a total free spirit and not in the sense of free spirit as you  sometimes hear it now, but she   d call and I   d say,    Where are you?     You never knew if she was in New Mexico, or Chicago or Houston or  wherever. She was just a great person who was very confident with who  she was and what she could accomplish.  20  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  And is your mother similar?  No. (Laughs)  It skipped a generation?  Skipped a generation, yes.  Can you tell me how your life has changed some since being elected?  Other than the chaos?  Yes.  Absolutely, yes. I think your ability to work with people changes  tremendously. That   s what you   re doing constantly, which I hadn   t  really done. I   d worked with people but not twenty-four hours a day,  seven days a week. I think your ability to understand a lot of the  common problems that are out there for everyone becomes more intense  because you   re hearing those things every day. You realize that not  everyone lives exactly like you do, that there are all kinds of situations,  sometimes you can help sometimes you can   t. It just broadens your  whole philosophy of life. I said if I could put together a doctoral  program, I could never put together anything like this. It   s been an  awesome experience. You get to learn so much.  Anytime for fun?  (Laughs)  You golf some, right?  I golf some yes, and my son   s become a Boy Scout so I   m learning those  things.  Camping?  Yes. One weekend we went on a canoe trip on the Illinois and camped  out. I had never camped out in my life. It was a hundred and something  degrees (Laughs). We came home, washed clothes, and then packed and  we went to Colorado and did a class three rafting trip, and took ATVs  over the continental divide. I said    Now, I want a trip for Mom,  (Laughs) I want a spa treatment, and something soft and nice and being  waited on.     Were you a Girl Scout growing up?  21  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  Winchester  No, oh heavens no   no.  That   s a nice change of pace, completely different.  It really is, and it   s always fun to be with him and for him to know that I  can do those things too, if he wants me to.  Build a fire and to     Oh yes. That   s the only thing   they want knives and fires (Laughs).  If you don   t have anything else, my last question is when history is  written about you what would you like for it to say?  I   ve thought about the sheet  question guide . I think if they could say  that I made the difference in the life of a child that that would be really  meaningful to me.  Well, I   d say you   ve already done that.  My son thinks that the world revolves around the Capitol probably.  I   m anxious to see what interests him, if he   s going to do this when he  grows up, who knows.  Some sons have     Yes, some have.  The Coles?  Yes, Mason and Tom. Mason, I think, has political interests if there  becomes an opportunity for him to come back here, wherever he is.  Someday, just might be governor.  Davis  her son  may be governor someday (Laughs). I introduce him  that way sometimes that we have the judicial branch and the legislative  branch and we   re hoping for future executive here.  Well I want to back up a little bit. I   m interested in you being a woman  pilot. There   s not very many of those. Do you still get to fly some?  No, not really and I didn   t. My dad was a trainer in World War II, and  my first husband was a commercial pilot, and they didn   t want someone  with my total lack of experience (Laughs) at the controls. But I flew  some, but I haven   t in a long time. I learned at OSU  Oklahoma State  22  Finchum  Winchester  Finchum  University . I graduated from flight school at OSU.  Well that   s good. If there's nothing else, thank you very much.  Thank you.  It   s been a pleasure.  --- -------  
