Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  My name is Tanya Finchum. I   m working with the OSU Library on a  project called,    Women of the Oklahoma Legislature, Past and  Present.    This is April 2, 2007, and we   re at the University of Oklahoma  Health Sciences Center speaking with Angela Monson, who was in the  House from 1991 to 1993 and the Senate from 1993 to 2005.  That   s right.  We are so thankful that you were willing to talk with us today.  Thank you very much, Tanya.  Okay. Well, let   s begin by giving us a little bit of background about your  hometown, your youth...  All right   I was born and raised right here in Oklahoma City. My  parents are both native to Oklahoma. I say my mom is native, although  she was born in Texas and moved here when she was just a couple of  months old.  My dad was a fourth generation Oklahoman. His grandmother was born  before statehood and so were several other relatives including his  grandfather and his great-grandfather, so Oklahoma is, of course, home  for me for a whole lot of reasons, and now that I   m old enough and have  literally traveled the world, I choose to stay here. This is home.  I was educated in the Oklahoma City public schools. I attended my first  year of college at the University of Oklahoma  OU  on a President   s  Leadership Class scholarship. I ultimately chose a major, a major that  was not offered at OU, unfortunately. So, after much negotiation with  5  my father, I was allowed to leave and walk away from what would have  been ultimately a full-ride scholarship to go to Oklahoma City  University, where I completed my undergraduate studies with a  bachelor   s degree in criminal justice, although at that time, it was called  law enforcement corrections.  After working as a probation parole officer for about a year in Shawnee,  Oklahoma   loved the work, but if you can imagine Shawnee, Oklahoma  back in the mid-seventies for this young twenty-one year old, it just  wasn   t my cup of tea. I finally came to work back in Oklahoma City  with a community corrections organization called CREO, the Council  for Resocialization of Ex-Offenders. We provided transitional services  to people being released from adult corrections institutions here in  Oklahoma and ultimately expanded our program to include a juvenile  justice program. I served as first director of that program, providing  varying support services to young people who were basically court-ordered  to our program, and other prevention kinds of activities. But I  guess it was the experience at CREO and at the Department of  Corrections that I realized I didn   t want to necessarily be the  implementer of the rules, but thought it would be helpful to be the rule  maker.  So, I went back to graduate school and attended the University of  Oklahoma. I received a master   s degree in public administration, never  intending, of course, at that time to be a lawmaker. I simply wanted to be  one engaged in the development of public policy.  I worked for a short time as a traveling city manager. My graduate  school track really was primarily focused in municipal management,  budget and finance. And after being on the road about 3,500 miles a  month between six small towns, I received a call from a state legislative  staffer who said,    We   ve got a new job. Your name was given to me,  highly recommended. Would you be interested in visiting?    And I  thought,    Oh, what the hay. I   ll go in and talk with him.    It wasn   t that I  didn   t like my traveling city manager   s job, but it was a job. It was a  grind and enjoyed it very much, but I wanted to explore new  opportunities.  I had a conversation with Mr. Paul McElvaney, a very good friend of  mine now, I didn   t know him then, and he explained to me this new  position as a fiscal staff analyst on a brand new committee, a joint  committee on federal funds. This committee had the responsibility to  track the receipt and expenditure of federal dollars of state agencies,  determine the programmatic impact, and other kinds of things related to  the receipt of federal dollars. And it sounded like a wonderful  opportunity. So I ultimately, after some discussions and interviews with  6  various legislators said,    Yes,    and went to work for the Oklahoma state  legislature as one of a very few joint employees at that time. It was right  when the Oklahoma Senate and the Oklahoma House of Representatives  had actually split their staffing.  My first boss was Roger Randall, who now works in higher education. I  worked for Roger for that first year, and the next year Cleta Deatherage  was the House Appropriations Committee chair. My bosses were the  chairs of the Appropriations Committee and I crunched numbers along  with program evaluations.  In the early eighties, when we had a new federal administration,  executive administration, there were huge federal budget cuts. I realized  that the greatest impact though, however, was not in state agencies but in  community-based organizations. This led me to the Mary Mahoney  Community Health Center. I became involved with Mary Mahoney,  learned more about the program and the people who needed their  services. I describe this because it was that experience which led me to  this health policy track where I found myself.  So I continued to work for the legislature for about four years, still  engaged in health policy activities, primarily as a volunteer, just learning  the industry. Then I decided to run for office after seeing what went on  in the state legislature. I thought,    I can do this, and maybe       like we  all think,       can do it better than some who are there.     I ran for office initially in 1984 and lost that race by 132 or so votes. It  was very, very close and I was quite disappointed, but certainly could  hold my head high because of the showing that we made. It was an  excellent showing for a first-time contender against a very well-liked  incumbent. After I lost that race, I didn   t have a job because, of course,  I had to leave my job at the legislature to run. I was out of money  because I spent all my savings in the campaign. I was really, really  stressed and crying one day literally at my sister   s house, who very  lovingly said to me, and I say that facetiously,    I don   t know why you   re  sitting on my couch crying. What you need to do is get a plan. You need  to get a job. Get a plan.    And I was somewhat shocked into reality and  decided,    She   s right.    I needed a plan. I needed a job. I wanted to  remain active in politics. I knew I   d run for office again, so I turned  down several positions offered to me back at the state legislature and  went to work selling insurance for the Equitable Life Insurance  Company. This job provided flexibility and allowed me to actually pick  up a couple of legislative lobbying contracts, which I did for community  action agencies along with a group of community clinics.  My engagement with the community clinics had grown and grown. I had  7  Finchum  Monson  learned more and more and coupled with my legislative experience, you  know, we needed somebody at the Capitol. So I remained involved and  learned more about the insurance industry. I mention that, too, because it  was so valuable to my continued growth and development of  information related to healthcare and how health insurance products  were sold, or in this case, were not sold by the Equitable Life Insurance  Company back in the mid-eighties because they realized then it was not  a profitable business. It was very difficult to manage and was not their  niche. So after two more bids   one more bid for the legislature, one  more failed bid for the Oklahoma House of Representatives in 1988, I  was finally successful in 1990.  Fortunately in 1986, a job was offered to me with the Oklahoma  Healthcare Campaign   Oklahoma Healthcare Project is what it was  called. It was the beginning of a consumer-based health advocacy  initiative in Oklahoma funded then by the Villers Foundation. That  foundation is now Families U.S.A., and I happened to sit on that board  of directors. It is full circle again. But that four-year experience allowed  me to hone my expertise in healthcare from a policy perspective,  financial perspective, delivery systems, quality issues   never was a  provider   thought I   d want to be, a long time ago, but I did learn more,  did more, and had an opportunity to continue my work at the Capitol.  In fact, we were successful, the Oklahoma Healthcare Project, for the  first large expansion of Medicaid income eligibility for children and  pregnant women in the late 1980s. So it was a wonderful experience.  Fortunately in 1990, when the incumbent chose not to run again,  although I was not her chosen candidate to succeed her, we did a bang-up  job in the 1990 race and I was able to move to the legislature, and the  rest is history.  So the seat that you finally won, a woman had held it before?  A woman had held that seat before, actually she had only been the  second or third person in that seat   so history in both my senate seat,  Senate District 48, and the house seat, House District 99, had a history  of long-serving members who had been in those positions. I actually was  only the third Senator to hold that post in the Senate District 48 seat   so  it was great.  Freddye Williams was the incumbent, and it was kind of bizarre because  she was a good family friend, a friend of my mom   s. I had much respect  and admiration for her, so it wasn   t anything, and I really mean this   it  wasn   t as if I thought she was doing such a terrible job, not at all. It was  that I thought I had something to offer, and I think that   s an important  message for women to always hear because we always think we have to  8  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  be against or not in favor of somebody or something to work in order to  change it. Not necessarily   if we think we have the capabilities and the  expertise and the skill set necessary to do a job and do it well, then we  should move in that direction, and I did.  And your sister   s plan helped?  And my sister   that was just that little touch, that little dose of reality.  My sister, Denise, was thirteen months older than I am. Denise died in  1998 from lung cancer. She was a very young woman at 42 years old.  She would have been 42 years old that year. She was the mother of two  small children who came to live with me when she was ill. Those  children were nine and eighteen months when they came to live with me.  They   re now twelve and nineteen. My nephew/son   son/nephew is a  freshman at Alpena Community College in Alpena, Michigan, and the  then eighteen month old is now this driving-me-crazy twelve year old  who is a sixth grader at a local high school, Northeast Academy for  Health Sciences and Engineering.  So when you were in high school, did you ever think about being a  politician?  No, not to run for elective office, per se, however, I had my first  experience running for elective office when I was age fourteen. It was so  bizarre. When I was fourteen growing up in Oklahoma City, there were  no African Americans on the Oklahoma City School Board, and there  were issues   I mean this is the   before integration period and so there  were issues in the district.  The Urban League at that time began this community-based initiative to  create what was deemed a Black Board of Education. It was kind of a  shadow board, and it was created more to make a statement about the  lack of representation from this segment of the community. So there was  one youth slot placed on this configuration of a board, and you actually  had to run for office. So there were three of us who filed for this seat,  and we ran campaigns and we worked hard. There were designated  voting areas   I mean, it was just like a campaign, and I won that race at  age fourteen, and that was my first   I tell people, my first experience  with elective office.  And I grew up involved in school leadership activities like the student  council and school district-wide leadership councils, but no running for  political office as a chosen profession, a chosen career. It never, ever  crossed my mind until I began my work with the legislature and really  realized that I did have something to offer. But it was not something I  thought about, and I think that   s important, too.  9  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  We need, the younger the better, to make sure young women understand  that elective office, public service, governmental service, really is a great  service choice for those people who are so inclined to want to move in  that direction   and to start early, because there are so many difficulties.  It   s hard for young women who want to have children and have a family  to run for office, to be elected and move to Oklahoma City when your  their kids are three and four and five years old or whatever age, at home  in Tulsa, or Woodward or wherever   and to move here and live four  days out of a week here for, you know, four, five, six months a  year   it   s very difficult. We have to figure out as a society how we  create opportunities for women. Other cultures have, not only do they  have targets for women in elective office in the legislative bodies, they  work really hard to create the kind of system to support what   s necessary  so women can serve in that capacity. Unfortunately, we haven   t done the  same in this country.  Were your parents involved in politics?  Not really. My parents were not active in campaigns, although they  talked politics. Politics was quite frequently discussed in our household.  They were regular voters. My dad was very involved in community  activities, and my mom was very, very involved in church activities   so  they were service-minded parents, but I think I surprised all of us when I  decided.  Maybe it wasn   t a surprise because my mom would tell stories about,  when I was a little girl, how I brought friends home with me for lunch  and was very proud to have these friends, as I described them, with  me   and they were just kids. I remember this well   kids who I knew  needed to eat, and my grandmother lived with us when I grew up and  there were five kids, my mom, my dad and a grandma in this big house.  It was a very loving, warm household, so I thought if a kid needed  something to eat, come home with me. There   s always enough. There   s  always somebody there, so my mom says she was never surprised. I was  a little surprised, and I think the rest of my family was somewhat  surprised, but not a family trait.  I don   t think there are others really growing up to become politicians.  Maybe some of my little cousins. I   m not sure, but certainly my family  has been really exposed to politics. My family was the core of my  campaign, always     always was, and I attribute my success to the  support and the love and the help that I received from my family.  And how much did you spend in your campaign   s   each time it probably  cost more?  10  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Yeah. The first campaign in 1984 cost me basically all of my saved  money, which was about  14,000. I may have raised another  3,000 or   4,000, so we   re talking about less than a  20,000 campaign. Lots of  door knocking   and although all of my campaigns throughout included  lots of door knocking, the cost of my last Senate race, which of course is  a larger race than a House race, was about  70,000 to  75,000   still a  whole lot less than what many senators now pay. Now, it   s not  uncommon to see them spend maybe a couple of hundred grand in a  senate seat so, it   s hard.  It   s hard.  It   s hard now, raising money, you know. I couldn   t do it on that  14,000  I was able to save and have available to use back in 1984. Time really  brings about a change.  Well, do you remember the first day that you stepped in and took office?  Yes, in fact I look at that those pictures and I think,    You   ll never be  able to wear that suit again.    (Laughter) It was about four sizes ago, I  guarantee you. I remember that day well. I remember my family being  present and all the people important to me being present, and the smiles  and how I got to introduce them.  I also remember the sense of urgency and the sense of obligation   the  sense of responsibility as you took the oath of office. It was a very  moving experience for me, and I knew the Capitol. I mean, I had been in  the building for ten years prior to taking the oath of office, but it was  like a very unique transitional experience to understand now that it is  your obligation. It is your responsibility to speak on behalf of those who  cannot speak for themselves, to be prepared so when you are moving  into a debate or a discussion about legislation, that your responses are  correct if you are being questioned, and then your questions are  appropriate if you are doing the questioning   so it was always very  serious for me to be prepared, to do work, to be responsive. I was not a  perfect legislator. None of us are perfect in anything that we do. I always  wished I could be more timely with my phone calls. I always wished I  was one of those people who remembered birthdates and all those  things   to send nice cards to people. I didn   t do that   but I still think I  was a pretty good legislator.  Do you have any idea how many bills you may have     Woo   passed?  Yeah, just a guess.  11  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Oh, I would say over fifteen years in the legislature, this is going to be a  rough guess   let   s just say I introduced on an average, these are all  going to be bills that I initiated, whether they are House or Senate  bills   let   s say I introduced on an average, thirty, thirty-five bills a year  and on an average, fifteen of them became law, for fifteen years, so  you   re talking two hundred and twenty-five bills, maybe two hundred  and fifty bills. That   s a pretty good track record. It probably is more than  that if I actually did the count. Many of those bills though, the general  public would be totally oblivious to. They are bills that helped the  government internally operate more efficiently. They are bills that only a  small segment of people would be interested in or concerned about, but  there are a few out there that really made a difference in people   s lives,  and that I appreciate having that opportunity.  Can you name a few of them?  Well, let me just name a few of the primary ones because I feel good  about them. The Mental Health Parity Bill is a bill that began the  process. It was not all that we wanted, but it was a huge start to ensure  insurance companies and other healthcare insurance providers and  coverage providers, treated mental illness...biologically-based mental  illness, as any other illness.  Just because the disease is in the brain   does that mean that, that person  is less deserving than an individual whose disease began in the heart or  in the lungs or some other part of the body? So we were able to pass  legislation, and it took almost four years of really, really hard work  fighting the insurance industry and the coverage industry, having to     you know, the whole concern went across the gamut   the chambers,  employers, everybody who just knew this would raise the cost of  insurance. Well, we had numbers that already proved in other states  where similar legislation was passed, even more expensive legislation  was passed, that there was no increase in the cost of insurance  attributable to this change. So it took a long time, but that made a big  difference. And then people, instead of having five visits a year or thirty  days of inpatient treatment, it was treated just like any other physical  illness, which   when I read the letters and talked to family members  who had loved ones who were suffering from various mental illnesses, I  knew it was the right thing.  One of the other bills we did was a continued expansion of Medicaid  eligibility for pregnant women and children that directly gave more  access to healthcare services to more people. And that was why I went  into the legislature   to start really, really working hard on assuring that  every Oklahoman had some guaranteed access to healthcare services.  That   s what took me there, and that   s what we worked hard on.  12  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  The Prescription Drug Authority Bill for advanced practice nurses, I  thought was important   and people don   t realize it. You go to the  doctor, you see the nurse/midwife or you see the advanced  practice/pediatric nurse, and they could see you and diagnose you and  know what you need, but couldn   t give you the script. So we were able,  and, again, there   s a lot of years of fighting for that bill, we were  actually able to pass legislation that gave these advanced practice nurses  under the guidance and the protocols established by a supervising  physician, the authority to write prescription drugs for things that they  knew and that they could very easily prescribe medications for.  So I think those, and there are any number of bills along that line     including some tax bills, that I am pretty proud of. There are other bills  related to financing of things that I am also very proud of, but I think if  someone were to ask me choose two or three, those would be the two or  three that stand out. No one knows I did them and that   s okay. It was not  done for credit, but I guarantee you they really did change the course of  life for a whole lot of folk.  Any that you tried to pass that didn   t get passed?  Yeah.  Major disappointments?  Of course. The very first   my very first year at the legislature, who  could ever forget that? Since I went to the legislature addressing  healthcare issues, my very, very first big bill that year was a bill to  create universal healthcare access. It was a single-payer plan bill, and it  was pretty direct to implement. Keep in mind this is 1985, the session of  1985, and I really introduced it to begin the dialogue. I never anticipated  that it would pass, but we got it out of House committee and then we  moved to the House floor, and it was a four-plus hour debate on this bill.  So, yes, we definitely raised the level of discussion, but as things turned  out, there was a possibility that it was going to pass.  I was surprised, given the debate and given the questions, and when it  actually came down to vote, we were within thirteen votes of passing a  single-payer bill in the Oklahoma House of Representatives in 1985. It  was just amazing. The gallery was full of people, about 300 supporters  of the legislation and one of those members was my mom. I   ll never  forget the comment when I came down to meet the supporters and the  folk who were there, including my mom. She gave me a hug and the  tears welled in my eyes, of course   and, you know, just feeling like I  had disappointed them. I   d let all these people down who thought that I  could do something to really improve access to healthcare services.  13  Little did they know, years later, of course, we would do lots of things  that improved access to health care services. Like the mobile 9-1-1 bill  which allows you to call 9-1-1 from your cell phone and the emergency  personnel will be able to have a read on your actual geographical  location. It was a process of negotiations that I had an opportunity to  lead and my bill created the foundation that now gives people a way to  dial 9-1-1 on your cell phone and they   ll know just where you are. So  those are things we   ve done.  But the other big disappointment, I mention these two because they were  my first year disappointments   this one had to do with gun control. It  was again 1985 in Oklahoma and I had a corrections/law enforcement  type background, so I knew a little about this stuff and I remember  thinking how important it was to place some limitations on people   s  ability to access weapons, hand guns, and make sure they were  appropriately regulated. Not to take them away, but to regulate  appropriately.  We introduced what now is known as the Brady Bill, but this was before  the days. We introduced this bill and, sure enough, we got to committee  and I was excited. I had done my homework. I had the chief of police  from Oklahoma City there to testify. I had the person who was the  district attorney at the time there. I had all of these experts there to talk  about why we know for a fact that creating some regulation of hand gun  possession really did help reduce violence and create a safer  environment. It was a great presentation. The committee meeting was  great. There were a few questions asked, and everything went smoothly  until it was time to make the motion to pass the bill. And, of course, I  was a committee member so, after all of the debate and the questions  and answers and everything was said, I was recognized and made the  usual motion,    Do pass on the bill,    and there was silence. Not one other  committee member said anything. No second. No substitute motion like,     Do not pass,    or    Report progress,    which could have come   that  would have at least kept the idea out there. I got nothing, total silence  and the committee   you could have heard a pin drop in this committee  room that was full of people. So after the motion failed for lack of a  second, the bill just stayed in committee. The chair told me afterward,     The only reason why I heard the bill is because you   re a committee  member and I really like you, but I never thought it would pass.    He  said,    I knew it wouldn   t pass.    That was really disappointing because  we had worked really hard. Of course, now, what I had proposed then is  now the law, so I was just maybe a few years ahead of my time. But I   ll  never forget those experiences because I learned lots of things as a result  thereof.  I learned from the gun control bill to make sure, not only do you do your  14  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  homework to determine what the support should be and what the  dialogue would be to support this legislation   really do your homework  to know what the opposition believes, thinks, and who they are. As a  rule, I know the rules of social change. I went to the Midwest Academy  for Social Change in Chicago, Illinois. I know what some basic rules are,  and I failed to apply those rules. In terms of the Healthcare Reform Bill,  the Single-Payer Bill, I learned, you know   you   d be surprised how  many things can become law so don   t just anticipate that it won   t  happen, therefore you don   t do the kind of work you should do.  Anticipate that it will and be prepared, so it   s a matter of preparation,  and I guarantee I was made a better legislator throughout the rest of my  career because of those two experiences.  Did you do your own research or did you have someone     Well, we have legislative staffers, researchers who for the most part,  draft bills. We have legal staffers, fiscal staffers, all of whom can do  research for us, but having been a staffer for the legislature, it was real  easy for me to revert back into that role and do my own research, which  I did do a lot of. I was dependent on staff, too, but I know they   re busy  and we didn   t have our own individual staff. They had, in the case of the  House, 100 other members possibly making certain requests and  demands upon their time. So it was not unusual for me to do my own  research, to contact some folk that I knew and to develop some things  that would provide the kind of support I needed. It was not unusual for  me to even begin to draft language of a bill because I had done it before.  Members don   t routinely do that. They didn   t then. They definitely don   t  anymore.  Well, describe a typical day. How early did you show up at the office?  Oh, at the time I was elected, I had no children. I was single, footloose  and fancy free, and was excited about going to work every day, so it was  not unusual at all for me to show up at the Capitol building around 7:30  or 8:00am and definitely not unusual for me to be there until 8:30 or  9:00pm at night.  I loved it and, in fact, I   ll never forget when I moved to the Senate. The  leader of the Senate at that time, Stratton Taylor, used to always tell me,     There is life after the legislature. It   s not in this building. You need to  begin to develop things that provide a life for you, and we don   t mean a  living, we mean a life   a life for you after you live here, after you leave  here,    and that was really, really good advice because it was not unusual  to spend twelve to fourteen hours a day at the Capitol. I found myself  after I was elected working almost the same schedule as during the  campaign, which was all day long. In fact, you might leave and go to  15  Finchum  Monson  dinner or go to an event and come back, but I would come back to work.  In 1996, when my sister got sick, life did change for me because kids  came into my life, which was a very good thing. It put things in  perspective. So instead of doing, you know, twelve, fourteen hour days,  they became more eight to ten hour days. Well, it was never a normal  life. Life in the legislature is never normal and never ends. It is seven  days a week. The phone rings. I stayed listed in the phone book. People,  when they call you, they don   t call to say,    Thanks, you   re doing a great  job. I appreciate it.    They call because they have problems, so every call  is additional work and every call is an opportunity to be compassionate  and nice and kind to somebody even when you can   t help and you have  to tell them there   s nothing you can do. But that was a part of my job  and responsibilities. I never regretted it, all the things that I did. I was  afforded many wonderful opportunities. We could talk more about the  National Conference of State Legislatures and, you know, I don   t regret  it. It was hard work. It consumed your life. I tell people,    You have no  personal life.    And I would do it again, knowing what I know now, I  would definitely do it again, but I can also say now that it   s over,    Glad  it   s over.     Well, how many women served with you at the time you were in?  Not many, not many at all. Not many in the House. Fortunately, I had an  opportunity to serve with some wonderful women. Laura Boyd came in  a year after me, the two year cycle after me but Carolyn Taylor, then it  was Carolyn Thompson, was in the legislature. Linda Larason, Debbie  Blackburn   there were wonderful women and there were, I   m just  trying to think, when I went into the House if there were any republican  women? I can   t think back that far, but there were a few of us  women ,  and the numbers have remained pretty constant. They   ve grown. The  numbers have grown, but Oklahoma   s place in the bigger scheme of  things in the world has not really changed at all in terms of women in the  legislature.  Most of the women that I served with in the Senate were older women  who had raised their families and didn   t have small children. I was really  the only woman, until toward the end, with small children at home. It  was easier for me because I lived right here in Oklahoma City. It was  like just making arrangements while you go to work but it was much  more difficult for many of them. We never had a women   s caucus, an  organized women   s caucus, the whole time I served. Maybe party  politics came into play too hard. We   ve attempted to, and there are  attempts right now to do so, and I hope they can do that, even if it   s just  a place where women in the legislature can come and share some of the  same difficulties that we have on both sides of the aisle. From dealing  with a male-dominated environment to just sharing strategies for raising  16  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  kids, balancing home and professional life, and maybe not talk as much  about issues if there are certainly huge gaps or huge places of  disagreement. But the women   s caucus, I think, is important. I regret that  we did not have an organized women   s caucus during the time that I  served in the legislature.  Well, did you do things outside of your normal day, with just the  women?  No, not really.  There wasn   t time, I guess.  Not really. You know, you learned to play with the big boys as they  would say. But there was this level of mutual support and admiration.  You always had a friend.  There were mentors for me, women mentors, who I knew I could always  go to. Senator Maxine Horner from Tulsa, when I went into the Senate,  was certainly one that helped me around, and Senator Horner had been  around politically. She worked for a congressman and she knew the  ropes, but she was just a good calming force for me in the legislature. So  yes, we did things. You found friends and compadres that you did things  with that did lend to the development of relationships between women in  the legislature. I really look forward to the day when women are  proportionately represented in legislative bodies. I just think the whole  outcome of the legislative process will be so different, and better. Let me  quickly say,    Not just different, but better.     And how soon do you think that will happen? (Laughs)  Maybe not in my lifetime, you know. It   s just hard because the job itself  does not lend well to what traditionally women view as a career  opportunity for them.  I was visiting with a lobbyist friend of mine who has a soon to be four-year-  old son. She lives in the Tulsa vicinity. Not in Tulsa, but the Tulsa  vicinity. It was easy when the baby was small and she would go home or  spend a day during the week at home. Hubby would bring the baby here   Oklahoma City , and her mom and the baby would stay in the city a few  days with her. And maybe, one night or one day would go by that she  didn   t see the small child. Well, now the baby is almost four, so it   s time  for school and a more consistent program. Now, she faces a huge  dilemma. You know,    Do I really go away and stay away from home  three, four days out of the week and just leave dad there to nurture him?  Or do I have to make a big career choice and figure out how I can stay at  17  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  home? Or       Moving to Oklahoma City was not an option because  family support opportunities in that area, so it   s difficult.  I   ll tell you this   it won   t happen until we can have workplace daycare  much more available. It won   t happen until men realize that they, too,  just like women can raise families and do a pretty doggone good job at  it, you know, because when male legislators leave home and are gone  four days out of the week, mom is at home raising children. No one says,     Oh, that   s not a good thing.    So it   s a mindset change and then just  trying to deal with this guilt that women feel.  You know, I feel it now when I travel sometimes and leave the kids at  home or with   of course, they   re not home by themselves, they   re in the  care of others who really love them, but it   s like,    But that   s my job and  I should be there.    So, we have a whole lot of things internally and  externally to deal with.  And the key though, I think, really is to start with women when they   re  much younger girls and opening this up as a career opportunity. It   s just  like the sciences, where girls never thought they could be physicians   it  was always a nurse, you know? Well, we can be lots of things, but we  have to start with them young to explore and share with young women  these concepts. So, if I had an opportunity and was going to build a  program to get more women into elective service, it wouldn   t start at  college, which is great, I mean, we need to do that, but it would start at  third or fourth grade. There should be these routine kinds of encounters  with young girls and public service and elective office. It would be to  brand this profession with them as a logical, reasonable profession, to  really make a difference in the world that they exist.  Sounds like a new plan needs to come along.  Well, one of these days   one of these days I have a whole long list of  things to do, like write a book and start a foundation, so that   s why I  have to live until I   m about 120 to accomplish all these goals.  And you stated earlier you   d like to do a PhD. That   ll come in handy,  too.  Yeah, that   ll come in handy. Now that I   m in my new job at OU Health  Sciences Center in the world of academics, I always thought I   d want to  go back to school, but, you know, it becomes probably more critical in  this kind of environment than others. And it   s been thirty years since I  began graduate school so the thought of going back to college actually is  very exciting, on one hand, because I love the dialogue. I teach some. I  love the dialogue. I love the interaction in the classroom. I love the  18  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  reading, and I really wouldn   t even mind doing the papers and the  research, so I think   so why am I being apprehensive? Well, it   s new  and it   s different and it   s a commitment of time that   s blocked off on a  calendar that you can   t fudge and say,    Well, I   ll come back to it later.     You   ve got to be there in that classroom and maybe that   s what my life  needs is, you know, more structure right about now. That   s really a joke.  But life is good. We   we   ll come back. I want to talk about my  experiences with the National Conference of State Legislatures. I don   t  want to forget that one.  Well, go ahead.  Okay. NCSL   the NCSL, of course      Stands for?  The National Conference of State Legislatures, which is, as the tag line  goes,    The premiere organization representing all fifty state legislatures  and legislatures of U.S. territories, with several international affiliate  members.    NCSL provides research and other support and technical  assistance for and to state legislators and their staffers. It   s a very large  organization that is comprised of all legislators.  By virtue of their election to office, legislators become members of  NCSL. It is the place that elected officials go in the state and sometimes  executive branch, too, but certainly legislative leaders and legislators for  information. It is also the place for staffers to go to when they   re looking  for research, comparative information, or to look and see what   s  happening in the world of state legislatures, like bills being passed. We  don   t do model legislation. It   s simply a clearinghouse and a place to  share info.  NCSL is no older than twenty-five, twenty-six years old   I can   t  remember how old we are now, but I had the distinction of serving as the  first African American female president of that organization and actually  the first woman that served the complete four year cycle as an officer. I  was elected at the vice-president   s slot, which is where the election  actually occurs, and then it   s a four-year continuation as an officer. The  only other woman that had ever been elected in that vice-presidency slot  left to go to Congress. She left the legislature to run for a congressional  seat and she was successful. So it was important for me to show that a  woman could hold this role. It   s a very, very busy role.  When I was NCSL president, I probably traveled 200, 225, 250,000  miles in one year, and it was for three years, just like a mad race   it was  just like, always on the go. You know, couple that with your home  19  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  legislative responsibility, add a national responsibility to it, and you  realize how busy one gets. I don   t regret it at all, and it did afford me  the opportunity to travel around the world, to meet with presidents, to  meet with other heads of state, to talk about the value of the state  legislature as a provincial legislature to the whole process of making  social change and creating public policy. It   s a wonderful experience,  including the friends that you meet, but the knowledge you gain about  how the world can be different, the insight that you gain.  NCSL is an opportunity to become more exposed to different ways of  doing things and different ways of thinking about things. I think therein  lies the ability of this country to compete globally, this exposure to teach  and make sure people understand that the world is not narrow. It   s not  narrowly focused, and we don   t all think alike. But it   s extraordinarily  broad, with lots of ideas and thoughts about how government should  work, about how people should be represented. None of them are bad,  per se. None of them are good, per se. They just are, and they are  different, and I think once we come to the realization that there are many  ways to govern, depending on the history of the people and depending  on where the people are   many ways to govern that are not abusive, that  are not controlling   I mean, there are other opportunities, and that we  think differently, we become better legislators.  So my experience with NCSL, I think, made me a better Oklahoma  legislator. It put me in touch with a whole bunch of folk that helped me  become a better advocate for Oklahoma and on the national level. There  were advantages to Oklahoma as well while I was in that position. But it  was a wonderful experience that I really, really enjoyed and would again  do again if afforded the opportunity, but only one year   only one year  not four. That   s enough.  Do you anticipate going further, like into Congress, or should I not ask  that?  Oh, no. That   s a fair question. I get asked that question all the time.  Is that a possibility?  Am I going to pursue other elective office? You know, a year ago I  would have quickly answered that question,    No,    and wouldn   t have  even thought about it. It would have been a definite,    No.    I like having  my life again. I like having my privacy   you know, being able to  schedule things and do things that are for kids or for family or for  whomever. I just like not being under total scrutiny all the time or  feeling the obligation to always be available and to go and to be, you  know, and to speak to, or whatever the job demanded. However, in the  20  last few months, there   s this sense again, this same overwhelming  feeling of obligation and responsibility.  As you look around and see the many, many issues that all of us are  confronted with, and you think,    Well, maybe there is something I could  do. Maybe there is a role for me to play in coming to some resolution,  whether it   s on violence in our communities, whether it   s the dismal  graduation rate of students in Oklahoma, whether it   s the extremely high  remediation rate that   s needed when kids go to college   therefore, we  know they   re not learning what they need to learn in their secondary and  elementary training. Whatever it might be that I know is having a huge  and extreme effect on our society, on our culture, that maybe I have a  responsibility to do something. Well, of course, being in elective office  gives you the bully pulpit. It gives you the forum. It gives you the clout  that you need to begin talking about some of these issues and put a  concrete plan on the table to address these issues. So will I run for  elective office again? I   m not going to say no. I can say I don   t have  anything in mind. I can also say I wouldn   t want to be one of 435, if you  know what I mean. That says Congress is probably off the table. Not a  bad idea to be one of 100, but I   m not announcing a U.S. Senate race  either.  There are a lot of good candidates out there that are contemplating  upcoming elections and, for now, I   m really, really enjoying what I do at  the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. The opportunity to  change the course of the future as it relates to healthcare. Not only am I  involved with policy issues, not legislative, but policy issues that make  this campus and our programs more responsive to a diverse population, I  also have the wonderful opportunity in our division here to ensure a  diverse population of students, faculty and staff here at OUHSC.  We don   t fare well in Oklahoma, at the University of Oklahoma, in our  recruitment of what we consider underrepresented minorities, whether  they   re racial or ethnic or income status minorities. We don   t do that  well. It   s a pretty much homogeneous group of students around this  campus. So my boss, Dr. Joe Ferretti, I know has for years, since he  came here to this post, had great concern and great desire to change the  hue of the campus   to make us look more like a community, a  community of people we serve. So it is a wonderful opportunity. I even  get a chance to work with fifth graders, with eleven year olds, twelve  year olds, to talk to them about becoming health scientists   whether it   s  a researcher or a provider or whatever it might be. So, I feel that I   m  being well used here. I feel a sense of satisfaction here.  I   m not pushing or encouraging or asking anybody to think with me  about running for elective office. If the opportunity clearly presents itself  21  Finchum  Monson  Finchum  Monson  and it   s clear that it was of no doing or making of my own, kind of like  divine intervention   well, then maybe I would consider it. But we   re  just waiting and seeing, waiting. Patience is a virtue, my friend.  Remember that always     always.  Well, is there anything I need to ask you that I haven   t or anything you  want to talk about that we haven   t?  I   ve been talking a long time.  No, you   re doing good. Well, when history is written about you, what  would you like for it to say?  That   s interesting, it   s like,    What do you want it to say on your grave  marker?    Actually, I think I would like people to remember me for being  a people person, being regular   you know, maintaining   really  maintaining the grounding and the values that my mom and dad taught  me about relationships, one with another.  I don   t want to be remembered for things that I did singularly because,  as a sole participant, I probably have not done much. But as an  individual working with, sometimes leading, sometimes following  others, I think we   ve accomplished a lot of things. You know, I was  NAACP president in Oklahoma City for a period of time before going to  work at the legislature and during my early years working for the  legislature, and I   ve had opportunities to see great need, the great need  that so many people have in so many ways, and yet to some extent it   s  better now than it was thirty, forty years ago, but in many instances it   s  worse now than it was then. So if people can just remember me for the  work that I did with and for others, that would be great. But if they don   t  remember me at all, and this is what I tell folk, the chances are you  know, fifty years, twenty-five years   someone said even two years after  I die, people just may not remember you at all, and that   s okay. You  know, that   s okay. Not that I will be bothered with that, I guarantee you,  in the afterlife. That will not bother me. But as long as people continue  to benefit from the things that I   ve done there in lies the ability to be  remembered. So that really is what I   m seeking for, just to be a steward,  good steward of time, good steward of resources given to me, to  understand that, you know, we as a people are so interconnected.  I walk into a room of students, of elementary school students, of pre-school  students, and I look at their faces and I think what wonderful  potential   what wonderful potential rests right in this room to discover  cures to terrible diseases, to become wonderful teachers that enlighten  and create a desire to learn among other young people. It   s all right in  this room, so what are we going to do to make sure that happens? You  22  know, what is it that we as individuals contribute to the nature of things  to make sure that happens? And this is pretty heavy duty and sounds so  philosophical and pie-in-the-sky, but it is what drives me   I guarantee  you it is that thought, that philosophy, that vision, that spirit that drives  me and, without question, it is in the spirit.  I have strong spiritual beliefs. I have strong convictions about why we  were created and what our mission is in life. I have strong, strong beliefs  that God empowers us to do things and places us where we should be,  and our job is to do it. Our job is to do it. So that   s my sense of who I  am. Life is good.  If I can just say this to end   2005, the year I left the legislature, was a  huge transition year for me, the smallest of which was leaving the  legislature. My significant other, Robert, Dr. Kennedy, my twenty-year  partner, was diagnosed with lung cancer in December of 2004. He was  not a smoker. I did not smoke. He was one of the very small numbers of  folk who contract lung cancer for no reason to be determined, and  Robert died ten months after his diagnosis.  Six weeks prior to Robert   s death, my mom unexpectedly died. My  brother, during 2005, had several amputations, he was a diabetic   life  was just hard. It was really, really hard for me in 2005. But I persevered.  I never gave up. Even going through difficult times, I always knew that  things would be better. And the Sunday after my mom   s Friday death,  my mom was a minister, was a preacher, was a pastor of a church   I  found a manuscript that she had written some time ago. It was on a small  piece, small page, small papers that she used to write on when she first  started writing, and the title was,    Life goes better with faith. Believe  and receive.    Now, she spoke directly to my heart about the  complications and difficulties in life, about the necessity to continue to  be faithful and to believe that things will turn out all right as you go  through these difficult times, and those words did sustain me during  some very difficult times. It made me draw on the faith that I knew  about, that I had experienced, that had grown in my heart and in my  mind because it is an intellectual exercise, you see, to believe things that  you cannot see. It is very intellectual, and to utilize that and to know for  certain that things would be better, and to be able today, now some  eighteen months or so later, to simply say,    Life is really good. I am  very happy.     Opportunities have been opened to me that I never would have  imagined. People love me that I never would have imagined. People are  caring for me and I have the opportunity to care back and still move  toward the mission of changing lives for people and contributing any  way I can. So life is good. Even after the legislature, life is very, very  23  Finchum  Monson  good.  Well, thank you so much for sharing that with us today.  You   re very welcome. I   m glad to do so.  ------- -------  
