  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Today is September 19, 2007. I   m in Moore, Oklahoma with Carolyn  Coleman, who was in the House of Representatives of Oklahoma from  1990 through 2004     Right.     served fourteen years   and this is part of the Oklahoma State  University Library   s oral history project entitled Women of the  Oklahoma Legislature. Thank you for joining us today.  Oh, thank you.  Did I say who I was?  Yes. (Laughs) I think so.  If I didn   t, this is Tanya Finchum, and I want to start with Carolyn  telling us a little bit about her childhood, where she was born and a little  bit about her hometown     Well, I was born in Oklahoma City, southeast Oklahoma City, and  actually I can remember back when I was about two years old. I  remember we lived on Hattie and Southeast 32nd, and we used to go  across a red sandy road into this big field. It was our crawdad patch and  my brothers had a place down in there where they   it was their camp,  you know, where they would play with their tire swing and all that, and  that became I-35 there at Southeast 15th. We lived there and I went to  school at Crooked Oak schools. That was a pretty good school back  when we were in school and then, you know   things change. It   s a  much smaller school now. And I went to college several different places  but I did not grow up well-to-do by any stretch. When I was thinking  5  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  about this, I thought about my dad. My dad worked really hard all of his  life. He did really hard manual labor, so now in his later years, he   s  paying for it. He   s not in real good physical health at all. I had two really  great parents. My mom pretty much stayed home and took care of us all  of our growing up years, and so I have a lot of good memories. We were  basically poor, but I mean we had a lot of good memories. We, you  know, we   d bike ride. We went up to the stores and got our soda pops  and all that type of thing, and so we had a lot of fun. And I have two  brothers who are both older than I.  You   re the baby?  I   m the baby, and I   m the only girl   so in that birth order thing, you  know, there   s a lot of stuff going on there. Both of my brothers live here  in the city. In fact, one of my brothers just lives on the next street from  me, and I think we all get along pretty well. Again, when I was thinking  about answering these questions, and I say we grew up basically poor, I  always think about how relative that is because there are so many people  that are just so bad off and then there are so many people that are so  much better off. I don   t know if anybody really is in poverty in the  United States anyway   some people just have more than others.  Anyway I didn   t grow up with a whole lot of material things, but it never  seemed to hurt me, you know.  When did you get interested in politics?  As far as really getting interested to work for candidates or run for  office, it probably wasn   t until I was about in my mid-thirties. We  always voted. I registered. I don   t remember the year, but I know they  lowered it to eighteen, and I think I was nineteen at the time, I   m not real  sure. But I registered before I was twenty-one. I think I voted for the  wrong people a few times (Laughter) but I always was interested. I  remember when Martin Luther King was assassinated. Oh, my gosh, I  just boo-hooed and boo-hooed over that, and then Bobby Kennedy. I  think I was a teenager when all that happened, but I remember all that.  I think we were part of that moral majority group of people. Pat  Robertson was running and so we got in with some people and thought  some changes needed to be made. We went to our   what do you call  it?   your meetings in February    your caucus meetings or precinct  meetings. We started going to our precinct meetings and met some  people and met Helen Cole, met Tom Cole. I worked for Helen in her  campaign. I met Joan Greenwood. I think at that time, Tom Cole was  running for office because Helen had retired, and so we got to know  people. It was at the time when this seat, it   s been re-drawn now about  three or four times, had been drawn for Nancy Virtue Lewis back in  6  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  1980, I guess. When it was first drawn up, it was a heavily democrat  district and I   m a conservative republican. Republicans all along had  been running. Nobody could ever win and then she retired because she  married Steve Lewis. Then   oh, my predecessor, and I can   t remember  his name and he   s a really nice guy. He has the pharmacy in Del City,  and I hate it that I can   t remember his name.  It   ll come to you.  We just differed on political issues, and so some people said,    Well, why  don   t you run? It   s time for a woman to run for that seat.    And I had no  idea what I was doing. I   m honest. I had no idea what I was doing. I just  knew that I didn   t agree with him on some of the things he   d voted for,  and I thought,    Well, shoot. I can do this.    And so we ran. I ran on a  very meager campaign, and I won 63 to 36 or something like that.  Against a man.  Against an incumbent democrat.  That   s even harder.  Yes, it was   and I think part of it though, to be really honest, was that  the demographics were changing. It was still a registered democrat  district, but the whole county had been changing. So I think I just got in  at the right time.  What kind of things did you do campaigning?  I walked my little feet off. It   s not like it is today. Candidates spend way,  way too much money on campaigns. It   s ridiculous. All the consultants  have gotten into the show. But we got our voting list, and we found the  best voting democrats and the best voting republicans, and went out and  just start knocking doors. And I   d already done that for Joan Greenwood  and Tom Cole, so I knew what I was getting into there. We walked  every night and every Saturday except when there was an OU   University of Oklahoma  game going on. We never walked (Laughter)  when there was an OU game going.  We walked everywhere we could walk and I was myself, you know. I  had about four issues, and I never said anything personal against John     that was his first name. I never said anything personal against him. I  said,    This is where I disagree,    and some people said,    I   m gonna vote  for you just because you   re a woman,    and I said,    You need to really  think about that.    I guess people were ready for a change.  7  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Did you use the same strategy for each time you campaigned?  Pretty much.  Did it get a little easier each time?  It was a lot more fun in the beginning, you know. I could probably  count on one hand the really nasty people that I ran into   but, no, I just  walked all the neighborhoods. And I remember visiting this one lady in a  neighborhood. I think she was about the only house on the block and  before I was able to get back to her, she was pregnant at the time, that  little baby was about two or three years old because I walked. I walked,  and when people wanted to talk to me, I talked to them, you know. I  didn   t just say,    Hi. I   m running for       and get out of there. I wanted to  know what they were thinking and I think they appreciated that.  My husband was able to talk to more people than I was able to because  he wasn   t the candidate. That   s why it took me so long to get back  around places because I liked to talk to people. So yes, I pretty much  used the same strategy. I just went out and talked to people, told them  what I thought. I   d always say,    This is how I believe. I won   t change,  and if you can   t deal with that, then you need to vote for my opponent,  but everything else, you need to come to me and tell me what you   re  thinking because I don   t know.    And so that seemed to work pretty well  most of the time.  So you campaigned seven times. Was each time against a man?  My first re-election was against a woman, and wow, she was mean.  (Laughter) I always tell candidates,    Just be aware. Women can be very,  very mean.    I mean, they just can be and that woman lied. I   m just  going to be real honest. I would come home and I would read the  Norman Transcript. We had a newspaper in Norman that was just  horrible. I put campaign pieces in the first year I ran. After that, I never  spent another penny at that newspaper that I can think of. I may have  that second election but they   re a very biased newspaper. So I said,     When you want to be open and honest and visit with me, I   ll come  back, but until then, I don   t care what you do.    But anyway, I would  come home and she would have an ad in that newspaper and I could not  believe somebody could be that mean-spirited. She would attack me and  there may have been a grain of truth, but it was just twisted all over the  place. Originally, on my first election, I thought,    I   m not gonna have  any problems. Here I am, a nobody, you know. I don   t have any  skeletons in the closet. I   m this little woman with two kids and a  husband. What can people say about me?    So I found out real quickly  that   and I   ve told candidates this      If you don   t have anything bad  8  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  going on, believe me, they   ll make it up. I mean, they just do.    So it was  a lady, and she just did really ugly stuff. I would come in a few times  and fall across the bed and cry because it was just, you know, so ugly.  But I beat her like 67 percent and then I ran against a man the next time,  I think. I only got off one time without a race. I think I had a primary but  I didn   t have a general. I had a race every two years. A couple of times I  had primaries, and there   s a whole lot of reasons I think I had races  every time.  But you won. (Laughs)  I won, and I always won up in the sixties.  Do you remember your first day in office?  I remember the inauguration. I was just overwhelmed and not having  been out there really before   a lot of people will come to you and say,     This is the first time you   ve ever been at the Capitol?      which is a  shame really because it   s our building and we should be out there and  we should be talking to people and all that. But I think I was pretty  overwhelmed. I had no idea what was going on, and the advice was  always to spend a little bit of time, you know, getting to know the  system and not try to run too many bills and just kind of learn that first  year.  How old were your children at that time?  Let   s see, by the time I went in, I think Rachel was fourteen and Sarah  was thirteen. So they were old enough.  And you lived at home   you didn   t have to have an apartment down  there?  No, thirteen miles. They had been in public school. They   d been in a  small Christian school and they   d been home-schooled. We had a very  flexible routine so it worked out pretty well for us.  Did you have a different office space each time? (Laughter)  Being in the minority party, when I was elected, I think there were  maybe only thirty-one republicans. I can tell you about what it was like  being a member of thirty-one republicans out there. I went in and I  shared an office with Representative Tim Pope. You could barely get  two of those big old desks in the office. I had a desk and a bookshelf and  a very small reception area for our secretary. We shared an assistant  and   let   s see, I was with him for two years and then I shared an office  9  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  with another person. Then, as we were growing in number, they have a  room that was the mailroom up on the fifth floor. They came in and re-did  it, and I shared that with Joan Greenwood. Since she had been in  longer than I, I got stuck in the middle room and froze to death, but it  was a nicer office.  And then I went across the hall and officed with Frank Lucas. That  space had been a vault and if you know who Frank Lucas is, he   s about  6   5   , 6   6.    When he would go in, he   d always have to duck under to go  in the office. But we were back in the vault. And since then, they   ve re-done  that office. And I think after that, I finally got my own office. It  was really the best office I had, except it was so small. It was on the fifth  floor right at the end of the stairs. We had stairs at the end of the hall,  and you could just run down those stairs and go right into the chamber. I  loved that because I could be back there and none of the lobbyists knew  where I was. I   d go back there and they weren   t bothering me a lot of the  time. But it was probably smaller than the space I shared. Then after  that, I got my own office and moved a couple more times. I don   t know  how many assistants I ended up with. I think I had probably about six or  seven assistants in all those years so it was interesting.  One for every two years. Well, describe a typical day in office.  Oh, gosh. Well, I got up every morning and went out there. Committee  meetings would start sometimes at 8:00 in the morning, and if you don   t  have a committee meeting, there   s no point in being up there. I   d always  try to get up there and go through my mail and talk to people. I would  spend time talking with the other representatives to find out what was  going on because (Laughs) I was a woman and I was a minority, and  that   s the only way I was going to find out anything. I had to go ask  because otherwise I wasn   t going to know anything. That was just really  difficult. I would go talk to the guys that I could confide in. I could ask  what was going on and get a heads-up on the legislation. When a  constituent called, I would talk to them. I was always the type that called  the agency head and would get to know them and talk to them. I spent  time with the staff and if somebody came by, you know, I   d always  make time to visit with them. I would go sit in session and sometimes it  was really exciting and sometimes it was really boring, you know. That  would pretty much be a day: go through my mail, my constituents, find  out what   s going on, read my bills, go to committee meetings, and go to  session.  What time would you get home in the afternoon?  I usually got home around 5:30.  10  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  That   s not bad.  No, no. On Thursdays, I   d get home a little bit earlier. On Fridays we  didn   t have session so I could do stuff I needed to do. Sometimes I   d go  back out there on Fridays for a little bit. Sometimes it was to my  detriment, because I lived so close. I had a husband and two children,  and I came home, but the people that came in from out of town that  stayed in the motels spent a lot of time with the lobbyists. It took me a  little while but I finally figured out,    Why does this guy know all of this  stuff that   s going on?    Well, he   s been out all night with the lobbyists.  You know, the lobbyists had been buying him dinner and telling him all  this stuff. That   s why they got to carry the bills. They were spending so  much time with the lobbyists. And I never did that. I came home, you  know, and I tried to find some issues that I was interested in and just did  my thing.  Do you remember the first bill you presented on the floor?  I   m trying to remember my first bill. The first bill that I remember, I  don   t think it was my first bill, but the first bill that I remember doing     got me in a lot of trouble with Norman schools. This may be a sore spot  with all education, but you know we have the gifted program for  children, and that gifted program had some problems. You have the  gifted program and then you have special-education and all of that, and  the gifted program was supposed to be to really help those children  excel. There should have been some boundaries, and there should have  been some specifications that this is what the gifted program is for. And  to be really honest, it was a funding mechanism. So I did some work and  I talked to a lot of people. I talked to some parents that their children  were in the gifted program and I found out some of the things that were  going on in the gifted program that did not help those children  academically at all.  I put some funding restrictions and some definitions and that type of  thing in and   oh, golly, Norman schools were furious with me because  they were going to lose funding from it. And I thought,    But this isn   t  right,    you know,    This isn   t right, what you   re doing   what are you  doing with the money?    Well, the money was not going toward this  gifted program at the time, and of course I can   t remember all the  details, but that   s the first one I remember. Somebody else ended up  carrying it and passing it. A democrat carried it because they finally  realized that something needed to be done and I stood up and answered  the questions. Some of the people didn   t even understand what I was  trying to do so they were trying to help me and I   m going,    No, I don   t  think that   s what we want to do.    I wish I could remember who finally  passed that bill. He was head of Education A B and he carried the bill.  11  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  I remember when it was about to pass, I stood up and debated and I said,     You know, it   s really none of us that should get the credit for this.     There was a lady who had spent long hours   I mean, she had done so  much research from the researchers and everybody that had done  anything on gifted, and she brought me all this information. The  weekend before the bill passed, she had a seizure, or an aneurysm or  something, and she died, and so I said,    This is the lady who gets the  credit for this bill. She   s the one that did all the work for it, and she  should get the credit.    And they stood up and applauded, and I   m going,     Oh, my gosh, what have I done?    because I was so na  ve. I didn   t  understand any of that stuff, and so they applauded. The lady   s name  was Donna, I think, and that was fourteen years ago.  In fact, those ladies, the mothers that helped me when I was trying to get  information from schools, the schools told us,    We can   t provide you  with that information, it   s too complex.    Do you know, the ladies took a  pad and pencil and came up with the figures within pennies? I finally got  it from this one school district, and they were within pennies and the  mothers had done it with paper and pencil and the school district  couldn   t give it to me. They didn   t have it. They didn   t know how to get  it, you know.  They probably didn   t want to.  No, of course they didn   t want to. It was interesting. So that   s the first  bill I remember doing.  What committees did you serve on?  I was on Education, and back in those days they had it broken out into  three, Common-Ed, Career Tech   not Vo-Tech, and Higher-Ed. So I  served on two of those   Education, Human Services, Tourism, and  they   ve changed the name so much, Public Health.  Did you chair or co-chair any of them?  I was in the minority. (Laughs)  Okay.  No. (Laughs) Right before I left, I got to co-chair with a democrat  chairman in Human Services and   no     no     no     no     no.  So my question should be   what   s your biggest obstacle   being in the  wrong party or being female?  12  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Both, I think. Now, obviously, the democrat women did not have that  same problem. They were vice-chairs or they were chairs, of course, I  don   t think there were that many. I know Carolyn Thompson was chair  of the Education Committee because she pushed through House Bill  1017. As more women came, you know, they were always the chairmen.  So being a woman was a problem, but more than being a woman, it was  the party. It was run by democrats, and that   s the way it was.  Did the women work together even though different parties?  We did to some extent. On social issues, they were very liberal. We  were all very conservative, you know. There toward the end, several of  us got together against a senator, going around and around on some  education issues. We could talk and we could kind of console each other  and discuss what it was like being in your caucus. I think those problems  were the same pretty much, but when it came to putting your vote up on  that board or doing what your leadership wanted you to do, they were  going to go with the Speaker. That   s the way it was because they were in  the majority party and that   s what you had to do. We came together on  some educational issues   a few, but not many issues really because  there was a political line drawn. I was conservative all the way and I just  had a real big problem with some of the money spending.  When it came to social hour, if there was a social hour, could you tell  much difference between men and women or again was it divided by  party?  No, and I didn   t go to a whole lot of things. When I was first elected I  went to more than I did when I was finishing up. There were some fun  things that we went to. It   s kind of like a family, you know, I   ll beat my  brother up but when you   re out of there, you   re all family again. You  love each other. We   d beat each other up horribly in session when we  were asking questions or debating or whatever, but at the functions it  was like all of that was kind of pushed aside. You had to have that civil  relationship because if it was anger and distrust and disagreement all of  the time, you couldn   t get anything done. You had to learn that even  though you might think one thing politically, that you   re still a good  person. You can still talk about other things and you can still have a  relationship so when there were social events, everybody pretty much  got along. There were some of the guys who were drinking heavily and  so I knew who to stay away from but it was time to finally relax and  visit and get to know each other.  Did you make any lasting friendships with other women while you were  there that you stay in touch with now?  13  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Well, Kathleen Wilcoxson is probably my best friend, and Joan  Greenwood and I were really good friends but she   s gone all the time  now so I haven   t talked to her since probably last summer. I took a  liking to Judy Eason McIntyre. I don   t see her very often, but I really  like Judy. We seem to get along pretty well, but I think Kathleen   s  probably the person that I have contact with pretty regularly.  What would you consider a couple of your major accomplishments while  you were there?  Well, it   s difficult. When you   re campaigning, people want to know that,  and they want to know the bills you passed. There   s a few people that  understand it   s not all the bills you passed because   my gosh, we have  got so many laws it   s ridiculous. You can   t even hardly turn your head  without there being a law to stop you from it. So I never did file a whole  lot of bills and there are some people that understood that we didn   t need  any more legislation. Most of the bills I filed ended up being taken away  from me and so I have a few things. I guess my accomplishments would  be that Kathleen  Wilcoxson  and I worked on the reading legislation.  I   m not a teacher or anything, but I have children and I   m interested in  that. I go to conferences where there are speakers and we had the OBE   Outcome-based Education  thing here in Oklahoma. My best friends are  teachers, Joan was a teacher and Kathleen   s a teacher, and my niece is a  teacher.  I   d read some things on literacy, started getting figures and facts on  reading, finding out that our children really aren   t reading all that well     and I had a pretty good relationship with our Moore school district. I  talked with them about some things and decided that there needed to be  something done so that when children start to school, they are taught  how to read and there   s a way to do that, you know. A lot of people  disagreed with me because they thought I was trying to do phonics as the  end-all and be-all. I do believe that phonics are probably about the best  way to read because we read by sound. We don   t read by sight. So we  worked for several years on that.  I had files of information and a lot of times you don   t write your own  legislation. The staff writes it, and I   ll tell you what, sometimes  legislators have no idea what their legislation even says. They just don   t.  They can tell you they do, but they don   t because the staff writes it.  That   s not true of everybody of course. But I had all this information and  I would have to write my legislation. We had really good staff people,  but they didn   t know any of that so I   d have to write my own legislation.  I would send it off to other states and have different people look at it and  come back. That was about the time, I think, Kathleen came.  14  What I wanted was for teachers to be trained in a well-rounded way.  They would have a full arsenal on how to teach children to read. They  would be able to work with the children and know what those children   s  needs were, and how to work with those children to do diagnostics so  that they would know what those children need. And we worked and  worked and worked on that. I fought Barbara Staggs week after week  after week on that. I mean, we fought each other like crazy. We could go  out and be friends but we fought each other like crazy on this. She didn   t  agree with me at all and a lot of people didn   t understand what phonics  were. And it would be killed in committee, I mean every time, it would  be killed. I would try to put some amendments on the floor and they  would be killed, every time.  One day in session, in April, you can file shell bills, and that   s what it  was, a shell bill. It had no language in it. You can come in later on and  put language in it. So all of my bills had been killed. And low and  behold, and I love the lady dearly, but Betty Boyd stands up, and she has  her bill, and it   s my bill, it   s my language. I mean they just took my  language, put it in her shell bill, and it became the Reading Sufficiency  Act. And I think Penny Williams carried it in the Senate. I didn   t put any  funding in it because as I talked with the schools, isn   t that what you   re  supposed to be doing? I mean, in the first, second and third grade, and  even kindergarten, if you are not working with those children to get  them to become proficient readers by the third grade, you   re in bad, bad  trouble. So what else are you doing if you   re not teaching these children  to read in the first, second and third grade? What are you doing? I don   t  know what they   re doing, they were doing all this stuff that all those  laws make them do, I guess.  I didn   t think they needed funding. I just thought they needed to be  doing this. Betty put funding in it and it   s just been mutilated something  horribly. I still don   t think our children are reading. Kathleen and I have  not been able to get any legitimate information from teachers prep or  anything, and it   s been years. I   ve been out four years, so it   s been eight  years, and many students still can   t read. But I thought,    Okay. Okay.  My name   s not on the bill. Everybody knows that it   s me.    I even talked  with Sandy Garrett.    We just don   t do that anymore.    So low and  behold, I read in the newspaper where Sandy Garrett and Betty Boyd are  in Tulsa, and    Sandy Garrett   s been a phonics-proponent all her life.     Well, no she hasn   t and Betty Boyd gets all the credit for the legislation,  and that crushed me. That just crushed me because I had worked so hard,  but that   s the way it is out there. You either get a tough skin and you  deal with it and understand that it   s not about your name being on the  bill.  Now if you   re a politician and you want to go someplace, yes, your  15  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  name better be on some bills but that   s not what I was about. So we got  it passed and we fine-tuned it a little bit over the years. That was one of  my biggest accomplishments even though I don   t know if it   s even done  that much good.  I tried to get remedial-education taken out of the universities, (Laughs)  and that didn   t go over too well because Joe Castiglione told me I was  going to destroy the athletics department, and I said,    Well, now that   s a  horrible way to feel about your athletes.    That   s not what our  universities are for, and I think David Boren   s done a lot of work on  that. That   s what the junior colleges are for. If they   re not getting what  they need in high school, which is a shame, that   s what the junior  colleges were for.  OSU has the Northern Oklahoma College     Oh, yes.     Gateway Program.  But it   s all about money. So I was on that microphone, some radio talk  show and I had said that if somebody told me that they had that attitude  about me, that I was that stupid, I would be so upset. That   s a horrible  attitude to have about their football players. I can remember standing in  the chamber for three hours at a time fielding questions. I just laughed it  off, but boy toward the end I was getting really tired of it because it was  three hours at a time fielding questions about that. It was because the  universities had come and said,    Do not allow that,    because of the  money, and so that would never get very far.  But one accomplishment   I filed a bill with Helen Cole and it was to  stop the smoking in our schools. I thought,    If we   re spending all this  money and all this time telling people how bad smoking is for people  then teachers should not be allowed to go in the lounges and smoke.    I  know the children see the teachers smoking and I thought,    This is not a  good role model for these children. On the one hand to be told how bad  smoking is and then to watch their teachers go in the lounges and  smoke.    So we worked that around and finally got that passed. I had at  the Career Tech   s that they had to be so far away from the school. They  could not smoke on their campuses because you have high school kids  coming in there. Well, that hit the fan, too. The lady who was over the  Career Tech came up and   this was a no-no what she did. When you  want to change a bill, you go to the bill   s author and you ask the bill   s  author to make some amendments to that legislation. Well, she went to  Terry McIntyre, who was a democrat, and he was a rural legislator, and  she went to him and asked him to change that to exempt the Career  16  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Tech   s from the bill. Frank Coulter from Moore and Norman came and  talked to me about it, and he said,    Well, she said she came and talked to  you and you were all right with that.    I said,    No. Nobody   s ever talked  to me about this, and I wouldn   t okay it if they had.    And so they passed  it. I may have been the only negative vote, I don   t know   but I stood up  and said,    This is what happened, and I don   t appreciate it.    But since  then what has happened? You can   t smoke anywhere, and I don   t agree  with banning it in private businesses. What I was after was to keep it out  of our schools, off our school grounds, and they just had cows about it.  But they   ve done it anyway now, so     You were a little bit ahead of your time.  Yes, I was ahead of my time I guess.  Well, what have you done since leaving office?  Oh, I went back to OSU Tech for awhile just to take some fun classes  and I worked part-time just doing some fun stuff. I   ve got two  grandbabies now and unfortunately, the grandbabies are in Kansas City,  which is not right. I should have somebody file a bill because those  grandbabies should be here with me. I go up there whenever I can. I try  to, like, once a month, but you know that gets expensive. I have two  grandbabies in Kansas City, and I have a daughter in northwest  Oklahoma City, and my mom and dad are really not that old. They   re  eighty and eighty-two but my dad   s in really bad health. He worked  really hard when he was younger, hard physical labor.  When he was younger, he was tested for rehabilitation because he has  only one eye. He was supposed to go to school to learn a trade but he  was tested. One day he was just telling me, he said,    They told me my  IQ was 150.    So he   s very bright. He didn   t go past the sixth or eighth  grade, but that man can figure anything out in the world. He can   t do it  so much now, because he   s had a stroke but he could figure anything.  It   s one good thing about some of the laws that we have. When he was  younger and we were growing up, there weren   t the laws to protect him,  and he always was fired because he was a health risk. I can   t even  hardly talk about it because it just breaks my heart. So he did extremely  hard physical manual labor all of his life, and part of that was because he  was a man. But now that he   s older, his back has just given out on him  so I spend a lot of time over there doing stuff with them as much as I  can. And my husband wants me home, and so this is what I   m supposed  to be doing.  Well, that   s good, too. I want to back up a minute.  17  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Sure.  I forgot to ask. Were you in the Capitol when the Murrah Building was  bombed?  I was over at the Labor Department having a meeting. We were sitting  there and we heard the doorknobs jiggle, and we were making jokes  about,    Oh, maybe somebody   s trying to break in here on us,    and then a  few minutes after that, somebody came and told us what had happened.  We all went to look out the window and smoke was coming up and that  was a horrible experience. I just wanted to get home, you know. I just  wanted to get home to my kids. I went back to the Capitol building.  Kevin Cox   his little boy was in the daycare down by there   and he  came in. He was just weeping and saying what he was seeing down  there. I don   t know if there was a phone call or what, but because that   s  the Capitol, they came over the speakers saying,    Look for any kind of  strange sacks, boxes, anywhere in the Capitol      and we all evacuated.  After I left the Labor Department, I went back to the Capitol, and that  was where Kevin was saying what he had seen and everything, and it  was a horrible feeling, you know. It was just a really horrible feeling and  so then we came home. And then a few days after that, they arranged it  to where the legislators could go down and see all of the mess, and it  was quite a mess. It was just horrible.  I should be asking more people that.  And then we were up at New York City about a week before 9/11, and  we were all down in there in the Twin Towers. We brought back and had  our pictures developed and had our Twin Towers up there, and they   re  no more so it   s a strange feeling.  Is there anything I should ask you before I ask my last question?  Oh, let   s see.  Anything else you want to cover? Did you have to have a new wardrobe  to do this job?  I finally did. I started out with skirts and blazers and that type of thing. I  think about the ladies and they   d dress all over the board sometimes.  There are a few ladies who never wore anything but suits, and some are  a little bit more casual. I won   t tell you her name, but there was a  representative who was elected, and she came up there and would wear a  blazer, but she would wear these horribly, horribly derogatory t-shirts.  They were derogatory against men. They were horrible, and she would  come over to us and give us these cartoons that she had copied off  18  Finchum  Coleman  somewhere. They were horrible, and she would give those to us and say,     These are just for us girls.    And I   m just thinking,    Oh my gosh,    and  I   m so dumb I never shared it with any of the guys. After the first year or  the first legislative session, she learned because after that she started  dressing very professionally. There are a few other people that noticed  that, but it was very, very inappropriate. She finally started dressing very  professionally and I realized,    I need some suits.     I   ve been told the chamber is always cold.  Oh, it   s freezing and I would gripe like crazy about those fans and  everything, trying to get them to turn the fans down, turn the heat up. In  fact, I can even remember   I don   t know why I keep remembering  Kevin Cox, but he went out to his car one time and got a blanket. It was  horribly cold, and I guess it   s to keep you awake some of the time.  One thing I would like to say, just for posterity I guess   it was difficult  being a woman. It   s difficult being a republican woman in the minority.  One thing people need to understand is there were some guys out there  that were horrible male chauvinists. I knew not to ever get near them and  there was one guy I should have filed a sexual harassment suit against  once because of his off-color teasing. I knew who I could tease with and  who I couldn   t, you know. I knew who I could come up and pat on the  back and who I couldn   t.  But women are no different. I   m not going to say names, but there was  one legislator, she was young and to get what she wanted, she would go  to the back of the chamber and hop up on the desk. She wore these real  cute little short skirts and she knew what she was doing. She used her  sexuality, you know. The men go about it a different way, but the  women use their sexuality. I saw this particular representative several  times embraced with men. I called it    bear hugged,    and she knew what  she was doing. I thought,    You don   t need to do that.     Then this other representative, she would file all these bills and we   d kill  them. Then she   d come over to the guys and start rubbing her hands all  over their backs and saying,    If you   d just let me bring the bill up for  reconsideration   if you   ll just vote   if you   ll just give in to my   let me  bring it back up, and I   ll take it back to committee,    and she   d just rub  all over them, and of course they did it. She never did come up with  decent bills, I didn   t think. I   d sit there and watch this going on, and I   d  go over and I   d say,    You are so pathetic   you are so pathetic that you  let her come over here and do this.    She managed to get her stuff  through. Most of the other women I don   t think really did that. There   s  always a little bit of that feminine thing because we   re women and we  deal with things differently, but I remember those two.  19  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  Coleman  And then there are always rumors but it was difficult being a woman out  there because you weren   t in the in-group. Like I said at the beginning, I  had to go and search out information because they weren   t going to give  it to me voluntarily. I think that   s probably true of most of the women.  We had to really fight. But for all those guys that were just horrible,  there were some really good guys. I just thought the world of them and  they understood that we were all equal out there. Since this is about  women I think people need to know, that it goes both ways.  In your fourteen years was there much difference from your first couple  years till when you finished in that type of behavior?  Well, in the republican caucus, at one point, there were two of us, and  then there were three, and then it went on up so I think the women have  more of a voice now. So that makes it different. When I   d go out and  campaign, I never wanted people to elect me because I was a woman. I   d  always go tell people,    You need to elect men and women who are  honest, who are truthful, who will tell you what   s going on and won   t,  lie to you and patronize you. You just need good, honest people. You  can disagree, but that   s what you need. You don   t need so many women  and so many men.     My last question is   when history is written about you, what would you  like for it to say? Tough question perhaps.  Well, obviously since I don   t have any big aspirations to be the  president, I would just like people to remember that I was honest with  them, that I didn   t feed them a line, that I was compassionate to them,  and that what you see is what you get. I learned over the years to be a  little discreet. That   s not being dishonest. Sometimes you just have to be  discreet because it doesn   t do any good to say certain things but I just  hope that people would know that Carolyn Coleman was honest with  them and that I treated them justly and I didn   t put on airs with them and  I wasn   t a    people pleaser.    That I respected everybody, no matter where  they came from. I think if people would say that about me, I   d be happy.  Well, just from listening to you today, I would think they would.  Well, you never know. (Laughs)  You were there to serve the people. Anything more you would like to  add?  It was really interesting and people were nice. I rescued a cat one time  from a dog. It turned out that she was a librarian at Norman schools and  this poor little cat. This dog had it and I   m trying to campaign, and I get  20  Finchum  Coleman  Finchum  all these little neighbor kids and we run up there and get the dog off the  cat, and then the lady comes and she   s just hysterical over her cat. She  got the cat and I saw her months later. We didn   t agree politically, of  course, but we talked and her cat was fine. But it was just a horrible  experience but we saved that little cat. There are a lot of neat  experiences. I   d be out there walking at 113 degrees and people would  offer me lemonade, water, cokes. People are just genuinely nice. Once in  awhile you find people who are just off the edge.  Most of the people at the legislature, whether you agree with them or  not, most of those people are trying to better the state. I wouldn   t trade  the experience for anything. I don   t think I   d have the outlook or the  perspective on stuff that I have right now if I hadn   t gone through that as  rough as it was sometimes. I mean, it was really rough sometimes, but  you visit with people and you meet constituents. And all kinds of people  come in with their needs and things you never even thought of so it  broadens your world quite a bit.  Well, thank you very much.  Oh, well, thank you.  That   s it. If you think of more things, we can come back.  ------- -------  
