Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Good morning. My name is Tanya Finchum. I am with the Oklahoma  State University Library, and we   re doing an oral history project called     Women of the Oklahoma Legislature,    and today is July 2, 2007. I am  in Oklahoma City to interview Dorothy Conaghan Chiles and she was in  the House of Representatives from May of 1973 through 1986. Is that  correct?  Correct.  Thank you for inviting me to your home.  You   re welcome.  Tell me a little bit about where you were born, your childhood and early  years.  Okay. I was born in Oklahoma City and spent the first twenty years here.  I went to Classen High School. I went down to Norman to OU   University of Oklahoma . I met my first husband, Brian, there. In fact, I  met him the first day I was in college. So that was interesting when we  looked back on it.  I enjoyed Oklahoma City. I used to ride the streetcars, which they no  longer have. They ran every six minutes, but when they took those off,  the buses ran every thirty minutes, if you were lucky. The streetcars,  during Halloween, would not go past Thirty-ninth Street because the  boys would pull the trolley off of the railing overhead and it couldn   t go  anyplace, so they wouldn   t come that way. I remember sitting on the  mailbox on Forty-third Street and waving at the cars when World War II  was over. I wasn   t old enough to go downtown, but we did go out and  wave and yell and holler as much as we could.  Old Classen High School has been changed to a special education school  5  Finchum  Chiles  in science and math and I believe that is where the Classen Museum is  now. So if you ever want to know anything about Classen-ites, you go to  the museum there. They have a very good one.  After I met Brian Conaghan in Norman, I decided that after two years of  college, I would rather get married, so that   s what I did. I then moved to  Tonkawa. I didn   t know where Tonkawa was, but when I moved there,  there were about three thousand people and today there   s still about  three thousand people. But coming from Oklahoma City to Tonkawa, for  the first year I thought I had died. It was so small, and I was always a  half an hour early to wherever I was going because you had to do that in  Oklahoma City to get there on time. Over the years I learned that you  didn   t need to leave home until five minutes before when you wanted to  be there because that   s all it took to get across town.  I enjoyed Tonkawa. It was a town that you never wanted to say anything  bad about anybody because they were always, as you found out later,  related to whoever you were talking about. (Laughs) But we had all of  the things that you could ever hope to have   you had a neighborhood,  the kids could walk to school, the people were friendly. When we had  our kids, there were a million kids and they all grew up together. You  knew the mothers and the fathers and you went to the football games.  You went to the PTAs and if they were in the band, you were in the band  boosters, and all those kinds of things. You kind of took your turn on  everything if you belonged to several of the clubs. You took your turn  for whatever needed to be done. And it was fun. We had a good time.  My husband bought the business from his father, Bill F. Conaghan. It  was called Contractor   s Bit Service. Tonkawa at one time was the  drilling bit capital of the United States.  Interesting.  There are still some bit-tippers in Tonkawa, but not as many as there  used to be. In the business, we got to know a lot of people. When the  kids came along Brian had something that the kids could do. He had a  shop, so they went to the shop with him and when they were five they  learned how to sweep the floor, and as they grew older they learned how  to do a lot of the other things that as their strength let them do. I think  that was one of the things that I see that the kids don   t have anymore.  They don   t have anyplace to go to learn from their father what is good  citizenship   that you show up to work, that if you say something that   s  what you do, and I don   t see that so much anymore. People don   t live  that way anymore. Now they didn   t like it a lot of times, but (Laughs)  they did learn how to take care of the truck and how to meet and greet  people. In fact, Brian   s mother, Letha, would remark   I would have her  come babysit while I would go to Eastern Star and she said,    Even when  6  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Joe Lee was two,    she said,    I don   t understand it. I can ask him where  something is and he can go find it.    So all of the kids were that way. We  had a good time.  Are you an only child or do you have     I am an only child. That   s why I   m spoiled. (Laughs)  Were your parents into politics?  No, my father was a republican and so was mother. He could lose his  breath talking sometimes about different democrats that he didn   t like,  but to be active more than just knowing what was going on from the  newspaper and voting, they weren   t. No. Brian  husband  and I got into  the Young Republicans back in 1952, I think, when Eisenhower was  running for office. We had more republicans in Kay County than you did  in a lot of counties, we joined the Young Republicans. That was before  you were forty. The president of the State Young Republicans happened  to live in Blackwell. I became the state secretary for the Young  Republicans just because I was close to Blackwell, which is ten miles  north of Tonkawa, and we laughed   we said,    You know, when we had  a convention we could all meet in the phone booth because there were so  few of us.     But through the thirty-some odd years, that   s grown. Henry Bellmon  helped make the change to thinking that maybe people really could vote  republican and have a representative that was republican. So we worked  in the party and then when we got to be forty, we changed over to the  senior party and we worked in the county. I was vice-chairman of the  county and, in 1962, the man that had been in the representative   s seat  from Blackwell suddenly died after he had filed for office. The Kay  County Republican party only had about three days to find a  replacement. The rules said that we could put a name on the ballot  instead of the one that died. Of course, we were all in a dither because  that wasn   t very much time to find someone that would want to run for  office in that short a time. I remember we called and we called and we  called because there were some people that we would really like to have  had run for office, but it was short notice and they didn   t want to run  right at that time. So finally one day, I slung down the phone and I  turned around and Brian was sitting in there in the breakfast room, and I  said,    Why don   t you run?    He says,    Okay, I will.    I could have just  killed him. I said,    You knew all this time we were hunting and hunting  for somebody. Why didn   t you say something?    He said,    I just wanted  to be asked.    (Laughs) So that was our first campaign. We had helped  people run for office, but that was the first time we were doing it  ourselves. I became his campaign manager and we worked hard.  7  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  That would have been back in the sixties?  That was in    62 when he ran for office. Well, he was there eleven years.  Five or six times?  Six times, and he was a good representative. He made excellent  speeches. He was tall, 6    4    and was strong, and people liked him. He  gave a lot of school speeches to classes. In 1969, he developed leukemia,  and so the next three and a half years we took our trips to Houston and  back lots of times. He always, up until the time he got sick, had had  perfect attendance and after he got sick when he was in Houston, he  wasn   t there. But we always came home to see the boys and then go  back to the Capitol. I have looked back and even at that time, I didn   t  know how he got up some days to go to work.  After three and a half years, he died, and we were in the same situation  as when he took office. He died in the middle of his term and the law  said that you had to elect a new representative. So the Kay County  committee wanted to know if I would run for office. I talked to the boys  to see if they would mind because I would be gone from Monday  through Thursday, and they said, no that was all right. You look back  and you think, gee, was that the right decision? But it was the decision  we made, and I enjoyed it. I had a good time in that it was interesting to  think of something different every day, and the problems that you had  left over from yesterday were sometimes the problems that it would take  years for them to be resolved. But other times it was always something  new and you met such nice people.  My district was from the west side of Ponca City  Kay County  to  Cherokee, which was in Alfalfa County. It was from the Kansas border  south thirty miles. That was a large area but there were such great  people. They were farmers. They knew how to till their ground. They  were good farmers. Their towns were bustling and good. They were  friendly. They were like people in Tonkawa. They knew how to be  friendly. They knew what they wanted. They knew they didn   t want  government in their back yard all the time. So I felt very comfortable  and very attuned to what they wanted.  How did you campaign in that area?  That was interesting. When Brian started out and then when I started  out, there were lots and lots of fences along the highways. If you go  along there now, you don   t see very many fences. They farm it road to  road, but the fences of course had barbed wire and we would go along  and ask the farmers if we could put a fence sign on their fences. That  8  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  took a lot of time, you know, to stop to make sure that they didn   t care.  If they said yes, then you had to have your staple gun and you had to  have the fence sign, and the first ones we had were about 36    x 15    big  and they were black with orange lettering that just said Conaghan. I still  have some of those in the garage in Tonkawa (Laughs).  We did a lot of calling to get people to say yes, they would give a  neighborhood coffee for us. They would call their neighbors in and we  could go and meet them and tell them what we stood for. I did door to  door and that   s a lot of work. One day in Blackwell, I came up the  driveway and you had to go around the garage to get to the front door, I  came around the garage and there sat this German shepherd, and he  wasn   t very happy about being excited with somebody new on his front  porch, and I wasn   t very excited about seeing him lying there either.  (Laughs) So luckily the kids were home and he wasn   t supposed to be  out. They got him back in the house and I thought I was gonna have a  heart attack, but the same thing happened to Roger when he was about  five, my youngest son, and from then on he wasn   t really very keen  about going door to door, but he did.  I had three sons that would go door to door. Then on the Saturdays we  would pick up kids that would think that would be fun. They would go  door to door, and we had a pamphlet for them to give, and all they  needed to do was say,    We hope that you will vote for either Brian or  Dorothy Conaghan.    And when the boys were little, of course, they  could get everybody to say,    Oh, yes,    because my little one was only  about five and he has   it   s greyed now, but he had at that time copper  penny red hair, and so everybody had to say yes to him. (Laughs) But  we did that. Then we formed parties to stuff and address envelopes.  Then you had to make sure that they were put in the right order so that  the post office would mail them, and they had the right postage on them.  We went to the newspapers, met all the newspaper editors and owners.  When it became election time, we would have to go back. I made out my  own campaign ads and gave it to them and then they charged me. It was  a lot of traveling. It was a lot of work.  Did you have a slogan?  My slogan was,    I will listen.    I didn   t promise that I would do anything  particular that somebody might want, but I told them that my door was  always open and that I would always listen to them. I would try to do  what was best when trying to keep a campaign promise.  On election day when you won, what kind of partying did you do?  Well, we sat at home. We called people to go out and make sure that  9  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  they had gotten to the polls. Then that night we always had a buffet at  our house and everybody that had worked on the campaign in any way  and all of the newspaper people that wanted to come   the girls from  Ponca and Blackwell would always come down, and they were so  nice   and we   d just have a ball eating and standing around and waiting  to see what the election results were. Of course, in May of 1973, we  were all on pins and needles because that was a primary and I had  republicans running against me. We were very elated when I won. The  man that was running against me from Blackwell had been a state  representative with Brian several years before. We were real good  friends with him. I hated to beat him, but I needed the job. We all  campaigned and I came out on top.  Did you ever have a female opponent?  Never did.  Were you the first female from your district to hold that office?  I believe I was.  Has there been any since then?  No. The one that replaced me stayed as long. I think he got caught up in  that twelve-year rule. The man that has it now has had it several years.  How did you manage the boys when you were   who took care of them?  I was lucky. Tressie Whiting was the mother of a good friend of ours,  and she had taken care of the boys. She babysat with them when I  needed to go do something. She stayed with them when Brian was sick  and would stay at the house. So I already had her broken in. She said  yes, that she would stay. She was a school teacher and had taught in  Cleo Springs in a one-room schoolhouse. The kids just loved her. That  was really the only way I would have been able to do it is if I had had  someone that could stay with them because at that time they were  fifteen, sixteen and eighteen, and that   s a dangerous age for children.  But they were in sports and in their church. Charles, my middle son, was  the one that got everybody lined up   all the deacons and the elders lined  up to go down the aisle at church on Sunday. He had done that since he  was in junior high. So the kids were good. I never had any problem with  them, and I thank God for that. If they ever did anything that wasn   t  quite right, of course it got back to me almost before they got home. So  (Laughs) they knew they had to be good, but they were good and I   ve  always been proud of them.  10  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Do you remember your first swearing-in?  Oh, yes. That was very exciting. There were three of us that came to the  legislature that summer   George Vaughn from eastern Oklahoma, Mina  Hibdon and I. I came first and then, I think, George then Mina, but I  believe it was Judge Lavender who swore me in, and that was exciting.  Goosebumps?  Well, you thought,    Oh, gee, what am I getting myself into?    (Laughs)  But it was very humbling really that there would be that many people  that cared enough to get out to vote and to vote for you. That was always  one of the things that made me want to do the best that I could because  there were a lot of people out there banking on me.  I think I had read in one of your campaigns you had the most votes ever  cast or something for, or won by the largest percentage or something     like a ninety-five percent landslide or something, I think?  Well, seventy-five, I think, was the vote for the primary election, I  believe, was in 1973, wasn   t it?  In 1980 the paper said you had had the biggest landslide in statehouse  races     Oh, really?     with ninety-three percent of the vote.  I forgot about that.  That speaks highly of you.  I liked my people. I really did hate to retire.  Do you remember the first bill that you presented on the floor?  No. Isn   t that awful? No, I don   t.  It must not have been too traumatic. (Laughs)  I didn   t get up and talk very many times from the floor. That just wasn   t  one of my things. Now I did when I had to, but I wasn   t as good at it as  some of the people were. Cleta  Deatherage Mitchell  was wonderful,  but I didn   t do it easily.  11  Finchum  Chiles  I think one of the first bills that I really worked on hard that I was a co-author  on, I think Charles Henry was the author of the bill, that changed  the amount that a woman could receive from a will after her husband  died, from one-third to one-half. I made a speech from the front podium  and, at that time, I had put on each desk a tax form that every woman  was going to have to fill out when her husband died so that she would be  able to live either on the farm or have the business left to her. But with  one-third of the estate, after coverture, marriage, they had worked and  worked and worked together to build and yet when he died she would  only get one-third.  Well, a lot of the time that wasn   t enough to be able to pay the taxes and  to stay wherever she was. If she was on the farm, she would have to sell  the farm or, if she had kids, the kids would have to buy it. It just didn   t  seem fair, so Charlie Henry and I, and there were a lot of co-authors on  that bill, but we decided that the wives ought to be able to have at least  half by will. So that   s what we worked on very hard, and the men  legislators were very difficult to convince that that was fair. They had it  in their hand and they didn   t want to let go of it because it was their land  or it was their business, and yet the wife had worked just as hard as they  had. I don   t see that thought process now, but it was then. We did get it  passed and it was a lot of hard work. Charles had a good bill.  And what are some of the other ones that you   re proud of?  Well, I worked on several that were related to health. One of them was  chelation. The medical community did not like the word chelation.  Chelation is the practice of alternative medicine as far as they are  concerned. The FDA has approved chelation as an effective treatment  for lead poisoning. The medical community did not want chelation to be  recognized as a treatment for the removal of blood vessel plaque. I  worked very hard to get the bill passed but the medical community and  insurance companies came out against the bill and it was defeated. The  principal objection of the insurance companies was the bill would have  authorized patients the right to medical insurance reimbursement for  chelation treatment. I worked hard on that bill.  There was Helen Cole, who had a bill about DMSO  dimethyl  sulfoxide . There were several of those kind of bills that we worked on. I  had one for a lady who lived in Tulsa that wanted to have the right to use  extracts from plants, Lilium  Longiflorum , as a recognized mode of  therapy in the treatment of any malignancy. The extract was supposed to  do all kinds of things to help you live longer and a better life. The men  all laughed at me about it but I got the bill through the House. I didn   t  have a senate author for the bill. Senator Stipe was very kind and  generous and put his name on the bill as the senate author. Well, of  12  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  course, the bill never came out of senate committee. Some bills did get  passed and some of them have been, through the years repealed so you  win some and you lose some. But it was interesting.  There was a bill dealing with graduate student teachers that were not  fluent in speaking English. The students could not understand some of  the teachers. That may still be the case. We passed a law, Senator  O   Connor and I, which gave the students a way to complain to the  administration when they could not understand a professor or graduate  student teacher. This was an avenue to allow the students to be able to  come before the    powers that hire    to make the aware that a teacher was  not a qualified English Speaker. I   m afraid it   s still happening, but at  least there is a mechanism if they want to complain.  There was a bill dealing with Indians buying gold paint. There are a lot  of Indians in Oklahoma. We were finding that the children, well   not  just children, but teenagers particularly were buying gold paint and  sniffing it and in so doing they were coating their lungs and it prevented  their lung   s from expanding. They were killing themselves. So the  police and sheriff   s department said,    We can   t do anything about it  because there is no way that we can say you can   t buy gold paint.     Therefore, we passed a law that said it was illegal to sell gold paint to  people under such and such an age. I   ve forgotten just what the age was,  eighteen or twenty-one.  I voted for the bill that raised the drinking age from eighteen to twenty-one     and that did help at that time. It cut down a lot of the drinking  deaths that we had.  And you did something with the insurance, car insurance?  The car insurance   we went from  5,000 and  10,000 to  10,000 and   20,000 for property damage and liability because you had to have  liability and  5000 just wasn   t enough. I don   t know that  10,000 and   20,000 is enough, they may have changed that now, but we worked on  that, yes.  And something about being able to leave out a driver that had a bad  record. Does that sound familiar, or am I thinking of someone else?  Ability to exclude a family member with a bad record so the rate     Wouldn   t go up. That probably was in one of those insurance bills. Now,  you know, the insurance is so high if you   re, what, under twenty-six that  that was, I think, helping along there, trying to keep insurance low  enough so people would buy it.  13  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  And then during your time, the ERA  Equal Rights Amendment  was     Oh yes. We had a thought provoking time with the ERA. As I mentioned  to you before, Hannah  Atkins  and I roomed together at one of the  National Legislative Exchange Councils and we were both working on  the ERA. She was working for it and I was working against it. We never  talked about it, but we knew where each one of us stood. That was an  interesting time. There were always people in the halls. There was  always somebody for it and somebody against it. Your offices were full  of people wanting you to vote one way or the other. ERA was a very  hard issue. I studied it and studied it and decided that because this was  something that was really going to be with us for a long time, after much  prayer, I decided to vote no.  Phyllis Schlafly was working nationally very hard against the passage of  ERA. Ann Patterson, who was in Oklahoma, was also against the  passage of ERA. Ann was the wife of Pat Patterson who had run, at one  time, in Oklahoma for the U.S. Senate. I agreed with their stand against  the passage of the ERA. I still have, in the garage, my certificate that the  pro-ERA gave to everyone that voted no. The certificate says,    I   m  barefoot and pregnant.    It was such a funny thing to have sitting on your  desk when you came back from voting, but I was proud of the  certificate. I worked hard to decide how to vote, and it was a tough  decision.  One of the other tough decisions was whether to vote for or against the  hospital that Oral Roberts wanted. I think, except the ERA amendment,  the Oral Roberts request for a hospital probably was the most mail we  ever received. All of the church people, of course, were writing wanting  us to vote for the hospital, and the medical institutions did not want it. I  think they thought it was another unnecessary hospital. But I voted for it,  and I received a letter of thanks from Oral Roberts. The hospital was a  really great hospital as long as it was in use. I think it just didn   t have  enough patients to keep it open, but it was great.  Were you the chair of any committees?  I was vice-chairman of the Higher Education Committee. The  committees that I always was on were Common Education and Higher  Education, since we had Northern Oklahoma College in Tonkawa.  That   s a two-year college. I always wanted to be on that particular  committee.  Right after the McAlester riot?  Right after the McAlester riot. We got to go down there as the Public  14  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Safety and Penal Affairs committee to see the prison and the damage  that was done. We went down several times, but it was such a mess.  They had burned it, and that was interesting. Oklahoma was in the court  system a long time with our prison problems. I got to go to McAlester  several times to see how things were shaping up. It was always  interesting. It was always kind of spooky having those gates close  behind you and knowing that you couldn   t get out. (Laughs)  That would be a little     Yeah, it really was.     disconcerting.  And then I went down once in awhile to listen to the Pardon and Parole  Board. That was very interesting. I would not want to have served on the  Pardon and Parole Board, but I did a lot of interesting things like that.  Then you called for an eighteen-month moratorium on new construction  for hazardous waste sites?  Oh, yes, we had one over in Grant County. An out-of-state company was  trying to come in and build a hazardous waste site in Grant County.  None of the farmers around the site wanted it, and it was a hot and  heated time because the farmers were really up in arms about it. The  hazardous waste people said,    Oh, it   s just fine, you know. We   ll have  all of these things that will keep the hazardous waste in   the rubber  lining and the clay and all of this,    but we have enough hazardous waste  running up and down I-35 that we don   t know about. The people in  Grant and Kay and Alfalfa County just did not want it there, and so we  were able to keep that from coming in. But it was, like you say, it was an  interesting time   had lots of committee meetings and a lot of area  meetings with the farmers, and the company that wanted to bring it in  telling us how great it was going to be. But we decided we could live  without it. (Laughter)  Why don   t we go back a little. I forgot to ask about where you lived in  Oklahoma City while you were there.  Well, I lived in several places. I lived in a motel. It was the motel there  on Fiftieth and   or just as you come off onto Lincoln. It used to be a  Howard Johnson   s. I lived there one year, and then I lived in an  apartment house down on Thirteenth and Hudson, I think it was   maybe  Harvey   anyhow, it   s a doctors    lot now. I bought a condo finally and I  lived there two years. I lived with my aunt and uncle in Edmond, I think,  for four or five years until she died, and then I moved on down to the  15  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  apartment house. But I learned I could pack everything up in the car and  move for six months.  Did any of the other women do the same thing?  Yes   yes. And they lived in different places. The ones from Tulsa, I  don   t remember where they lived     You didn   t share     Didn   t share anything, no. Usually by the time you got home at night,  you were tired enough that you wanted to go to bed. You didn   t want to  sit up and talk with anybody. So I think most of them lived by  themselves. Now the men, a lot of times, they would share apartments  and that seemed to work out all right. But I don   t remember any of the  ladies. Of course, a lot of the ladies lived in Oklahoma City area, and  Anna Belle Wiedemann would go home to the Piedmont area so we all  kind of did our own thing.  Well, on a typical day, how early would you get up and when would you  get home?  Oh, usually about 9:00 p.m., that would be if you had a dinner. All  organizations tried to have their annual conventions and state dinners  when the legislature was in session, so normally there would be at least  two and sometimes three a week, depending   January, February and  March anyhow   April, they kind of let up   but the Farm Bureau or the  Farmer   s Union, the phone company   all kinds of organizations, the  attorneys and the CPAs, all had dinners and you would work at the  office until say 6:00 and then you   d go to the dinner at 6:30. Well, then  dinner probably wasn   t until 7:00 or 7:30   so by the time you ate and  visited and talked to all the people that had come from your district  down to see you, it was usually 9:00 before you got home. And you had  gone to work, depending on your committee meetings, I usually got to  work about 8:30, and so that   s a long day.  A very long day.  And when you stop and talk to everybody that comes in, or you   re on the  House floor, it was not as easy as people thought it was. And then on  Thursdays, a lot of times I would have speeches to make Thursday  evening in the district someplace. So that made it even a longer day  before you got home.  You didn   t have to cook too much during the week, did you?  16  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  No   no, we didn   t. (Laughs)  Where was your office when you were in the Capitol?  I think I had three offices   three offices or four. One was about three or  four offices down the hall from the door by the elevator. I was on the  fifth floor. Republicans were on the fifth floor at that time, and I was on  the north side of the hall. And then I was on the west end of the hall for  awhile, and then when I became the assistant minority floor leader I  moved to the vault, next to the front door.  The first woman.  The first woman. I was really pleased about that, very humbled and very  honored. I was moved up into the vault   at one time it was a vault   but  just as you came in on the north corridor of the fifth floor, as you came  in that glass door, there was a vault right on the left-hand side, and they  had turned that into an office so I was in there from that time until I  retired.  Did it have a window?  No, no, no   no window. There were two rooms. My secretary, Marty  Moon, sat out in the outer office, and it was a little bit larger so that  people could sit there and wait, and then my office was through the door.  (Laughs) I didn   t have any kind of window. I put some pictures of  flowers on the wall to make it look like it had a little light to it.  You had to climb up five flights?  Oh, no. We had an elevator. Now sometimes it didn   t work, but there  was an elevator. A lot of people did walk, but from the parking lot to the  office was a good walk, so I usually rode the elevator.  In high heels, too, I imagine.  In high heels, right   right.  If you were going to encourage a female to go into politics, what advice  would you give her?  Well, I   d tell her to make sure she talked to her family first and make  sure that they were willing to go all the way, to do everything that they  needed to do to help her get elected, and then ask her if she was willing  to do everything that there is to do because it   s physically tiring and it   s  emotionally tiring, and if you   re not really ready to do that, then don   t.  17  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  But if you   re willing to do that, I   d say,    Go for it.    It   s a lot of fun. It   s  a lot of experiences that you wouldn   t have otherwise, and you come  away with a good feeling that you   ve accomplished something that you  wouldn   t have done otherwise.  You   ve served with maybe nineteen different women. Do you stay in  touch with any of those?  No, not really. I   ve talked with Joan Hastings a time or two, but no, I  don   t know why. It   s just that you aren   t in the same circles anymore     Different directions.     and when they retire, you lose track of where they are.  Since getting out of office, what type of things have you been doing?  Well, since I retired, I got married again and my husband, Bob Chiles, is  a CPA and attorney. While he was still working I took up golf because  he liked to play golf. I was appointed by Governor Bellmon to be a  commissioner on the Health Planning Commission. For awhile I was a  commissioner there, and I think I was vice-chairman at one time. But  then the legislature, in their wisdom, did away with the Health Planning  Commission therefore I didn   t have a job anymore. Then I was third  vice-chairman of the Oklahoma Region of Christian Churches and,  because of being on the board, I was elected President of the Oklahoma  Christian Foundation. And after that, I   ve been on the Bylaws  Committee of the Nine-Hole Golf Group in Sarasota and played bridge.  We   ve got a    kitchen bridge    in Sarasota. There are eight of us that play  bridge together every week. I try to do a little bit of exercising. So my  time seems to go. I don   t know what I do exactly, but I have a good  time. (Laughs)  There   s life after the legislature.  Right. There is life after the legislature.  Did you have a mentor? I forgot to ask that earlier.  In the legislature?  Either in   before you got in or while you were in, either one. I think you  mentioned a Shirley     Who did I admire? Shirley Bellmon. When she was running with Henry  to be governor in    62, she was such a delightful person to meet and she  18  was friendly. She was open. She   d tell you anything you wanted to  know. She was very personable, and I thought that was a wonderful way  to be, and people related to her. I mean, she could tell you,    I had a bad  day yesterday. The sink overflowed. I had to clean it up.    Things that  you wouldn   t think that people would tell, and yet she was just always  down to earth and she was very, very intelligent.  Shirley always tried to leave wherever she was a better place. She  received a lot of honors during her time, but I worked with her at her  Oklahoma Artisans Committee that she put together when Henry was in  the second time. And then she went up to Oklahoma State and was  instrumental in forming the cottage enterprises for craft people and the  cottage industry. When she was in Washington when Henry was a U.S.  Senator, she and a couple or three other ladies bought and sold houses  and renovated them. She was so talented.  I always admired Joan Hastings for the difficulty she had during the first  year or two that she was there, personally with the death of her son. And  Jan Turner was fun. She had so much to give and was so well-liked. The  men loved Jan Turner. They just would carry her high. They teased her  all the time, and she was so good about taking it.  And then Helen Cole was a freshman in my office, and Helen and I were  from different school districts, different school areas. She was from in-town  and I was from rural. We never agreed on school issues at all, but  we didn   t talk about it. We knew we   d disagree. We came from different  areas with different situations. But she was always such a wonderful  person, and she worked so hard and she got so much done. I feel very  inadequate when I think about Helen Cole and how much I did and how  much she did. But she was wonderful and a really great person to know.  I enjoyed Cleta. Now Cleta at the time, Cleta Deatherage Mitchell, when  she was in office here, I admired her for her ability to get what she  wanted done working with the men. She was the chairman of the  Appropriations and Budget Committee, which was a feat that was great  because a woman was not that smart, you know   they couldn   t do that.  Well, Cleta told them that she could. She did, and I was always so  pleased about that.  The education system, the higher education system that we have, back  when I was there was in court for several years. The court system was  saying that Langston University needed to have more white students. It  was a difficult problem because Langston had always been known as a  black university. And it was interesting. The alumni from Langston  wanted to keep Langston open, but they did not want to send their  children there. The alums didn   t want it closed, but they didn   t want to  19  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  send their children there either. So it was a problem. The way the  Regents finally solved it was we put a satellite Langston University in  Tulsa. That brought the white students    marks up, and I understand now  that there is a second satellite for Langston. So that was the way we got  around what the court was wanting us to do to achieve and be able to  retain Langston, and I understand they have brand new dorms this year.  They have excellent schools in different areas.  Did you choose not to run again?  I chose not to run again. I had been there thirteen years, and I was tired.  That   s a long trip, ninety miles north twice a week. And lots of times  three or four times a week when I   d come down for committee meetings  and I was just tired. I was discouraged also that it seemed like so many  of the bills that we were passing were taking away more and more of our  liberties as individuals, and some legislators wanted to be there full-time,  which was a bad idea. We don   t need full-time legislators and so I  thought,    I   ll not run,    and then Bob and I decided to get married, so  after I retired we got married.  Did you ever think about running for the Senate?  Yes, I did. Senator Grantham was such a wonderful man, a gentleman. I  don   t care how many times you saw him, he would stand up and shake  your hand that day. I mean, if you saw him three or four times that day,  he would still do that. He was such a gentleman. He retired, and I  thought about running for his seat but that was even a larger area to  represent. I decided that I   d rather stay where I was, and I enjoyed the  House. I had so many good friends, and I made good friends with all of  my secretaries and some of the other secretaries.  When I was first elected all of the men knew who I was because of Brian  being sick, I was there the last   particularly the last two years. And  when I ran for office they all knew who I was and welcomed me for  taking his seat. It was kind of interesting. I always felt safe because it  didn   t make much difference where we were   when we went to dinner  or whatever the event was that we had to go to. The men always seemed  to take care of me. Now they didn   t say anything about it. But I always  had somebody to talk to. If there was dancing, I always had somebody  that would dance with me. They made sure that I wasn   t getting hit on  by somebody else, and they were wonderful. Now they never said  anything about it, and I never said anything about it, but I knew that   s  what they were doing.  Did you attend the cheese parties I   ve been hearing about? The cheese  room?  20  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  No, I don   t know about the cheese room.  Maybe that came after you.  That probably came afterwards, but when you had a dinner there were  always drinks beforehand and hors d   oeuvres. People would have a  drink and hors d   oeuvres. I found that orange juice about that time of the  day was really good and then you ate a little bit and visited and waited  for dinner.  I have not been out to the Capitol since they   ve done all the re-shuffling  of offices, and I need to go because I called   in kind of preparing for  this, I called out to the legislature and found out that the chief clerk   s  office is now down where the library used to be in the basement. I need  to go out and see where all the offices are. The legislature, of course,  was supposed to have all three stories for offices, and we always did but  at one time the attorney general   s office was there where we were also,  so it was really crowded. But now I guess everybody has their own  office, and we had two to an office. Republicans had two to an office up  until   well they still had some when I was there, but the democrats,  most of them all had single offices.  And the office changes every year or every election?  I don   t know. It might depend.  On the party that   s in power?  Right. Normally they let the republicans assign offices for the  republicans     Okay.     and if you happened to be a leader, if you were minority leader or  assistant or something, you got single offices. Otherwise, we had two to  an office with one secretary. And if you had one legislator that did lots  of correspondence, that was a lot of work for her. And then if you had  two of them that did a lot of correspondence, she was really worked  hard.  Did she help with research or did     No, we had research offices. I mean, the legislature has researchers, and  you could call down and one of the people in research would come up  and you would tell them what you wanted and they would go get it for  you. I took it upon myself the first several years I was there to  21  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  indoctrinate the new legislators on how to take care of their calendar and  their journal because every day you got a calendar and you got a journal  and   and you had a black folder for each one of them, so you wanted to  put the calendar on top every day and you put the House journal on the  bottom because it went chronologically, so that was kind of  interesting   to tell them where things were and how to get things done  and     You would have made a good librarian. (Laughter) Orderly. Okay, let   s  see. Have I forgotten to ask you anything? Any other differences with the  treatment of men and women while you were there?  There was some in that some women came in with kind of a chip on  their shoulder   they were gonna show these men   and those women  didn   t get along too well with the men. The ones that wanted to be  treated just like a man   when the men treated them like that, they didn   t  like it, and I thought,    You can   t have it both ways.    But I found that  you were treated as you wanted to be treated, and I was always trying to  be friendly with them. Some of them would tell me jokes, but they were  not dirty jokes that you would be too embarrassed to listen to. But they  were friendly and they would open the door for you if you wanted them  to. So I never had a problem with that, but some of the ladies did. One  lady was always complaining. They never did it right. If they opened the  door, that wasn   t right, and if they didn   t open the door, that wasn   t  right, so the men finally just gave up and quit trying.  Did you have to change your attire when you became elected? I   ve had  people say that they had to start wearing at least a sweater because the  chambers were so cold.  Oh, I wore wool till July. The men would wear a tee shirt, a shirt and a  vest and a coat, and then they would turn down the thermostat so they  were comfortable. Well, there was no way we ladies could get enough  clothes on. I wore wool suits all the time and was still cold. You had to,  to keep warm, which was ridiculous and you   d go back and you   d  complain. Well, I can   t think of the guy   s name that was the sergeant at  arms   we   d yell at him,    Turn the heat up.    We women were always  complaining.  Took your coffee with you?  I drank a lot of coffee while we were there. The pages were always there  to bring you coffee. I would take two down each year. You got two  pages a year, and they would come and stay for a week. I   d always try to  take them out one night to go to the movie or something. But that was  always fun, and the pages I think had a good time. They   d bring you  22  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  coffee or whatever you needed to have done. But I drank so much coffee  there for awhile that I had to finally quit. I found out that you could  drink hot water just as well as you could drink coffee and it did just as  much.  I guess that   s true. (Laughter) No caffeine to keep you up.  No. (Laughs)  If you can   t think of any other questions, my last one is   when history is  written about you, what would you like for it to say?  Well     And not just in regards to legislature, but the big picture.  Oh, well, I guess it still would be,    She did the very best she could.    I  missed one day in thirteen years, and that day my mother was in the  hospital and she died the next day, but that day we were in recess so out  of all of those thirteen years, there was just that one day that I missed,  and I thought   I look back on that and I think,    Well, was that really  worth it?    But at the time I thought it was.  You were representing the people, so they would appreciate it.  Right. And I tried to be a loving mother, (Laughs) grandmother, mother-in-  law, (Laughs) great-grandmother. I   ll leave that up to them.  Do you have one or two memories that just   when someone mentions  your time in the House that that   s the first thing you think of?  Yes, the time that John Miskelly ran down the aisle from the front to my  back desk yelling at me all the way. (Laughs)  Yelling at you or     Yelling at me.  And who was he?  John Miskelly was the Democrat floor leader, and he was in charge of  moving the bills through the House. We had to have all of the budget  bills out of the appropriation committee by a certain date. The Common  Education Committee bill was always a very big one and one that had to  be passed, so I had promised that I would vote for the Common  Education bill. They always put so many things in it that really was bad  23  Finchum  Chiles  legislation. But I promised him I would vote for it. Well, I did. But then  I voted no on the emergency. He saw my name up there in red and  turned around and barreled down that aisle and he says,    You promised  me,    and I said,    No, I promised you that I would vote for the bill. I did  not promise you that I would vote for the emergency.    And he stood  there and,    ya-ya-ya   d    at me, but I didn   t change my vote, and John and  I were still friends. That was one of the things that was nice. You could  disagree, like lawyers do at times, but you still were friends and so I  remember that. The emergency needed to be passed in order for it to go  in effect as soon as the governor signed it for it to go into effect.  Then Representative Frank Davis from Guthrie fainted on the floor of  the House. That was a lot of a stir. They brought in the ambulance  gurney and took him to the hospital. I said,    Well, I   ll go to the hospital  with him.    I rode in the ambulance with him because I didn   t want him  waking up in the hospital and not anybody being there, so that   s what I  remember. Well, in one of the letters that Frank wrote to me when I was  retiring, he said that was one of the things that he remembered was that  he was laying on a hard bed and there were lights in his eyes and he  could hear people talking, and they would say,    What day is it? Who   s  the president of the United States? What year is it?    And he said he  couldn   t figure out why they were asking him all those questions and  finally he said,    I heard you say,    Frank, do you think you   ve died and  gone to hell?       And he says,    I sat there and thought about that for  awhile, and I thought,    If I was in hell, I wouldn   t be hearing your  voice,    so I said,    No.    (Laughs) But that was a remembered day. There  wasn   t anything wrong with him, as I remember. He just, I think his high  blood pressure had gotten a little bit high, but that was funny.  It was stimulating. We had lots of exciting votes   lots of exciting  speeches. Some of the men were great orators, and it was always fun.  And then there were always people that you knew you were gonna vote  against their bill just because it never was a good bill. (Laughs)  Lobbyists     I enjoyed the lobbyists in that the lobbyists that came to see me were  only trying to help me, and that sounds strange   that   s what they   re all  supposed to do   but I had Farmers Union and what else? Farm Bureau,  AT T   the insurance people would come and tell me their side of the  bill. Those particular people that I talked to always told me the truth. If  they didn   t like the bill, they   d tell me why, and if they did like the bill,  they   d tell me why, and I could rely on them.  Now some of the other lobbyists, you sometimes wondered whether that  was really all that was going on with it, but I enjoyed them. I appreciated  24  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  their work to keep me informed so that I didn   t jump off and  misunderstand what was really being said.  Have any of your children gone into politics?  No. My middle boy is involved   was Tonkawa Republican chairman.  Yes     They   re still young yet.  They   re still young. He has thought about going into the city council,  and he thought about running for representative. He was a volunteer  fireman and then he was a regular fireman for twenty-four years, and     fire chief for awhile, so he   s been in politics. And the youngest son in  Tulsa works for the Oklahoma Corporation Commission as a field  supervisor. And so he works hard. They   ve all been in Masons and  district deputy, so they   ve been busy. They   ve been active in different  things in the church. They all like people.  You were a good role model for them.  Right. And their dad was. He liked people. One of the things that I  remember about Brian was he would go to the different drilling rigs and  deliver drill bits, which is what you put on the bottom of the pipe to drill  the hole, and they were heavy. He was big. He was strong. And one day  out in the doghouse on the platform of the rig, the men were sitting and  talking, playing cards or whatever they were doing while the pipe was  being drilled down and they were discussing politics.    All politicians are  cheats. All politicians are crooked.    So he sat there for awhile and  finally he got up   stood up as big as he could, and he says,    Okay, you  want to take a swing at one of them?    (Laughs) And of course they all  backed down, because they knew him. And I don   t think that they knew  he was a politician, but they knew who he was and so they didn   t  consider him as being crooked or not being what he ought to be, but he  got so much fun out of telling that story. (Laughter)  We all have preconceived ideas and they   re not always correct.  That   s true, and of all of the years that I was there, I   d say there was  only a handful of people that you would have considered maybe taking  something they shouldn   t. The rest of us were honest, but we were  painted with the same paintbrush, and whoever wants to run for office  has to have a thick skin. And it was interesting when Brian was being  accused of being a dirty politician or something was said about him, that  would make me so mad. I would get so mad. But when I got to the  legislature, and things were said about me, it didn   t bother me at all. So I  25  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  guess you want to defend who you love, and you know that that   s not  true, where when it   s yourself you know it   s not true and let it roll off  your back, and if you can   t do that, then you have a hard time.  You may need their vote tomorrow.  That   s right. (Laughs)  You have to use a little psychology.  Right. Right. That   s true.  I think I   ve asked enough questions. Is there anything else you want to  make sure we get down?  Well     Did you actually get to meet Dwight Eisenhower, or you just worked in  his     Just worked in his campaign.  You didn   t get to actually meet him. You did get to meet     Reagan.  What was that like?  That was interesting.  Did you shake his hand?  I think we probably did, all of us. We were glad to see him. We were  glad to see him come and we were glad to see him go because of the  security. There were big sheets, plastic sheets, hung over the doors. You  couldn   t go in and you couldn   t go out, and it was an ordeal, so it was  kind of nice to see him but nice to have him go. (Laughter)  While you were in office, did you have to travel to D.C. for any     I went to D.C. a couple of times. I was Oklahoma chairman of ALEC,  which is American Legislative Exchange Council, and that   s the  republican side or the conservative side of legislators where the NCSL is  the liberal side organization. So I went there a couple of times and that  was interesting. I met Newt Gingrich way back when he was just young  and shook Nixon   s hand when I was a delegate to the national  26  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  Finchum  Chiles  convention in 1969 in Miami, and I have his signature on a plaque, so  those were exciting years. That was fun.  Never thought you   d be there, huh?  No, and I had to work to get there. You know, you weren   t just suddenly  a delegate. I was the delegate from the Sixth Congressional District.  How are those chosen?  Those are elected by the congressional district. You go from the county  to the state, and the state then has a slate of delegates and you vote for  those. The congressional districts had two, I think. I don   t remember  whether they were voted on at the state convention or whether they were  voted on at the congressional convention, but anyhow you had to be  voted on.  And that was an honor, too, then?  Yes, that was an honor.  You   ve had a long, productive and rewarding life and career, haven   t  you?  I think so. I think so.  Well, that   s all I have to ask.  Well, very good. I do thank you.  Thank you very much for inviting me to your home. It   s been great.  You   re welcome.  ------- -------  
