Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Today is August 14, 2007, and I am at the OSU-Tulsa Library to speak  with Penny Williams, who was elected to the House of Representatives  in 1980 and served through 1988, at which time she was elected to the  Senate and served through 2004 and left because of term limits. This is  part of the Oklahoma State University Library   s oral history project  entitled Women of the Oklahoma Legislature. Thank you so much for  talking with me today.  Happy to.  First tell us a little about your childhood, where you were born and how  you came to be in Oklahoma.  By a circuitous route. I was born in New York City in 1937. Then, in the  middle of World War II, my parents divorced so I lived back and forth  between Long Island and New York City. I grew up with dogs and so  that heavy panting in the background is Blackie  Williams    dog  and not  me. (Laughter)  At any rate, I grew up and spent a lot of time with my grandmother in  New York City. Then by the end of the war, my mother had remarried  and we moved to North Carolina and then California. My stepfather was  in the Marine Corps. We finally came to settle in Camden, South  Carolina. The reason we settled in Camden, South Carolina, is that we  could not settle in Aiken, South Carolina, because my mother was told  that Aiken was not large enough to hold both my mother and my  stepfather   s immediate ex-wife. (Laughter)  Because of my grandmother   s divorce, which was the first of its kind in  New York, my mother and my aunt were kicked out of the girls    school  that their grandfather had helped start. He was a co-founder. My  grandmother had five children, and divorce was just unheard of in those  5  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  days. So the two girls were shipped off to boarding school in Aiken,  South Carolina. My mother always said that was the making of her life  because she fell in love with horses and riding. Horses became the  passion of her life and she rode for lots of different people. She was in  the first ladies race. So I grew up with this woman and her scrapbook,  and that was probably the most romantic thing in my childhood, that  scrapbook of all these pictures of her in the newspaper.  I went to school there and attended something between a very small  rural school and home school. We finally left the public system and went  to a Calvert system that was used by the missionaries who were going to  Africa. This is out of Baltimore, Maryland, and it was a wonderful  system. It was a small school that adopted this system and we all went to  the school, those of us who lived in my neighborhood. We walked to  school and it was really wonderful growing up with horses and dogs and  friends, who were mostly boys. I was a tomboy. Then finally I did go off  to boarding school, to Saint Catherine   s in ninth grade.  In South Carolina?  We still lived in South Carolina. In fact, that   s always home. But this  boarding school is in Richmond, Virginia, and I went there for four  years. Then I went to Sarah Lawrence College in New York and started  going to dove shoots back home with Joe, my husband-to-be, who also  lived in Camden. He was at Yale University when we started going out.  Eventually, I left Sarah Lawrence and married Joe, and that   s when I  first came to Oklahoma. It was actually    57 that we settled in Fort Sill,  our first home.  Fifty years ago.  Isn   t that amazing? Oh my, it seems like yesterday sometimes. The only  fight we had initially was over whether we would take Lightning with  us. Lightning was a pointer dog. My husband really didn   t want to take  him, but my parents thought we needed a dog, so Lightning came out  West with us. We drove from South Carolina with this pointer dog and  my husband grousing, but accepting. At one point, we let Lightning out  of the car and Lightning wouldn   t come back. Finally, my husband  found this dog pointing a covey of quail near the highway. Lightning  became part of the family from then on.  He was doing his job. (Laughs) When did you get interested in politics?  Very late in life. My stepfather was pretty interested in politics, and as  far as I knew at that time, he was one of only three people in Camden  who read the New York Times and the Herald-Tribune, which in those  6  days was still an American paper. Now it   s an international paper, but he  would read the Herald-Tribune and the New York Times, and was  always listening to the news. So I got a little bit interested in wanting to  get to know my stepfather better.  I think I became most interested in politics when my husband left the  Army, after two years. We lived in Germany and had our first son over  there, and he then went to work for a pipeline company. We were sent to  Iran. I started getting interested when I was in Germany, being pregnant,  lying on the sofa (Laughs) and reading books. That   s when I first read  about the Dreyfus case. That   s the first book I read that I think made me  really question the way I thought things were internationally compared  to the way they probably were.  Then I read Camus    book, Le Question, about Algeria and those times,  the French relationship to the world, and became interested in the French  relationship to Vietnam and then the American relationship to Vietnam.  It wasn   t really until I got to Iran that I began to look at America in a  different way. I kept reading about these things happening in the civil  rights movement and with the Vietnam War and the teach-ins. By that  time, I was reading the International Herald-Tribune and the local  Tehran paper. It was such a different view from the one I had gotten  reading the Tulsa Tribune and the Tulsa World. It was a very different  perspective on the world, much more international, obviously. First, we  got to know just embassy people and Americans, but little by little we  got to know Persians, the intelligentsia and people who lived in the  villages around Tehran. We ultimately got to know all aspects of Persian  life and the people there, and so began to see America through their eyes  as well as our own.  I just couldn   t wait to get back to America, even though I didn   t want to  leave Iran. We   d raised our children there. We   d had four boys, the last  of whom was born in Tehran. We were there all through the sixties, so I  kept thinking,    I can   t wait to get back to America.    I hadn   t appreciated  how valuable voting was, the political process, and our right to  participate in some way. We were there during the Shah   s time when  Persians were gaining civil rights. They were becoming literate in the  villages. They were very sophisticated in the cities, much more cultured  in Tehran than I was. I mean, most of us Americans didn   t speak other  languages. We were monolingual, and it was just incredible to me to be  with these people who could switch from Farsi to English to French to  German to Russian   four and five languages fluently without any  thought given to any of it. Not people who gave themselves airs, they  were just people who naturally switched from one to the other.  I began to really marvel at that kind of fluency in the world, that kind of  7  Finchum  Williams  world literacy. That was new to me, and I came to appreciate it a lot.  French had earlier been the international language and then English, by  the time we got there in the sixties. There were lots of people, even the  poorest people, who could speak all three. I mean, that   s unbelievable to  me.  Looking back on it now that I   ve been back in Oklahoma all these years,  I   m even more amazed at other people in the world, but also more  cognizant of the way other people think and view the world. They have  more perspectives, I think, than we do. Anyway, it was great to come  home to America and I couldn   t wait to be involved politically. I never  thought I   d run for office myself.  So how did it come about?  Well, I just wanted to be involved, so I joined the League of Women  Voters and got involved in voter registration. At that time, I was still a  registered Republican. My family was all republican. My stepfather was  working for Nelson Rockefeller at that time, and I thought it would be  exciting to try and get a few Oklahoma delegates to be for Nelson  Rockefeller in 1968. Needless to say, we only got one (Laughs), and that  took a lot of doing. We got one delegate out of all of those, and then I  realized the Republican Party in Oklahoma wasn   t our Republican Party  of the east coast. I mean, it was really different and much more rigid,  much less open-minded. On the east coast it was very fiscally  conservative but also had been through hundreds of years of problems,  which Oklahoma as a state had not been through. So they had a heritage  of grappling with problems and they weren   t anti-government.  I think what struck me the most about the Republican Party in Oklahoma  is that so many were anti-government, except for my mentor and hero  Henry Bellmon, who had visited us when we were in Iran. He gave me  the notion of politics as an honorable calling, a challenge, and a kind of  public service. He remained my mentor even after I switched my  registration to Democrat in    68. He was  not the usual Republican ;  some of the people who worked for him were my kind of republicans.  We stayed in close touch and I still   I was a Bellmon Belle   worked  for him and a few other republicans, but just never thought of running  for office myself.  It was really, I would say, working for greater justice in public education  and more choices related to quality for our own children, as well as  equality. When we brought our children back, they had had such a rich  experience living in Iran and they grew up speaking several languages,  just like all the people around them. They came back to a mono-culture  for sure   wonderful, convenient, comfortable, but not challenging. I  8  Finchum  Williams  mean, we never had air conditioning in Iran. They even had air-conditioned  cars in Tulsa. I couldn   t believe it. We lived at the Mayo  Hotel before we bought a house, and it was amazing going from air-conditioned  hotel to air-conditioned car. We never had television in Iran,  so  in Tulsa  we could actually watch what was going on. I became  really involved in watching politics and soon got involved in local  politics. Jim Jones    campaign, for one, but my work was initially non-partisan,  League of Women Voters, voter registration, working on  Tulsa   s segregated north side.  Tell a little bit about your first campaign.  Well, that really started in one sense with the non-partisan League of  Women Voters. We, as a league, had gone through this whole time of  school integration and working for the Equal Rights Amendment  ERA .  Those were the main two issues, education reform and equal rights     pushing for the Equal Rights Amendment   in coalition with other  organizations, such as Oklahoma Business and Professional Women and  the American Association of University Women. I got to know some of  the Oklahoma City people and people from elsewhere in the state at this  little library in Stroud, and we had monthly meetings about this  agenda   education and the Equal Rights Amendment. I started getting  to know the Legislature because we were given assignments. People like  Cleta  Deatherage Mitchell  and Jan Dreiling worked with us and told us  who the really tough legislators were, who the possible votes were, who  were open-minded enough, who cared about equal rights and civil rights,  had cared about civil rights in the sixties and surely would support equal  rights for women in the seventies. You know, it was amazing to me that  you could walk into a court of law and not be treated equally as a  woman. I mean, it still blows my mind. The Equal Rights Amendment  was twenty-seven words long, and many didn   t even know what it was.  Henry Bellmon and David Boren were co-chairmen of this committee  called OK ERA, and I thought,    Well, that   s a snap. Of course we   ll pass  the Equal Rights Amendment with this bi-partisan leadership.    They  chaired the committee, and I was asked to be on it. So I really got to  know Oklahomans, not just through the coalition of working with the  League of Women Voters, but also some of the individuals who were  political, like Cleta.  It was really those two issues that got me down to the Legislature. I got  down there and I thought,    Wow. I could do this.    (Laughs) Little did I  know. But I thought,    These are just people like you and me. These are  people who bring forth concerns of voters in their district and they   re  pretty ordinary.    It was really not until I served in the Legislature that I  got to appreciate how extraordinary many of them really were. Some of  9  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  them I disagreed with, but there were just some extraordinary people at  the Legislature. I could see it was a great privilege to serve. I really ran  the first time because of my own representative, who was a Republican.  I had supported him because we were working on these two issues of  education improvement and Equal Rights Amendment passage, and he  strongly supported both of those things and authored bills to that effect.  His name was Paul Brunton. I got to know the Legislature to some  degree through him, and he suggested one night after session sitting  around,    You know, I   m not going to run for re-election, and you should  run for my seat.    I laughed, and that was the first time I ever thought of  running for office. I put it out of my mind quickly, but it kept coming  back subconsciously. I kept thinking about it.  It   s different, I think, with men. Many men just think,    Sure, I could do  that.    I really didn   t. I thought,    Oh, I could never do that.    Then people  said,    Your children have all grown. They   ve all left. You   re not home  taking care of children this year. You could run.    This was in 1980, and  they were all off in school.    I guess I could,    but it just took me ages. It  was really through two of my best friends, Norma Eagleton and Patty  Eaton, that I got my consciousness raised and got my nerve up. We had  worked together to elect Norma Eagleton to the first voting position a  woman had ever held at that time in Tulsa. We had a city commission,  not a council, elected at large. There were five commissioners and  Norma was elected to be Finance Commissioner. It was quite a race.  Did you knock on a lot of doors?  Oh, yeah.  Or did you do something else?  No, lots of doors. I loved that part of the campaigning. I   d been overseas  all through the sixties and I was really almost starved to know who  people were and what they cared about and what America was becoming  and what Oklahoma was becoming. I always had thought of America as  kind of an idea as much as a place. This promise of America, this  promise of the commonwealth. A place that is acting for the public  good.  So, I had idealistic notions that didn   t go away, even with all the  cynicism over the Vietnam War and other issues when I was living in  Iran. People overseas still loved America. They may not have loved  Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon, but they loved the American people  and the American ideas, the American notions of freedom, fair play, and  a democratic republic. Not a pure democracy   somehow we have  promoted that unthinkingly, just pure democracy   overseas. I think  10  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  we   ve gone from one extreme to another as we   ve supported regimes  overseas, either pure dictatorship but they   re for us, or pure democracy,  however it ends up. If it ends up with Hamas winning a popular election  among Palestinians and we don   t like the result, then we turn our backs  on it. So we say we   re for democracy, but then we don   t really like the  results.  What was your first day that you were sworn in like? Can you  remember?  I do, because I hadn   t thought anything about being elected. I had only  thought about whether I could win or not. I was in a district  with a  heavy republican registration , even though it was very independent. It  was a district that had the University of Tulsa in it, and I was working at  the University of Tulsa at the time   I left my job to run for the  Legislature   and so knew a lot of people living around that area as well  as people all over the district. I knew that even though the registration  and the voting were pretty republican, it also could be a swing district.  The democrats had sort of written it off as being a republican district just  because we   d always had republicans representing us, including Frank  Keating, who became a governor later.  Once election day came, and to my great surprise, I really was elected, I  knew it was only because of the hard work of so many friends and  getting to know people one at a time. I mean, it   s the kind of thing you  never can really do in a larger race, but in a House district   30,000  people   you can actually do that. In four months    time, you can actually  knock doors and meet people and communicate by phone. So I really did  get to know the district pretty well, but mostly I think it was other people  vouching for me. They knew me and we   d worked together on school  integration or education reform of one kind or another, and at lots of  levels. I think I was just incredibly lucky to know people in every  precinct. So it was a pretty personal election. Nonetheless, I didn   t think  I   d win, so I didn   t think about the Legislature at all. So, boom   all of a  sudden, I won and then I started getting these phone calls.    We have to  be over there tomorrow, we have a democratic caucus.       A what?     (Laughs) I had to switch gears so quickly. I thought,    Well surely there   s  a day of rest.     No.  We all bounced over there and this is where the Equal Rights  Amendment came in. We drove across the turnpike with this friend of  mine, Don McCorkell, who had a great big van. So all of us who were  democrats bounced into this van and sped across the turnpike for my  first democratic caucus, to elect a Speaker of the House. Well, Cleta  11  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams   Deatherage  had introduced me to Dan Draper, and he was strongly for  the Equal Rights Amendment. So I was a Dan Draper supporter. We  could all vote for him as our Speaker. So that was almost like a no-brainer,  being able to support someone.  Where was your first office?  Actually, that was with another guy on the third floor, which is where all  the research people worked. There was a little suite of offices down  there, so it was just great access to the education staff. Most of the  legislators were up on the fourth and fifth floors, but there were some of  us who were freshmen who got to be down on the third floor next to the  staff and next to the Education Committee chairman.  It was two years earlier, we had all elected representatives who would  vote for Dan Draper. So, it may have been    78 that Dan became Speaker  instead of    80   but we all supported him  Draper was elected Speaker in  1979 . Cleta had introduced us all, and that was part of our overall  strategy to support him.  Do you remember presenting your first bill?  I remember asking my first question. We were told as freshmen,    Just  lay low your first year   just learn the lay of the land,    and that did take  me two years, just to learn which direction the Capitol went, which door  I walked out of, which was the east, west, north and south. I was always  getting confused. The building kept turning around but I do remember  my first question. Speaking of women, there were five of us women who  got elected from Tulsa County.  All in 1980?  Yes. Joan Hastings and Helen Arnold, both republicans, had already  been in the legislature, but there were three new democrats. We had a  total   it was our all-time high   a total of five women legislators in the  House from Tulsa. Alene Baker and Twyla Mason and I were the three  new ones. All  Tulsa area House members , except for Joan Hastings,  supported the Equal Rights Amendment. At any rate, there we were, we  women, sitting in this committee on the judiciary. We actually were on  the subcommittee of juvenile justice. That was my interest, policy for  young people, but we were part of this larger committee of the judiciary.  A legislator by the name of Frank Shurden had this bill   he became  known as the legislator who was for castration for those who had  committed rape. At this point, he had the bill that called for alternate  death sentences for criminals, convicted criminals. They could choose  12  how they were going to die, how they would be put to death. I kept  listening to this bill and these other women on the committee, these big  Equal Rights Amendment supporters, who were saying,    Oh, yeah.  Great. That   s just so American, you know, freedom of choice.    I was  thinking,    What is wrong with this picture?    So I finally got up my  nerve and asked my first question, and that was,    How would you write  the job description for the executioner? I mean, we   re talking about  people.    One of the lines of the bill was,    You may choose to die in the  way you did in your victim.    It was kind of screw-y language, and then  everybody started looking at the language and so, finally, we defeated  the bill, the alternate death penalty bill. But it was just a strange bill. So  then I found out that I really could ask a question and that questions can  sometimes lead to the right outcome if you just find the right question.  (Laughs) So I spent a lot of my time thinking of the right questions.  But back to your question   my first bill. The issue I had run on was  equal treatment for Tulsa. Above all other issues of equality, I thought  that it was way past time for us to have equal access to higher education  in Tulsa, Oklahoma. We were the largest metropolitan area in the United  States without a four-year college, taxpayer-paid public education. We  didn   t have it. We had a two-year college, a junior college, but nothing  beyond that. So you could look at the statistics and see all around  Oklahoma City and Norman and the Edmond area   you had all these  people with degrees compared to Tulsa. I mean, there was about a  fifteen to twenty percent difference. If you went out of Tulsa and  included Bartlesville, then you got a little different picture but if you just  looked at the metropolitan area of Tulsa, we were way behind Oklahoma  City, and it really was a question of access. So I thought we should have  some kind of higher education and Tulsa State University or OSU-Tulsa,  a co-equal branch; that was not popular. None of those options were  popular. So my first two years at the legislature I really didn   t act like a  freshman on that one issue. On every other issue, I acted just like a  freshman, but on that issue I just didn   t know any better. I kept acting  the way I   d acted in the campaign, pulling people and groups together.  I look back on this with some embarrassment because I would send out a  meeting notice and would invite all these Tulsa Senators and House  members, and I   d get this committee room. I learned you could get a  committee room, and all these powerful people and well-known people:  Finis Smith, who had been president pro-tempore of the Senate, Bill  Poulos, and Charlie Ford and all these well-known legislators who   d  been there for ages. Senate President Pro Tempore Rodger Randle, my  mentor and Senate bill author, didn   t object, so I thought it must be  okay. We would convene these meetings and, looking back on it, I  realized two or three years later that actually it was a question of  seniority. The legislator who   d been there longest would usually  13  convene the meetings of the delegation. We went through a lot of  versions of a bill to get Tulsa some public higher education and I just  kept losing bill after bill.  Finally, one day Twyla Mason Gray, who was Twyla Mason at that  time, was reading the records. She kept reading the journals to reflect on  votes from Appropriations and various committees. She found where the  Appropriations Committee had never voted for the higher ed  appropriation. They just had sent it on out to the floor. So, someone  raised an objection about the higher ed bill and, meanwhile, we   d been  working with legislators from all around the state to try and get them to  fall in with us and support equal opportunities for Tulsa higher ed. Lo  and behold, this point-of-order was made on the floor of the House, that  the higher education  appropriations  bill had not been officially passed  and signed out of committee. So we voted    no    on final passage of the  emergency clause, which  would have given  all these institutions their  money immediately instead of three months from that day. So the  emergency clause was important to have.  Obviously the bill passed, but the leadership couldn   t get the emergency.  Robert Henry was in the leadership. He   s one legislator who was not  from Tulsa who    threw in with us.    He was from Shawnee and was head  of Judiciary. He was threatened with his chairmanship, and told he  needed to change his vote, then he got more and more adamant and  outraged. We had this horrible stalemate, and then we all   we  republicans and democrats from Tulsa   met in the office of our  Transportation Committee Chairman, Bob Hopkins. He was the only one  from Tulsa who had a large enough office for us to meet in, and we  would sit around the room, thinking,    What will be our next move?    We  had held up the whole Legislature and made the Speaker look very weak  but we couldn   t budge. We couldn   t break ranks.  Finally, one of our number who was a republican said,    I think maybe  it   s time to go take Dan Draper a peace offering and have a little talk  with him after session and, I don   t know, take him a bottle of whiskey or  something,    (that was Jim Forrester from Tulsa). We said,    Okay, give it  a try to see what comes of it.    And he was right. Dan Draper was ready  to compromise, but he was from Stillwater so OSU would have been  fine but the former Speaker, Bill Willis from Tahlequah, with  Northeastern  State University  down there, apparently was going to  veto that idea. So they kept thinking,    What could they give Tulsa that   s  not too much but that gets through?    We actually came up with this idea  of a consortium. Rodger Randle and I had been to Denver to see Auraria,  and we thought it was a great idea, putting these public colleges together  on one campus, having little branches and having the student be able to  get the first two years at a junior college and the next two years at a  14  branch of one of the universities   actually in their case, it was the  University of Colorado   and go on to graduate work. At any rate,  finally I think they thought,    That   s probably the least we can do, the  most harmless thing we can do,    and so that   s what we finally agreed to.  I was enthusiastically for it. I thought this could be great, as long as we  had enough control within the board   s powers so that we could assume  charge of our own destiny in Tulsa.  I will just say that for years after that, we kept trying to strengthen the  board so we didn   t have to just sit and get whatever crumbs the Regents  decided to throw us. By 1990, I was really ready to focus on common ed  (kindergarten through twelfth grade). All through the eighties I   d really  focused on this equal access issue of higher education, but also at the  same time greater quality in higher education; we had twenty-seven  colleges, which seemed like a lot. The traditional way to treat them was  across the board   when I passed a bill on future teacher scholarships,  for instance, I was so proud of myself because I   d gotten  200,000 for  scholarships for future teachers. But instead of making them life-changing  possibilities for people we could recruit from math and science  and other academic core subject areas, the Regents chose to divide up  the money for people who were already in the pipeline going to get  education degrees anyway. I mean, that was just typical of what  happened once we got the money to the Regents, and in such small  amounts   instead of a  5,000 scholarship it becomes like a  500  scholarship, and lots of them   but it was so typical. So the money  would be like taking a Dixie cup of water and throwing it out there on  Lake Keystone. It would just vanish. You couldn   t see any dramatic  impact.  I kept trying to get back to this notion of raising our sense of  possibilities that really we could do a lot better in Oklahoma and we just  didn   t think enough of ourselves or somehow we thought we couldn   t be  an education state. We were always in the bottom five states on these  human issues, whether it was health or human services or education or  mental health or any of the people areas. We were always in the lowest  of the low states and that seemed absurd to me to have a state of this  kind of wealth and to be this low   a taxing state. We were forty-ninth or  fiftieth on ad valorem taxes historically and you could go move to Texas  or New Jersey and your taxes would be three and four times what they  were in Oklahoma. But still we didn   t seem to have the belief that we  could do any better. It just became this sort of frustrating exercise.  I finally learned it was too hard to take on the system. So my strategy  became one to create models. The University Center at Tulsa, UCAT we  called it, was supposed to be such a model. We could really create a  great model where the best education from anywhere could be imported,  15  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  as long as the board had the clout and the money to import education  Tulsans needed and that companies and employees had the need for.  I started feeling the same way about common ed, that there isn   t enough  variety in common education and some people don   t have the chance I  had to go to a small rural school or just to a small school in a small  town. The choices we were able to exercise for our own children   some  of them went to private school, some public school. We were back and  forth, but we were very privileged. We had the right and the means to  make those choices. Most of the parents in the public school system  didn   t have those choices. For whatever reason, you had two working  parents or you had various limitations. So I thought,    Well then public  education itself needs to have more variety to it.    We created alternative  education where students who had not done well or who had dropped  out of public schools had another chance to still get a diploma through  another route. They might have been disruptive in school. They might  have been bored.  I   ve got one of those. (Laughs)  You have one? Well, a lot of them just didn   t find public school that  challenging and so we eventually created the system of alternative  education. Initially we started off with just pilot projects and  demonstration grants. A school in Tulsa, Street School, became a  national model. I had been working on that before I was in the  legislature. It was natural just to continue working with Street School. I  served on their board and got to know that one school pretty well. I  knew it could be a model for the state.  We  funded alternative education statewide . Then we had the Summer  Arts Institute at Quartz Mountain under the Oklahoma Arts Institute  where really talented students in various arts disciplines   dancing,  theater, writing, visual art, symphony   across the board in arts  disciplines, these students would go for an incredible two weeks at  Quartz Mountain in the summer. Eventually in the eighties we added a  model for math and science. We felt that math and science was so  undervalued in Oklahoma, and many employers were telling us that they  would get graduates who had insufficient math and science background  and they had to import a lot of their talent. Robert Henry,  state  representative from Shawnee at the time,  and I did a series of bills to  strengthen math and science. I authored the math and science school  (OSSM) and he did the Institute for Science and Technology as an  interim study (ultimately OCAST).  What went into your thinking of switching from the House to the Senate?  16  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  That was just easy. I had an opponent every time, and it was always a  big fight to get re-elected.  Usually a male or a female?  Male    I   m trying to remember. I had a female opponent one time but I  always had an opponent. It was just a big struggle. I would get some  momentum making some progress on the education front and then I   d  have to run for re-election. Some politicians were able to just always be  politicians and be very effective and not have to all of a sudden switch  gears. I wasn   t that way. I mean, I think the worst thing that happened  with me is I got down to the legislature and I was so in awe of the  process and how people got bills passed and how people were  successful. I became kind of like a student of the process, but not always  able to copy the people I   d learned so much from, feeling much less  effective than what I knew. I certainly lost all of my sense of irony and  detachment   aesthetic distance, maybe they call it.  So all of a sudden here was the prospect of running for an office that had  a four-year term, and I thought,    That would be so great because I know  I   m a lousy politician. I   m not gonna be a politician from day one and do  all these politically-correct things. I   m just not gonna do that.    Not  because I was above it, I just couldn   t function that way. I was aware of  things I was told I should do, but I procrastinated. I would always  answer phone calls. I didn   t always answer letters by mail. I tried to  reach people at least once by phone and I didn   t always get back a  second time, so I always had fences to mend when I ran for re-election.  It was always really tough. When Rodger Randle ran for mayor, then his  Senate seat, of course, became vacant, so I ran for his Senate seat. So  that was just a natural. I don   t remember it being that difficult. All of  these races sort of swim into my consciousness. I never had a democrat  opponent. No democrat wanted (Laughs) to run for this seat. It was  House District 70, and then Senate District 33   and in twenty-four  years, I never had one democrat opponent.  Well, what was the biggest change in that time period over twenty-four  years? Some things had to change.  I think the biggest change was how we expressed our relationship to  money. We   ve always had a very unrealistic relationship to money in  Oklahoma, somehow believing that we could get a free lunch. We were  told by various governors,    You   re doing fine Oklahoma,       You   re  number one,    and we had been number one in football   one of our  universities, OU, for instance, had been number one several times. But  we were number forty-eight and forty-nine in funding for education, and  so when I was busily creating models during the eighties with the help of  17  lots of like-minded other people and coalition forming, we still in overall  terms were way down.  We were the victims of boom-and-bust economy. Governor Hall raised  taxes in the seventies and we lived off the economies that came after  that. We were able to cut taxes thirty different ways thirty different times  in the eighties. So there was plenty of tax cutting, yet we were still  increasing our financial commitment to some of these essential services  and education. Then when the bust cycle came, because we had never     through the 80s, we never did rebates   we never cushioned the shock of  the price of oil going down. We never prepared ourselves for that. We  didn   t do any long-range planning, so the bust really got us in, I would  say,    80,    82,    83. Just at the time we were trying to get the state to make  an additional commitment to higher ed in Tulsa, we started suffering this  bust and oil prices plummeted. Oil revenue was such a huge part of our  state budget. So we had to increase taxes and still we didn   t increase  them enough. When I was in the House, we increased taxes four  different times under different governors, the last one being Henry  Bellmon, because it was the only way we could keep ourselves above  board. Henry Bellmon said at one time,    We need to raise teacher  salaries.     Coincidentally, when I was in the House, we had created a House/Senate  Long-Range Planning Committee because we hadn   t really been ready  for these times. It had a three-year life and we accomplished just about  everything we set out to do. Our third year, a report was submitted when  Governor Henry Bellmon came in to his initial year  of his second term .  He looked at the education part of those recommendations, and kind of  played with them in his head for a while. He met with the Oklahoma  Education Association teachers, and I think AFT  American Federation  of Teachers  was also involved. At any rate, Henry Bellmon met with  these teachers and agreed Oklahoma teachers should make salaries at  least at the regional average. He said,    As far as I am concerned, every  teacher should make  5,000 more apiece.    So we took that and said,     Hey, yes. That   s a great idea. Let   s go.     The long and short of it was, we put together an education reform task  force, Task Force 2000, and that was one of the most important bills I  ever  carried. There were no  legislators on it. We had some journalists,  some newspaper people, business people and teachers. George Singer  from Tulsa chaired it and wrote an incredible set of recommendations  shifting the whole focus of education from one of rules and regulation  enforcement to one of outcomes, looking at results. How were our  students doing? Were they learning? Were they successful? Were they  ready for the next grade? Were they ready for college? Were they ready  for high school? Were they ready for junior high, middle school? Were  18  they even ready for kindergarten? And we just kept getting further back,  thanks in large part to this first-ever independent study we had had of  higher education that Carolyn Thompson had authored when she was a  freshman in the House.  Remember how we as freshman get things done because we don   t know  any better? When I did UCAT, and that   s when she did this higher ed  independent study   anyway this independent study kept forcing us back  further. Henry Bellmon already had, with three daughters himself, a  large commitment to early childhood education way before his time     way before the time that early childhood education had become a  priority in Oklahoma, he   d had a long-standing commitment to it. So  that was an important part of 1017. Steve Lewis and Bob Cullison, our  legislative leaders, were strongly committed to that part of the education  bill. We passed  HB 1017, which  reflected the recommendations  of  Task Force 2000 .  The recommendations of Task Force 2000 had dramatically shifted our  focus in education from these   the enforcement of rules and regulations  that didn   t have a whole lot to do with quality   shifted the focus to how  students  performed . The legislation  wasn   t as dramatic as the TF 2000  recommended, but House Bill  1017 did shift the priority in education.  The problem is we didn   t repeal enough education law. We still had this  huge book of education law that all of our dollars at the State  Department of Education, five hundred employees strong, was bound to  enforce. So it was very hard to open windows and doors and make  changes to this cumbersome system that didn   t always prepare students  for college.  I will tell you one thing. I do remember when I was a freshman, I wrote  to the state superintendent at the time and said,    Shouldn   t we be  distributing this new report    What Students Need to Know and Be Able  to Do to Be Ready for College   ? Shouldn   t we be distributing this to the  schools?    And he said,    No, that   s not necessary.    I think I still have  that correspondence. (Laughs) I mean      We shouldn   t get this out to the  high schools? They don   t need to know this?    So we did a lot, after 1017  passed, we made a lot of adjustments along those lines because we really  thought change wouldn   t come naturally from these education leaders     offices. It was up to legislators and policy-makers and governors to  show our departments of education and regents offices in the land that  it   s really okay for students to do a lot better academically and to be  ready for the 21st century and the global economy. We were ahead of our  time when we were calling for this. The minute we passed the bill, it was  okay with them, too. They just wanted the protection of legislation and  the governor   s signature before they changed anything.  19  Finchum  Williams  That is my jaded view of how education works. You just almost have to  create exceptions like alternative certification where you let a few  people who speak lots of languages, love kids, are able and willing to  help, are imaginative people and competent but don   t fit the system, you  know, because they haven   t been  through the traditional certification  process . Mid-career people. Even though we did that as an issue in  1017 with the label    alternative certification,    the language almost made  it worse. So every year after 1017, we would come back and we   d have  a bill that would improve and strengthen aspects of 1017. We mandated  that we be part of the National Assessment Education Progress (NAEP).  We mandated that we have money going for Advanced Placement  courses and testing and  professional development for AP teachers .  Something OSU did when Smith Holt was Dean of Arts and Sciences  was revolutionary in getting German and Advanced Placement English  classes out to the panhandle. Beaver and  Forgan and other  schools out  west there in the panhandle all of a sudden had two, three, and four  schools they were partnering with OSU to have one professor who came  over television. Talk-back TV was the first method, but eventually they  got more sophisticated and Oklahoma came to be one of the leading  states in making college professors accessible in these core subject areas.  I think we accomplished a lot of things through those years, but it all  took a lot of pushing. If it hadn   t been for people like Smith Holt who  initiated things    Before Sandy Garrett became Secretary of Education,  we had Smith Holt as Secretary of Education for Henry Bellmon. He  was on the ETS board, Education Testing Service out of Princeton. We  had these two systems and we   re an ACT state, so most of our students  take the ACT core courses. But Smith Holt had been on this other board,  and they   re the ones who put out the report,    What Students Need to  Know and Be Able to Do to Be Ready for College.    He did initiate a  great number of things that made higher education more accessible to  high school students and ultimately for seventh and eighth grade  students. We were just incredibly fortunate to have people like that to  work with who were very focused on quality and the reality of change     dramatic, deep change that was coming. George Nigh had a terrific  Secretary of Education. It was not formally called that, I think it was  education coordinator or something. Carolyn Smith was just fabulous.  Are you from Oklahoma?  From Tennessee.  Okay. Well, see Tennessee was one of these lead states, too, because we  had even gotten out of the Southern Regional Education Board (SREB).  This was another thing that was very important for us, getting back into  that compact where we had interchangeable graduate courses that are  20  free or you   re treated across this compact like an in-state student. If  you   re in one of these southern states, it   s common market education. So  in veterinary medicine and things we were strong in, that neighboring  states might not have strengths in, their students could come into  Oklahoma and be treated like residents of Oklahoma and only pay in-state  tuition.  We had this going all through the south, but Oklahoma had gotten out of  SREB, this compact, because our chancellor at the time thought,    We   re  better than those southern states,    and it is true in terms of how our  students do, we are not in the bottom five. In terms of how our students  do, we   re always in the upper realms on results. I   d say in the top  twenty, but in terms of the money we put into education and invest in  our students, we   re always in the bottom five states.  You were talking about what changed. I   m sorry I went so far astray.  What really changed was this unrealistic relationship Oklahomans have  had to money because of this cult of   it   s almost like a religion      no  taxes    or    lower taxes.    The people who had been part of the state  before started gaining the upper hand little by little by little.  I am  referring to  that drumbeat of    no new taxes    and    tax cuts    and the kind  of thinking that this is what wins elections, combined with the reaction  against the eighties when we raised taxes four times, and then passed  this education improvement investment   the money to pay for these  improvements to education, lowering class size, et cetera.  A group formed that was anti-legislator, that was anti-taxes, anti-government,  anti-services and especially letting legislators struggle and  agonize over priorities and what should be invested in and what should  not be. So we had this state question. Maybe it was 69   I   m not sure  about the number. It was a state question that said,    No taxes without a  vote of the people,    unless the legislature overwhelmingly, by three-fourths  of the legislature, would support such a thing. We couldn   t raise  taxes without a vote of the people and at that same time, they had a vote  to repeal the taxes we had raised for education in 1017, and so we had a  repeal fight on our hands. We passed 1017 in 1990, so we had to mount  a campaign to vote    no    on repealing 1017. As far as I know, at that  time, we were certainly the only state in the South, maybe the only state,  but the only state in the South, (in SREB, which now numbers sixteen  states) to actually vote on taxes to invest in improving education. We  voted    no,    not to repeal 1017, but it was a tough fight and it was a very  hard vote.  Then right after that the next vote was to make it impossible for the  legislature ever again to vote for taxes just by a simple majority and in  an emergency clause. Another vote was to limit legislative terms so  21  Finchum  Williams  people could not be re-elected after they   d served twelve years. I had  been there for awhile once that passed. I actually got to stay twenty-four   years  when it went into effect, but this has become almost like a  religion, not to tax ourselves and to me, this is the price of membership.  We   re so fortunate to live in the United States.  You asked me about the watershed time in my life politically. It really  was living in the Middle East and seeing how fortunate we were in  America, just how fortunate we were to have the great education system  we had and to have the arts development, the cultural development we  had. Where other countries were investing in the arts and proud of their  arts, we in Washington were starting to go the other way, to dis-invest in  the arts or just to have the arts for people who could afford the arts, not  for the public. To me, that   s the whole point of America. We may have a  wide spread in incomes, but our culture is created by and should be  available   accessible to all of us, not just those rarified few who could  afford to go to and keep an art museum going, or we   d never have our  culture. We would just have artisans working for the monied classes, and  we went beyond that.  The experiment of America a long time ago was to have this accessible  education for all, and they meant what they said back in those days.  Governor Riley of South Carolina, when he was Secretary of Education  in Washington under Bill Clinton, he meant what he said,    All means  all.    It   s all of our children, and they   re going to be paying our Social  Security in our generation. At least we had done in Oklahoma what we  did nationally. We haven   t borrowed from our grandchildren.  Not yet.  Not yet. But I will say this. On the other hand, we haven   t invested in  them either. We passed a bill called,    No Child Left Behind,    and I was  passionately for that notion. I had been all through the seventies and  eighties when Marian Wright Edelman and Hillary Clinton (who was a  governor   s wife at the time in Arkansas, she was on that board) called  for    leaving no child behind    and made this pledge of    No Child Left  Behind.    Then when George Bush came and took that goal and made a  motto of it, I was enthusiastic. I thought, this is the commitment we   ve  needed, along with the bipartisan legislation. But then Congress didn   t  fund it. We partially funded it, but to really    leave no child behind,    we  really have to do what the bill says and to fund the bill. Well, Congress  didn   t fully fund it, but they mandated everything, so we the states have  to pay for everything, or we just get to grouse about it.  Then we go off on these wars. I won   t say these wars, I   ll say the Iraq  War or the invasion of Iraq, because that is what has really raised the  22  Finchum  Williams  debt and raised the deficit. We never pay for it out of our own money,  the Republican principles of    pay as you go.    Forget that. That   s an  Oklahoma principle, but it is not a national principle anymore. That is  out the window. It   s the most extravagant caper I   ve ever seen and it   s at  the expense of your grandchildren and my grandchildren because they   re  going to have to pay for it. At the same time they   re being given this  debt, we   re saying    no    to investing in them. We will not pay for more  health insurance for them. We will not fully fund    No Child Left  Behind.    That   s why I feel I   m left with unfinished business. That is the  bottom line of where I left the legislature.  After we passed 1017 in 1990, they kept creeping up on me. I kept going  to meetings and learning more about what other states were doing and  other people were doing. Yes, we finally did re-join Southern Regional  Education Board so we were part of the southern states. I   m so proud of  them because they have become the leaders in goal-setting for the  nation, because we set goals for ourselves as southern states and as  Oklahoma. The one thing, if I could think of one thing that I really  wanted to do that I didn   t get done, was a very targeted investment in  under-financed schools that are under-performing schools where the best  teachers   the most experienced teachers or the newest, freshest, most  enthusiastic teachers   should be going. The absolute best in our system  ought to be operating for those children who are being the least  successful because those are the ones who are going to have to pay our  Social Security and provide the future for our country.  Whenever we had the chance in Congress, we voted against  students ,  and even in the Oklahoma Legislature, we have voted against them.  Even though we may have passed a bill in the Senate to target priority  funding for turnaround schools, innovation, principal training and all the  rest. I mean, a new kind of principal leadership training   taking the best  of what   s worked, what   s most effective, and bringing it to bear to  support those children in being successful. I felt we didn   t do that. We  learned we should do it, and it took us years to learn it. We started  learning it with 1017, but it   s the one part of 1017 we never came back  and seriously funded or targeted. I don   t feel like a total failure,  (Laughs) but I feel like I didn   t finish what I set out to do.  But you accomplished an awful lot.  Well, I pushed. That   s how I see myself is this very, sort of unpleasant  person coming down the halls. People would say,    Oh, let   s run the  other direction so we don   t have to do this.    Bob Cullison used to tease  me about going to these conferences and coming back with new ideas of  what other states were doing with and,    Why couldn   t we do that?    He  said,    Look, I   ll approve you going to the conference. Just don   t go to  23  Finchum  Williams  the meetings.    (Laughter)    It   s too expensive.    So it was too expensive  for Oklahoma because all of these ideas do cost money because you  invest in teachers, and we did.  You know one thing we did, we were one of the first, early states to do it  was investing in the  5,000 bonus for teachers who were able to gain  national board certification. They say it   s as close to merit pay as we   ll  ever get; what they have to go through to pass that certification is  unbelievable. I also think effectiveness is the important thing, and  helping students make gains who have a lot yet to learn and need to  learn it fast and need to be on that road to catching up. There are  incredibly resourceful teachers who can help them do it, and we ought to  have some kind of bonus for teachers who are really willing to go into  the lowest performing schools let   s say, and effect turnarounds.  What have you done since you   ve been out of office?  My mother lost her husband, my stepfather, just a month after Christmas  after I got out of the legislature. So I pretty much have been involved in  South Carolina, my home state, for the last two years. You know, it   s  interesting. South Carolina is such a state. It   s just as idiosyncratic as  Oklahoma in a way. It just has these funny things about it, you know.  In Oklahoma, we have Turkey Mountain and it   s five hundred feet high  or something. We have these things we call mountains that are little  hills, and in South Carolina, it was the first state to secede from the  Union and lead all those states into secession. It   s the only state in our  union that   s been majority black and yet they have somehow struggled  and become a progressive state. They   re in the process of becoming  progressive, especially progressive when Governor Riley was the  governor. Dick Riley is one of my heroes. After two years of voting     no,    the legislature finally voted    yes    to education improvement and  they enacted a penny sales tax to pay for it. So we kind of copied them  in the nineties ten years later when we did our bill. The difference is,  ours went to a vote of the people and theirs didn   t. But we did a lot of  the same kinds of things that South Carolina had done. They have such a  long way to go. They   re still down in the bottom five states, too, in terms  of results.  I   ve spent a lot of time in South Carolina the last two years, and so I see  how similar we are in our strivings and in our difficulties to overcome.  It   s really been amazing. My mother lived for two more years, so that  was just an incredible time and opportunity that I had to be able to be  with her, not having to be in legislative session, be with her and her  prized dog I brought back to Oklahoma. Now I   m home from South  Carolina and expecting one new grandchild in Tennessee. My oldest son  24  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  lives in Tennessee. He has one son, and we   ll gain another one here  shortly. Then I have two grandchildren who are moving today from  Montana to Colorado where my other son, Peter, lives, in Boulder,  Colorado. Now I will have two sons in Boulder, Colorado, and their  families, so this will be a much easier commute than Montana. Colorado  will become my other state and Tennessee will replace South Carolina.  As a group of women, the five from Tulsa, did you stay tight when you  were there?  On Tulsa issues, always. Joan Hastings didn   t support the Equal Rights  Amendment, but the four of us did.  Did you live in the same place or did you share a house?  We lived in different places. In actuality I think I did live at one time in  the same complex Helen Arnold lived in, but different parts of the  complex so we didn   t really see each other. Norma Eagleton was there in  the Corporation Commission and she lived in that complex, but all three  of us lived in different parts of it.  Did you notice different treatment between men and women early on?  A lot, and that is where numbers do matter. I didn   t believe that, but I  learned it in the legislature. When you get a number of committee  members who are women, there   s a lot we can do, especially if we   re  from different ends of the ideological or political spectrum. If we agree  on an issue, it   s hard to stop us. I can think of some issues where we got  run over, like the gun carrying law.  Concealed weapons.  Concealed weapons law and capital punishment, corporal punishment.  Sometimes we would just get run over, but a lot of times we   d be  together on some of these    civilizing issues    they used to call them in  the nineteenth century   some of these issues that tend toward problem  solving instead of the immediate swift (Laughs) sword.  You managed to do breast cancer     Breast cancer we did, and Betty Boyd, when she was in the legislature,  she and I did a number of bills together. It was so great having her. We  did the anti-discrimination in genetic background for employment  insurance. Now the federal government is on the verge of passing a bill  that is very much like the bill we passed in Oklahoma. We did a number  of things that we had bipartisan support on, not just the breast cancer  25  Finchum  Williams  legislation, but drive-through deliveries. Have you heard of where you  just have twenty-four hours? Because the insurance companies, in the  days when HMOs came into existence, you had this wedge of the  insurance company and the HMO between the doctor and the patient.  You had this huge other presence there determining the length of  hospital stays for pregnancies and birth. So, we changed that because  more and more they were doing it for insurance reimbursement, just  these twenty-four hours. You know, baby pops out and then the next day  you pop out of the hospital and you   re home with no differentiation for  women who needed another day or two in the hospital, because things  weren   t going well. Then they couldn   t get reimbursed if they stayed. I  will say that even some insurance lobbyists agreed with us on that one. I  just know that there were some off-camera who were sympathetic and  didn   t really fight it out in the open, and so we were able to pass some of  this legislation that benefited women and children.  It was only when you got to those wedge issues that were brought up  intentionally to make legislators look bad   if they had the courage to  look bad   like the abortion issues and some of those. It was only when  you got to those kinds of issues that we parted company. Mostly, we  women were together on education issues. Betty Boyd and I were in  agreement on choices in public education, we just kept improving that  part of 1017   charter schools, for instance, and choice  between and  among public schools  we eventually legislated.  And I hate a heavy-handed legislature. What   d I   d love to have is a  legislature that sets standards and says,    You districts, you find out any  way you can to meet these standards and come up with these results  while not breaking federal law,    and then we   ll have school books that  are this thick instead of this thick because there   s such a compliance  mentality instead of    let   s make big gains, let   s support our students in  making big gains or even in helping them through trouble.    We should  just bring more of our resources to bear on that. There were lots of other  issues that I worked on. I just mentioned education because that   s the  area where I feel     You   ve done the most?     and have this great hope, this sense of unfinished business, of not  successfully targeting this student population that is not doing so well.  We know who those schools are. We know who those students are in  those schools, and we just look at them and say,    Isn   t that interesting?     without really making a commitment to help them turn around. I think  that   s immoral. It   s that moral obligation I feel to them that took me too  long to build that I feel is unfinished business. And they   re poor kids.  Let   s face it, they   re the poorest. It just so happens that the students who  26  Finchum  Williams  are the poorest have the lowest scores, and you can take the lowest thirty  performing schools in Oklahoma and know that you have an obligation  to do some targeting and not just with money but with other support,  getting foundations to help, getting mentors, getting volunteers, getting  people to do field work there as part of their teaching in-service. There  are so many things that could be done if we had them center focus.  That   s unfinished business.  Well, do you see yourself getting some of it finished in some capacity?  Maybe. I now have time to take a good long look at things, especially  when I   m on the road in between Colorado and Tennessee. I will in  some way be involved in cultural development and poverty issues at  some level. I just don   t know yet where I can be most helpful. I will say  that the one area I felt most successful in that surprisingly very tough  area when I was in the legislature was in the area of property taxes.  When we democrats were in the majority in the eighties, and Speaker  Bill Willis was speaker emeritus and the grand old man of the House, he  headed the Revenue Tax Committee. Year after year, I would come up  with a bill to at least raise the income ceiling for people who were  exempt from property taxes. People with  5,000 income a year. Finally,  he let me raise that to  7,500, and then  12,000, and then finally when I  was in the Senate, we inched it up some more. But I felt that I finally did  break the log jam on that front, and so every two years after that they let  me, L-E-T, let me have a bill to make some improvement to that area of  law so people could stay in their houses if they were eighty years old,  let   s say, and their houses that they   d lived in all their lives had  appreciated, they still should be able to stay in their houses if they only  had a certain amount of income.  Anyway, little by little we made a little progress on that front, and it was  revenue neutral for education because the state would reimburse the  counties for the money they lost from the property taxes they didn   t  collect. But if the state doesn   t have money or if the state is busy giving  these huge tax cuts, then it does create a conflict between the counties  and the state, and so that   s an ongoing conflict. If I were there, I would  still be working on that front as well. Otherwise, I   m for taxes. I   m for  paying for membership. America is a club I believe in belonging to, and  that I believe we pay dues to and that we all have that obligation. If we  thought more in terms of fairness to people who are not doing so well  and instead of going for the top one percent or top one-tenth of one  percent to give all the tax relief to, we would move closer to what my  idea of America always has been, the promise of America.  We weren   t supposed to be a monarchy, and we weren   t supposed to  27  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  have only the top one-tenth of one percent making all the gains. I   d be  working on that front. So you say, what   s changed? (Laughs) It   s just  that notion that all of a sudden, we don   t have to pay for anything and  that we   re great and we   re the best, even when we   re not, and even when  we   re not paying for it, and somehow seeing government as a negative.  Government is just us. It   s just the roads we drive on and the paying for  fire and emergency services and all those things we take for granted.  That   s what I stopped taking for granted when I lived overseas and  learned a little more about how lucky we were because in the Middle  East, you see people who don   t have many of these freedoms we have.  Well, we need a few more of you. (Laughs)  I doubt that, but I think we need lots of people pushing for progress and  the commonweal. When I feel more hopeful, I   ll be there with them.  Right now I   m feeling old.  No.  (Laughs) Old, and I feel there   s a lot of work up ahead, but I haven   t  crossed that bridge yet. I   ll let you know. So how about you? What do  you do at OSU? You   re with the library officially?  I   m a librarian. We moved here in    96, and I was a social worker before  that. I switched gears at mid-life and went into librarianship. My  husband switched gears and went from computer science to geography.  Wow.  He   s a professor at OSU.  See, if I went back to school, that would be something I   d be interested  in. I have known some geography teachers in the past from OSU, and  that is a wonderful thing that we have here. It started with that National  Geographic Alliance and their teacher institutes and they often meet  here. But    96, so you   ve been here for eleven years. Have you come to  think education is a priority in Oklahoma or an area that needs more  commitment made to it? How do you see it?  I think it needs more myself. I   ve got a seventeen year old, and coming  from Tennessee, it   s very similar I think. There   s not a great deal of  difference. I went to elementary school in North Carolina and so  switching from North Carolina in the sixth grade into the seventh grade,  the difference was amazing. I didn   t have to study any, for like     Isn   t that interesting? See, we had that great educational leadership in  28  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  North Carolina for years. Forty years before we ever started really  thinking about it, we had Governor Hodges and eventually Governor  James Hunt, Jim Hunt. But they just kept building. We went to see that  Research Triangle in North Carolina in 1983. Stratton Taylor (who  eventually married Carolyn  Thompson ) and I were both in the House  at that time and we took this tour and saw their math and science school,  saw their Research Triangle. Really it was from Governor Hunt as well  as Earl Mitchell at OSU, professor at OSU, that I got the idea of a math  and science school from. It was Governor Hunt   s fabulous leadership  that built on the foundation of that historic commitment to education in  North Carolina, just amazing   and that is so interesting to hear you say  that, that Tennessee and Oklahoma     That   s my perception.     are more alike. Even in these days of education reform, North  Carolina is number one in nationally-certified teachers. That was an  initiative of Jim Hunt   s when he was in the U.S. Senate, but also as  governor it was an initiative of his along with an early-childhood  commitment. When did you leave North Carolina?  1971.  Oh, well, you left before he was governor, because he was governor in  the eighties.  We just figured it was because property taxes were always higher in  North Carolina.  If they are, then that would say something. That is so interesting about  Tennessee. Some of these states have really switched from being  democrat to republican. I think the civil rights issue really did make a  difference.  Well, too, they had just started not too long before we left the merit  system for teachers. My mother-in-law is a retired school teacher, and  she had maxed out of that and gotten the highest she could go and had  jumped through all those hoops so     That   s what our state has, that ceiling. You get up to the top and then  you may still teach for ten or fifteen more years, but nothing changes.  Until we created this national board certification bonus, there wasn   t any  way for those experienced teachers to gain more. I would love to see us  establish a bonus for teaching in the lower-performing schools and  helping those kids.  29  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Well, I think there may be some grade inflation going on, too, in some  places.  Yes.  I get that impression just from several things and they don   t do as well  in college once they get there.  And the colleges can tell us something. We don   t have enough  information sharing and cooperation between higher ed and common ed.  We need more between the state superintendents    office and the  Regents    office so that we have more of a    seamless system.    That   s one  of those things we worked for to make 1017 more of a seamless effort,  but we never got there. So under unfinished business, that   s something  else. There would be more transparency at the common ed level to  assure we get extra help to the students who need it, and then colleges  get better prepared students.  At least now they have the    Right to Try        Now that is something and that is for high school students? What does it  add to the high school curriculum?  I don   t know if it adds to the curriculum, but you could take a class in  the summer at a college, and if you make a good enough grade, you can  get into college. If your GPA or your ACT score wasn   t high enough to  get you there before.  Okay, so that is an improvement. What we had before was concurrent  enrollment. This is an improvement even beyond concurrent enrollment.  It   s another option, I guess. Concurrent is still going on.  But this is an add-on. This is good.  I don   t know when it came about.  I think it was very recent. I think that was a Regents-initiated change. I  will say, ever since we did that independent higher ed study and we got a  new chancellor, higher ed has been doing a lot more for student success.  That was under Henry Bellmon, we got two Regents who were leaders.  Then we had a majority of five who were leaders. That may have been  one of his most important contributions as governor appointing those  good Regents.  I need to thank you for coming today. It was very nice to have you here.  30  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  ------- End of August 14, 2007 interview-------  Today is March 27, 2008. My name is Tanya Finchum, and I   m here in  the Angie Debo Room on the OSU campus. My guest today is Penny  Williams, and this is part two of an oral history with Women of the  Oklahoma Legislature. Ms. Williams served for twenty-four years, and  in our last discussion we talked a little bit about education issues, health  insurance and taxes. Today we   re going to continue and discuss some  other things she was involved with. So thank you for coming to  Stillwater.  Thanks for having me.  It   s a pleasure. Since we are in this room, we can start with Angie Debo.  That   s a great place to start. I just love being in here with all of these  documents brought together into focus in one room because these were  all through her house and it   s great to see them here. She is someone I   m  very proud of introducing to Robert Henry, who is now a Tenth Circuit  Court Judge. In fact he is the Chief. At any rate, I think Robert Henry  was my ace in the hole. Whenever, as a freshman and a sophomore in  the legislature, I really wanted to do something I cared about, I would go  to Robert Henry because I knew he could help us get it passed. So in that  respect, I was kind of an old fashioned woman in the legislature and I  think that I had great taste. And immediately when I first learned about  Angie Debo, I thought this is someone I should have been knowing  about long ago. Robert Henry, of course, thought the same thing when  he heard about her. Now he is probably her main spokesperson or  publicist. We had never hung  a portrait of  a woman in the Capitol, and  I thought it was high time and that she should be the first woman to be  hung, because all the paintings in the Capitol that had been  commissioned had been men. (Laughs) Will Rogers and Carl Albert and  Robert Kerr are people you would have, of course. But we didn   t have  the person who really became nationally and internationally famous as a  historian for recording Oklahoma   s history as we were transformed into  a state. We went from Indian Nation as we were recognized by the  federal government to a state.  At any rate, she did graduate work at OU and did her undergraduate  work at the University of Chicago, where she really learned how to do  research. She came back to OU and did her graduate work. She delved  into the files of what happened to Indian Territory and what happened to  the land and did her PhD thesis on that subject. She went into archives  that hadn   t been delved into by anyone before. She had a hard time  finding them   finding them at the courthouse, finally, digging way back  31  into time, but she found out about the Dawes Commission and that was  at the end of the 19th century and the earlier part of the 20th with all the  break-up of the Indian lands, what doomed them to lose everything  really. When they were bound together as a tribe, they had the land   as  they said, the moon, the sun, the stars, and the land   that were all  shared. Ownership of it. It was not a concept that was natural to them, as  you know. Of course, those particular tribes, the Five Civilized Tribes,  were force marched to Oklahoma as many of them were. So it   s a very  interesting place in terms of its troubled past. People have an ambivalent  relationship to our own state. And Robert Henry was so immediately  responsive to that. I think he loves Oklahoma and Oklahoma history in  much the way Angie did. But he also saw the problems. Truth telling is a  very serious business. When you do that research and you find  something, you find out things that aren   t going to be popular. It   s hard.  We commissioned a portrait of Angie Debo, painted by our    court  painter,    Charles Banks Wilson, who had done the frescos in the state  Capitol in the rotunda there as well as other paintings. So we asked him  to paint her and he seemed very pleased to be asked. I mean, he didn   t  really hesitate. That was my first experience with    pork barrel.    Because  Robert Henry had been there and served on the Appropriations  Committee he knew how to get a small amount of money tucked into the  main appropriations bill. So at any rate, that   s how we got the money for  the portrait, as has happened before in the Capitol with all the other art  there. The unveiling of her portrait was the most moving ceremony. The  tribes people were there who had come to honor her and former  Governor George Nigh presided. It was just a wonderfully moving  ceremony.  Then, an interesting thing happened before she died. When Henry  Bellmon was governor (this was very soon before she died) she wasn   t  really able to come to the Capitol anymore. She won the Charles  Dunning Prize for History and this is like the Nobel Prize for history.  But it   s only given about once every twenty-five years or so. This prize  was such an honor. No Oklahoman and no woman had ever received this  award before. So we had a ceremony at her house, and Henry Bellmon  traveled up to Marshall and many of her friends from out-of-town and  in-town all crammed into her house and she got that award. Anyway, it   s  just such a privilege and pleasure to be here in her room. It was a  wonderful friendship. I loved driving up to Marshall to visit her. I should  say the way I found out about her initially was when I was working for  the Equal Rights Amendment. We certainly wanted to get her own  representative   s vote and other legislator votes when it came up in  Oklahoma. She wrote a wonderful letter in support. I should bring you  that for this room here.  32  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  That would be good to have. Was it difficult getting approval for her to  be the first woman to have her portrait hung?  No. (Laughs) It wasn   t difficult. It was really thanks to Robert Henry   s  charm and knowledge of how to get things done through the legislature.  So it wasn   t a very public issue until after we   d gotten it done, because it  was in a huge appropriations bill. We had all these millions for  everything else and this was  35,000 or something, way below the  market price for any Charles Banks Wilson work. And part of that was  really his gift to the state. We came up with some seed money for it. It  was just one of those things I look back on with relish when I think of  my last year in the legislature, and then look back to those early days, I  think we   ve lost a lot in knowing how to move things through that help  grace the state. I think of what happened along the way, somehow, and  you had asked me this before, about the biggest change   it   s somehow  our relationship to investing in ourselves, tax dollars for services. I think  in those days when we did the little commission to Charles Banks  Wilson for Angie   s portrait, we were just beginning to learn about some  of the things we had to be proud of   more than we knew.  Most of us had never heard of Angie Debo, of her honors and her work.  She wrote book reviews for the New York Times Weekly for years and  people outside of Oklahoma knew her. But we didn   t know her inside. In  those years we started finding out some of the things about our state that  were just extraordinary and some gems, world-class gems that people  don   t talk about. We knew about Gilcrease Museum, but we didn   t know  about the DeGolyer History of Science Collection. There were lots of  things we had not known about that started coming to light in those very  positive days, even while the economy was going down.  We had positive days and people who were discovering their own past  and doing things to honor that past and make it more known. So it was  just a great time to be there, even though we were losing money and the  price of oil was going down. They said,    Do you think     no, it would  be unthinkable for the price of oil to go up to twenty-five dollars a  barrel.    No one could believe it. I think it did get to twenty-seven dollars  in those years and then it plummeted. (Laughs) And now it   s one  hundred and five dollars a barrel  Anyway, it   s amazing. So, it was a  great time to just share in some of the positive discoveries about  ourselves and the excellence that we really have had all along in this  state and that we needed to build on.  With Angie Debo, you also helped to raise money to do a film.  We did, and that became pretty well known nationally. That was very  little state money   a few thousand dollars.  33  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  I just read you used your Rolodex to solicit      That   s right. (Laughs) Thank you for remembering that. That was  important and you know, most people were in the position I   d been in     they didn   t know about her. So the film did make her come alive for  students of other generations.  Did you keep a copy of that solicitation letter?  Yes.  That might be interesting to have, too.  Good idea. I thought you were going to say the film   I certainly have a  copy of the film.  I think we may have a copy of that.  I bet you do.  Besides Angie Debo, there was the artist-in- residence. You just were a  supporter of that.  Yes, but I didn   t create that program. All I did was get money. This  funny thing happened about quote unquote    pork barrel    legislation. For  some reason people thought getting money for the arts was my pork  barrel, you know, and there were lots of people who wanted money for  this highway and that highway and this bridge and it would get named  after them. They thought if they gave me some money for the arts, I   d be  okay. (Laughs) Angie was one of my very few forays into getting  something personal done. They just sort of assigned me the arts. And so,  instead of thinking about the arts as our heritage, which of course we  now do, and a responsibility to invest in our children   s inheritance, they  just thought of that as something,    She cares about that so we   ll give her  that this year.    That   s how we funded a number of things in the arts.  Kelly Haney, as appropriations chairman, got a few things done for the  arts, but he also had many other things to do and so he would always  say,    She   ll take care of that.    (Laughs) Anyway, those were funny days.  Now we have that problem at the national level. Things get labeled     pork barrel    that are really of national importance   environmental  issues and parks and things like that. But there   s definitely a distinction.  There are things of national importance or state importance and then  there are things that are pet projects. I never thought the arts as a whole  should be anybody   s pet project. It was absurd to have them relegated to  34  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  that. I think we have come a long way. We have assumed a lot more  pride in who we are and the variety of our people. You and I are both  from other states and we have adopted this state and it is such a quirky  state. But I could really see this pride growing in those days, in the  eighties, when people started being more proud of who they were.  It was more of the thinking at the national level because we had learned  to take a lot of pride of the arts we had in Oklahoma and I   d have to  attribute that totally to Betty Price. She was the most fabulous Arts  Council Director   she just stepped down this last year in 2007. People  from other states were envious of us for having her. She helped make art  popular statewide and popular at the legislature. But at the national level  when they were disinvesting they wanted to do away with appropriations  for the National Endowment for the Arts and Public Television, NPR  and all of that. OETA, for one, had been defunded. I think it   s the  difference in being a nation and a country. Since we really made this  commitment to the arts, both in Oklahoma and nationally, we stopped  being quite so provincial. Other countries have always taken such pride.  Countries like Italy, Germany and England have all taken enormous  pride in their art. We just went through this spell where we didn   t, and  where we misunderstood the value of the arts and the public benefit.  Was that the same time the Poet Laureate came into being?  Oh yes, that was later. That was just a bill we did creating the Poet  Laureate programs, so to speak, in Oklahoma. Some other states have  had that; we have one at the national level and one in Oklahoma. And  right now, as of this last fall, Governor Henry and the committee named  N. Scott Momaday as our Poet Laureate, and it   s wonderful to have him.  Angie Debo would have been proud to have seen him named our Poet  Laureate.  That was done during your twenty-four years of service?  Yes, and you know I can   t even remember all of the different individual  things that we did. A lot of it involved getting money for the arts and  alternative education and things like that.  And the Jazz Hall of Fame.  The Jazz Hall of Fame was one of my greatest bills   one of my favorite  bills. I shouldn   t take much credit for that because that was strictly the  strength of Senator Maxine Horner, and Representative Don Ross from  Tulsa, who was in the House. They were ardent supporters and that bill  took less work than almost any other bill because they were such great  advocates that we could just pass it, with very few votes against it. Now  35  Finchum  Williams  that has truly a very robust history behind it in Tulsa. We have the  Greenwood Cultural Center and the Jazz Hall of Fame and are  commemorating our problematic past in that area as well as in the area  of Native Americans.  We talked a little bit about art. We can switch gears into historical  preservation.  Well I think the main thing there   and this really was not a state issue or  act. The train station in Tulsa, for instance, which is now the Jazz Hall of  Fame, went through a lot of different phases. In that regard, I did get  some money for some sculpture that is outside that train station. But  that   s the only thing I specifically did. The train station was preserved  when it could have easily been torn down as so much has been in  Oklahoma. We also enacted some incentives for historic preservation  and environmental preservation. We got a conservation easement bill  passed, and that had as much to do with our history as it did with the  environment.  Now we have a Historical Society in Tulsa that is much more related to  the state than it used to be, and we were able to get appropriations for  exhibits to travel to Tulsa and other parts of the state. I think that historic  preservation and the arts, and cultural development more generally,  relate directly to economic development and our well being as a state.  When we hold ourselves out to other states and try to get people to bring  their companies here, they want to know about quality of life for the  employees they will hire.    Do you have a ballet? Do you have a  symphony? An opera?    It   s amazing how much they care about cultural  amenities.  There are issues that were said to be important which seemed actually to  matter much less. Right to work was one of those wedge issues that  really was not as much a factor as business magazines and associations  sometimes made it out to be.  We need to improve our kindergarten  through twelfth grade system to appeal to prospective employers.  It was  important to have targeted financial opportunities: tax credits and  incentive funds and tax increment finance, as well. Not just cultural  development, but some innovative ways of appealing to companies  within the state to grow and to attract companies from outside the state,  especially in science and technology. That was something else Robert  Henry and I worked on. And to make Oklahoma not just a magnet for  other people out of state, but to build ourselves up and invest in  ourselves. I do think our problematic past has created this kind of  pessimism about whether we can really rise above this. So every now  and then you see leadership that is able to transcend our limitations or  feelings of insufficiency that hold us back.  36  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  That comes into the Science and Mathematics school, it was part of that.  Absolutely, and it is part of the notion of creating a model like the  Quartz Mountain Summer Arts Institute. If you say,    Look, here is what  we mean by really great arts education. Come down to Quartz Mountain,  you can see it and see what these students are doing two weeks out of  the year.    High school students have gone through a very competitive  process to get there. Nationally known people are brought in or tapped  right in Oklahoma to work with these students. We said the same thing  for the School of Math and Sciences. It   s a shame to let students  languish, especially in rural Oklahoma where most high schools just  couldn   t afford to give the advanced courses or even calculus   the  advanced math courses that would help these students get into MIT and  Harvard and the top flagged universities where they were really destined  to go, if only they could get the right preparation to be ready for those  places. So we created the school as a magnet to enable students from  Bluejacket and all over rural Oklahoma  to have access to advanced  math and science classes .  There was a competition for where we would have the school. Stillwater  was one of the finalists, but we finally decided that Oklahoma City was  most appropriate because it was our State Capitol. At that time the local  broadcast media and the local newspaper, The Daily Oklahoman, had  not been for putting more money in education. But eventually they did  really come to support this school. I do think it helped because when you  create a model of what real college preparation should look like   not  just a place to develop the brightest students but a place that showed  what coursework looks like if you want to be able to go to college and  be ready for college   this is what it looks like. This is what you have to  do. This is how hard you have to work. At least subliminally, I think,  The Daily Oklahoman became much more supportive of education in  years thereafter. So I   m glad we put it in Oklahoma City.  It   s more centrally located too.  It is. It   s just across the street from the Health Sciences Center where  students have this terrific opportunity to work with medically-related  science and math students, or for the Center   s researchers and scientists  to come and give some time at the school, mentoring, advising. It has  worked out to be great. OSU has been a very important participant in it  as well. A lot of OSSM   s graduates go to OSU so it   s a good  relationship with the two comprehensive universities. It was a fight  though. I was one of the two votes   the head of the board and I   it was  just a big fight about who was going to get the school. Because little by  little, even though it was not popular initially, seen as another elitist  37  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  idea, became so. It took years. You can   t do these things with term  limits.  How long did it take to do this?  It took maybe ten years to really get it going from the time we did the  legislation. So when you have a term limit that   s ten or twelve years you  just can   t get it done. We were investing, I hate to say lots of money, in  various aspects of special education. We had and have a school for the  deaf, a school for the blind   and that was one of the side considerations.  People started thinking, we do target investments in models and one-of-a-  kind schools. And maybe there is a need to have this, too. So people  who have off-the-charts I.Q.s from small towns in Oklahoma can get  these opportunities being with these great faculty people here. I   m so  glad we did that. A lot of this we did in my early years in the legislature,  when Robert Henry was there. Then he left and I got some bills done in  between, but there   s nothing like being a freshman and not knowing  better. You know, just being able to really get some things done because  you think they   re possible and of course we should have this level of  excellence. So I miss that opportunity, that challenge.  You mentioned term limits a little earlier. Do you have any comments on  that?  I   m not for them. I think that people have the right to not re-elect  someone. I think I can understand them better at the executive branch  level; if you   re president or governor, then you   re in charge of the whole  bureaucracy, and our system of government is built on balance of power.  When Roosevelt had four terms, people said,    Well, wait a minute. This  is getting out of hand.    We do need to have checks and balances in the  federal government and eventually many   most   states decided they  needed them, too. But with congress, legislators have to go back and talk  to their people every two years, usually, those voters can limit your  terms. It   s the only issue that I can think of where I would agree with the  John Birch Society, that this is a right to vote that should not be taken  away from people.  You can   t still reverse it?  I doubt it. As I said earlier, I don   t think Oklahomans value themselves  enough. You know, that they should have the right to vote. But voters in  the past took away that right from themselves by majority vote and I just  don   t see it being reversed.  You spent more time in the Senate than you did in the House.  38  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Yes.  Is there very much of a difference between the two?  Yes. It   s a lot more hurly-burly in the House; it   s cozy, you share a desk  with someone so you are sitting there with your seat mate and you are all  crowded and there   s lots of discussion and activity and it can be so  unruly that you sometimes have to have stricter rules than we do in the  Senate. In the Senate, everybody has his or her own desk and they talk  on and on and very rarely does debate get limited. It   s just a very  different place. You are given a kind of respect or accord in the Senate  that you   re not in the House. But you are also subject to the other  chamber. In the Senate, we didn   t initiate the things that the House did.  In the days when the Legislature was empowered to raise taxes like  every other state, which we are not now, the House by law had to initiate  a new revenue raising measure. And then we, the Senate, would either  go along with it or we wouldn   t. Then the governor would sign it, or he  wouldn   t. The Senate, because of that, I think, didn   t initiate legislation  as much as the House did. It wasn   t as creative. A more deliberative  body but wasn   t as innovative. It was more fore-minded on some fronts,  but then on others the Senate had their domains and they had the advice  and consent and approval of appointees, kinds of privileges that they  didn   t want to give up.  Then just atmospherically, they were in two different places. But I really  loved the challenge vote. I would get frustrated as much with myself as I  would with them. I   d think,    Why can   t I communicate better?    That   s  what I think. We   ve lost some of these people from the legislature who  were such great communicators who could convince us to do things we  didn   t want to do even though we knew for the commonweal, for the  best of all, it was important to do them.  Cock fighting became an odd issue. It   s just odd. I guess we   re one of  the last two states to do away with it. It   s so hard to   for lack of a better  word   make peace for safety. If you   re not investing in your own  people, young people, and they   re out committing crimes and causing  trouble of one sort or another, it   s just going to get worse. So if you   re  not helping to turn them around and get them to a point in their lives  where they see a more positive future for themselves, just locking them  up and doing all of the things we do to punish them is not only not going  to get them there, it   s going to make things worse. And now we have the  research to show that it   s going to be unsafe for the rest of us. It   s less  safe when you lock up all these kids and all these people. Tough love  works better than just locking people up and throwing away the key, as  they say.  39  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  And there is a large number of women in prison     We   re number one in the world, not just in the United States, but in the  world.  Oklahoma is . It   s not because our woman are any worse than  they are elsewhere, it   s just that is something we do. (When a lot of our  crimes are drug-related, when a woman, let   s say, drives a car that   s  related to a drug run of some kind, oftentimes she   s doing it for domestic  reasons.) But they   re the ones who were locked up. The statistics show  that men, for whatever reason, have plea bargained away their jail time  in instances where women have not. It   s something that needs further  looking into, why that is. Is it that they didn   t have the right legal  representation? There are lots of problems that we have that are on-going.  A lot of people down there in Oklahoma City really believe in  solving problems, and want to work on problems. Some have become  too partisan, or a lot of this has become too partisan. We don   t even  want a solution for something because it will make someone look good.  Excuse me? I see that in Congress even more than I see it in Oklahoma  but I could see it start happening here. I would say after Henry Bellmon  was governor I started seeing it more.  So how many different governors did you serve under then?  Five. Now that I think of it, that was during Governor Frank Keating   s  time. He had been a good senator, in my opinion, when he was in the  State Senate. But that smaller thinking had gotten a hold of him in the  Republican Party so he was really, it seemed to me, doing more the  bidding of this smaller thinking in the Republican Party in taking over,  and the way to take over was through wedge issues, get really partisan  and take over the legislature. So we could see as the years wore on, it  was becoming less democrat and more republican, especially in  Congress but also at the state level. Because when that is your goal and  your energies are devoted to that, you can lose sight of problem solving,  state building. But if you   re thinking longer term about your state, that  total partisan polarization really doesn   t help. We had always been able  to build coalitions with republicans and democrats in Oklahoma in the  past and now, it looks very tough.  Yes, it does.  I do think we saw in Washington that it was problematic to have one  party in charge of both the executive and the legislative branches of  government because no one put on the brakes. The democrats didn   t  when democrats were in the majority. They certainly weren   t going to be  for cutting things they cared about. And when republicans and George  Bush want more and more and more money   that whole thing was  40  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  squandered, in my opinion. It   s time for a good debate. And we   re  having one, we   re in the middle of one now.  And are you running for Congress next?  No. I   m not sure yet what I   ll do. But      Do they have the silver-haired legislators?  Yes they have, but I   m not going to do that. I   m not sure what I   ll do yet.  I now have this luxury of time when I can decide but it will be  something related to   probably in the arts and education.  Write a book.  Maybe.  Before we end, I want to ask you about your memories of the bombing of  the Murrah Building bombing.  Oh yes, April 19, 1995.  Yes, you would have been in the Senate then.  I was in the Senate, and we lived downtown. We had an apartment  downtown just a few blocks from the Murrah Building. My apartment-mate  was there when it happened, and it knocked her off her chair, there  was such an impact. I was not far away, at the State Capitol on the fifth  floor, speaking to the Senate pages, and we could feel the building  tremble after we heard this loud crack. There was just a crack and you  could feel the impact of the crack. Then we found out later that that   s  what it was. So we   re very close to that. That was a real shocker. That  was quite a trauma we all went through.  What a foretaste that gave us of 9/11 in New York. It just brought all  this   snapped us right to attention the minute we realized what was  happening. It wasn   t totally d  j   vu but we   d felt that impact before.  And it did bring us together as a people at the time. Everyone wanted to  help and there was none of this partisan division then. But then pretty  soon thereafter, the next year or so, things started getting just very  different   pointed and divisive. It may take conflict and argument to get  things done, but at least then something gets done. You don   t just go to  stay in a place, you work. When I left the legislature, I didn   t have the  feeling we were getting on down the road making progress. I had a  feeling we were stale-mated.  41  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Well could that be because of term limits?  Possibly. I think a lot of what we did was not to put our names on bills  and pass legislation. A lot of what we did was to put out fires. To stop  really bad legislation from happening. I like to flatter ourselves as a class  because I was in that first class that was forced to leave the legislature,  that first class of Senators and Representatives. I like to think that had  we been there, we would somehow not have let House Bill 1804 pass,  for instance, that anti-immigrant bill, pass. I think it has been very  detrimental. It just did not solve anything. It ended up being an anti-immigrant  bill instead of an anti-illegal immigrant bill. It swept up all  the people who are undocumented who are not citizens, even though  they may have grown up here from age three months, let   s say, and gone  to school here and paid taxes here. They were brought here by their  parents and for one reason or another haven   t been able to get  citizenship or didn   t even try.  A lot of these people are just undocumented. They   re not illegal. They  themselves did nothing to come here illegally. But there   s no distinction,  it seems to me, between those two. Then the legal immigrants of some  nationalities get lumped in too. So it just created this climate of  suspicion and hatred. It has affected us economically too, companies  have told us. It was challenged by the National Chamber of Commerce.  There is at least one legal challenge pending. But at any rate, I just think  it would be more productive if we had talked more about what the real  problems are, focus on those and solve real problems instead of  smearing everyone with this broad brush and making us seem what we  are not, an inhospitable state. Of all the states I can think of, we have the  greatest variety because of our Native American population. We are not  an inhospitable state. But now people elsewhere think we are. So this  legislation has really put us on the map in the worst way.  None of those have to console with the ones who have had to exit?  That   s right, and about 20 percent of them have. I mean we have really  lost a lot of people. It   s not what we needed to do. We haven   t been  much of a growing state anyway. We need more bright young people  growing up in this state. Anyway, I just hated to see it.  It gets back to the focus of being in this room, with Angie Debo. It   s not  something that was directly connected to her and I also think of this song     Oklahoma.    It is a positive rendition of what is the best in our grain,  what   s really good in our grain. You brought up the bombing in  Oklahoma City. So much good came out in people after that, both at the  individual level and even at the political level where we forgot some of  our partisan fights and banded together, gave blood, helped here in  42  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Finchum  Williams  Oklahoma City. I hope that that song forecasts our future more than  some of the things that have happened lately. I   m sorry about those. I   m  sorry not to be a part of the fight about those issues. I miss that, I miss  working with great people and some of our wonderful staff. I miss their  expertise and talking about the public good and what   s best for us and  our future generations. I miss all that. But I have certainly luxuriated in  some of the things about the state that I love. Just as an everyday citizen,  just spending time going to arts events and movies, grandmother-ing,  bird watching, taking photos and doing things that I love to do. One of  these days, I will get back to work.  I don   t know. In twenty-four years you did a lot of work.  It was a real privilege. One last thing I want to say, thinking of  Oklahoma, even more broadly thinking of music. My friend Don  McCorkell, who was in the House with me, used to look out at us doing  all these bills and describe his notion of the legislature as the jazz band  theory of politics. Everyone had a different instrument, and they were  making great music together, and most of us couldn   t play the piano and  the trumpet both. We understood each other   s weaknesses and foibles,  but we worked with each other to bring about some really great things.  Nursing Home Reform, Reform of the Juvenile Code,  1017 sparking  subsequent education  legislation reform and early childhood  opportunities in Oklahoma, making that a universal opportunity. One of  the few things we are number one in is the early childhood programs  because all children, all four-year-olds are eligible if their parents want  them to go to those programs. That kind of thing, I think the jazz band  theory of politics brought about a lot of wonderful changes. Just being  part of that jazz band, I learned I   m a better collaborator than I am a  loner. I like working with others on something to make our place better.  I   m sure a lot of us feel that way.  You helped make the land grand.  Oh, that is sweet.  Anything else you want to cover?  That is the promise of that song and is this wonderful thing that  Oklahomans have.  Thank you for joining me today.  You are so welcome.  ------- End of March 27, 2008 interview-------  43  
