Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  My name is Tanya Finchum and I am here with Daisy Lawler and this is  part of the Oklahoma State University Library   s oral history project  called,    Women of the Oklahoma Legislature, Past and Present.    And  she was in the Senate from 2003 through 2006, elected in 2002.  We are actually sworn in 2002 unlike the state people that are sworn in  this month  January .  You actually start working when?  We actually start in November.  Okay, we are going to start. Bring us up to date. Tell us about your  youth, your hometown, what your childhood was like, your parents, that  type of thing.  My parents were dairy farmers. They were always self-employed and  worked really hard. Neither of my parents were very educated people.  My mother probably had an eighth grade education and my father  probably had a third, if that much. So they never had a job outside of  agriculture. They always worked on the farm. Then they acquired some  land. In fact, the first house that they owned   that they lived in, they did  not like the way it was constructed. So they elected to tear it down all  except for one room. They lived in that one room and then re-sawed all  the boards and took a hammer, straightened all the nails and reused all of  the things they had torn apart. They put the house back together and it is  still standing to this day and people are still living in it. When my  parents saw a need, they did not hire someone to come in and do the job,  they did it themselves. Then they sold that farm and they bought some  more land and decided they would like to go into the dairy business.  5  They needed to build a dairy barn and, as I said, they did everything  themselves. They acquired a manual cement block maker and made the  cement blocks, two at a time, until they had enough to build a dairy barn  which is probably a 100 feet long and maybe 40 feet wide. They did the  plumbing, the electrical work, the cement work. Everything that needed  to be done, they did it themselves. Then they had a dairy farm.  I was an only child. As I grew up, Mother decided I needed  companionship and to go to school. At five years of age she took me to  the first grade and dropped me off. I am not sure the teacher was real  happy with a five year old being in the classroom but I was there and  that was it. There were no kindergartens at that time so you just began in  first grade. I went through school a little younger than some but, always  was fine. I enjoyed school, being with the people. I did not participate in  sports because we lived on a farm and my family had the job of milking  in the morning and in the evening. Taking me to sports activities would  just be burdensome so I never participated in that. I did other activities  but not that.  I had a wonderful teacher in high school, a speech teacher. She was  always afraid I would be late when we went to speech contests. So she  invited me to come spend the night with her. I thought that was the  utmost of anything I had done in a long time because I got to stay all  night with my teacher in this wonderful house. Being a country girl this  was really special to me. She was always one of my favorite teachers  because of the interest she took in me as a farm girl. We never had much  money. In fact there were times that when we would have a school play,  and we would walk    At that time I went to Waurika to school and  elementary school was apart from the high school. You had to walk  maybe eight blocks to get from one school to the other to attend some of  the activities. They would have high school plays and they would be a  dime. Lots of times I did not have the dime to go because we just did not  have a lot of money.  I grew up in a time that we were poor but there were a lot of people that  were poor. We really did not dwell on that. We had everything we  needed when we grew up and as I said, my parents worked hard. They  valued education even though they did not have a lot. I told them I  would like to go to college, and at that time you either got married or  you went to college, so I decided I would go to college. I went to  Chickasha. I had a really good time. I did not make good grades but had  a good time that first year.  Then I got married and my husband was an agriculture teacher. We  moved up to northern Oklahoma and lived there a few years. I had two  children, a boy and a girl. I decided I wanted to go back to college and  6  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  we moved back south and had a farm. I put my children on the bus to go  to school in the morning then I would drive to Cameron to go to school.  When it was time for them to come home, I would drive back to be there  when they got home. So I arranged my classes   I would take all three  hour classes one semester and all two hour the next so that I could have  days off and also acquire my education. I finished in three years and got  a degree to teach elementary education.  I finished in December. In January, I began teaching first grade at  Empire which is a rural school with about 400 or 500 children. I taught  there for twenty years. I remained in the same classroom for eighteen  years, first grade. I taught pre-first a couple of years and then I moved to  another classroom and taught fifth and sixth for one year. After that I  decided it was time for me to change schools. I went into Duncan and  taught there the last eight years, first grade.  I retired after twenty-eight years of teaching and twenty-five of it was in  first grade. I loved it. I loved every day. I would always wish for  someone to have a job they liked. I liked going to work and I liked  teaching and I liked the children. I knew it was time for me to retire after  twenty-eight years. I had been interested in politics after my husband  had run for an office. He had been a senator from 1990 to 1994. My  friends knew I was interested in politics. I had been involved in a  number of races over a period of time. When I decided I was going to  retire, someone asked me if I would run for this office and I did.  Tell me a little bit about your campaign.  My campaign, I ran against an incumbent in my first term.  A male or female?  A female of the opposite party. Being a school teacher, it was a time in  2002 when things were very bad in the state. They were having a lot of  cuts and lack of money for education and other areas. I decided, through  the encouragement of my friends, that this was something I would think  about and pray about. I thought about it and prayed about it and decided  that if this was what I was suppose to do, I would know. And through  asking and receiving, I realized this was something I was supposed to  do.  I had some teacher friends and I asked them if they would help me  because I knew I didn   t have very much money. First of all, I was a  retired school teacher, which is not a lot. My husband and I farm and  ranch, which is not a lot. I knew I was running against an incumbent and  you cannot raise many dollars if you are running against a sitting  7  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  incumbent. I knew it would be an uphill battle, but I knew I could win. I  ran a grassroots campaign with help from my friends and a lot of door  knocking.  I was told, when I first started, that if I did not have  100,000 to   150,000 that I probably needed to stay home and that I probably could  not be successful. Well I knew I did not have that amount. I did raise   24,000 and then I had some money of my own that I put in, about the  same amount. And so my campaign was around  42,000 to  45,000 the  first time I ran.  What was your motto?  My motto was,    Pick Daisy.    When I retired, I had a retirement party  from teaching. A newspaper came in and they covered it. They knew I  was thinking about this and at that point it kind of came out. My  daughter-in-law and other people had been talking and they thought  since my name was Daisy, it would be a really good slogan.  And it worked.  And it worked. It really did.  Did you have a role model, anyone in particular that you looked to  guide you along this political path?  Not particularly, I really did not.  Once you got into the Senate did you have anyone who took you under  their wing?  When I was running, actually nobody thought I could win that was up in  the Oklahoma City area except for Senator Keith Leftwich. After he ran  his race, he had an opponent that year and finished in the primary, he  came and said he would like to help me. He gave me some advice along  the way and helped me in my first campaign. Cal Hobson had some very  good information and he was very, very wise and intelligent as far as  telling you or advising you with some points that you need to be aware  of.  Do you remember what some of your thoughts were your very first day?  The very first day was very exciting. My family was there. We took a lot  of pictures. We were sworn in. Of course there is a lot of media attention  at that time. I think all the four years when I would drive to the Capitol,  you are always in awe of that building when you drive down Lincoln  8  Finchum  Lawler  Boulevard and see that building thinking    you know, I have an office  there. It has always been a blessing to be able to serve the people.  Did you have any major goals when you were going in? Particular  issues you had campaigned on?  Yes, there were several issues that I had campaigned on. One was  education, funding education first. Another one was roads and bridges. I  live on a highway in Stephens County and there were several very  narrow bridges that were obsolete that were built in the 1920s and  1930s. They were very dangerous. That was one of my goals, to get  more funding for roads and bridges. To work on the high cost of  medications, to help senior citizens in funding nutrition sites. That was  another area I wanted to work in. You get put in certain areas when you  get into committees. The prison system seemed to be an area I was very  interested in.  When I got elected in November I had a call from a friend that actually  lived in Stephens County. She worked in what is now Mabel Bassett   Correctional Center . She asked me to come to their graduation and  give the speech at the women   s graduation at a Mabel Bassett in  December after I was elected in November. So I am thinking, o---  kay   (Laughs). So I went and it was really an eye opener. The women  graduating were getting their GEDs  General Equivalency Diploma   s .  They were getting certificates of completion as far as CareerTech  completion. They were so excited you would think they were getting  their master   s or doctorate. Their families were there. They were excited.  It was really an awesome, touching time. I was able to tour the system.  At that time it was a private system and within the year the state took it  over and moved in more women. It went from being about 300 women  to about a 1000. I went back and visited later, as it was a state system  and it was more crowded. They had taken out one of the CareerTech  programs. They were down to one    I was very disappointed in what  had happened during that year   s time when the state had taken it over.  My goal began, to put more CareerTech programs into the prison  system, to enable these women to have some type of job skill when they  were released.  Many of them did not have much education, so that was another goal     to get a good reading program into the system. That was one of my bills  the first year I was there   to try and implement a phonics reading  program in all the prisons. However, I was only able to get it into one.  At Alva, the warden was a little more progressive. She accepted the  challenge to take it into the system and did the testing. It proved to be a  very good program. Even into the fourth year I was there I had a bill to  allow them to do faith based pods in two of the systems as a pilot  9  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  program and then to follow that to see if it would decrease the  recidivism rate.  Also, if they had a valid driver   s license when they came into the prison  system, they would be able through them paying for it, to keep that  driver   s license valid if they were in less than twenty years. At the end of  their term they would have some form of identification and be able to  drive a car and get a job. Right now that is not something that is allowed  and they have no identification. They cannot cash a check. They cannot  drive a car, most of them, because they have no driver   s license. They  have been in too long and it has expired. Those were some of my goals,  to reduce recidivism in the prison.  Were you chair of any committees?  The first year I went in I was chair of Select Agencies which is several  agencies that are self-funded. It gives you a chance to educate yourself  as far as how to run a committee. I served as chair of that two years then  the third year I as chair of Agriculture, vice-chair of the Subcommittee  on Education, and vice-chair on the Subcommittee on Aerospace and  Communications.  Had women ever held those positions?  I do not think a woman had ever been a chair of Agriculture.  Traditionally that is a man   s position. When I was elected I was the only  woman on that committee, of about twenty members, for two years. The  third year another woman came on the committee and then I was put as  the chairperson. It was a really good fit for me because agriculture and  education were the two areas I was most interested in. I was able to pass  several bills during that time and head off bills that were not good for  agriculture or see that they were amended so that they would be good for  agriculture. It was a good fit for me.  Did you have a particular leadership style   since you were the lone  woman for a while in that particular committee?  I think my leadership style was all business. I run a fast committee.  Everyone needs to say what they need to say but we do not need a lot of  extra side talk. So it is a pretty fast moving committee.  And what was your major accomplishment?  In agriculture I believe we were able to, or are going to be able to, build  a new laboratory right here by the Agriculture Building  in Oklahoma  City . For years the laboratory had been on the third floor of the  10  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Agriculture Building. That is where they do a lot of the testing, of the  foods, the water, the feed. It was an open atrium type building and it was  not meant to be a laboratory. You have a laboratory on top of people that  are doing typing and business   down below. It was just not safe. It had  grown to the point that even the electrical outlets would not carry the  current. There were burn marks. You had tanks of explosive type  materials sitting over beside the wall. The fire escape pattern was not  good. It was just a disaster waiting to happen. I was able to pass a bill to  build a new one. They should be turning the dirt some time this spring   2007  beside the old one so I believe that was one of the major things.  And to expand the diagnostic lab at Oklahoma State University also.  I had read somewhere that you were involved with some hospice issues.  Yes, the first year I had the opportunity to author a hospice bill. I had a  friend in Duncan that was very, very involved in hospice beginning with  some of the very first hospice care in Stephens County. I called her and  said,    They want to build a free standing hospice house, is that good?     And she said,    Yes I think so.    We traveled to Wichita Falls, which had  one, and toured and saw that this is a really good thing for people who  cannot stay at home. They do not want to stay in a nursing home. They  cannot stay in a hospital most of the time, so in the last weeks of their  lives they would be able to go into this hospice house and stay there.  They would have a nice room and their family would be able to come in.  It looks kind of like an assisted living building on the outside and all of  the equipment is hid in the room so that you do not see a lot of  equipment. It comes from plug-ins in the wall. It was a really nice thing  and I think at this point right now Oklahoma City is planning to build  one and that may be one of the first in the state.  Can you describe some of the social culture of the legislature? Did you  go out to dinner?  Yes, I lived up here  Oklahoma City  because it was almost two hours  from my home. I would come up on Mondays and stay until Thursday  then drive back home and live in a hotel while I was up here and that  worked out fine. I chose not to buy anything or to get an apartment  because I did not want to have to bring up all the things that you would  need for that.  Because of the evening events, staying up here was much better. I would  be at the office before eight and I would get back to the hotel sometimes  at eight or nine o   clock at night. You have events and sometimes early in  the session you maybe have three or four in one evening. You would go  from one to the next to the next to the next trying to make an  appearance. People have gone to the trouble to have these events and  11  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  invited you so you like to go make at least an appearance in most of  them and show courtesy to the people that are putting the events on.  There are a lot of things to go to, dinners that you are invited to. There is  the ability to gain a lot of weight while you are here.  Did you have time to make friends with some of the other women in the  House or the Senate?  The Senate mixes with the Senate and the House mixes with the House  most of the time. There are some joint meetings and there are some  times in the evening that all the women get together or with some of the  lobbyists. We particularly had another senator that would invite the  women out to have dinner. There are so few of us. In the Senate there  were eight women, six democrats and two republicans. In the House  there were somewhere in the range from eleven to fourteen women in  the House out of the 101. In fact one senator asked me when I was first  elected if I wanted to be treated differently or like one of the boys. And I  replied,    I know you respect each other as senators and so yes, just treat  me like one of the boys because I know you respect each other and you  would respect me.     And he responded     And he just grinned. (Laughter)  Did you notice if there was a difference in attire, like before you were  elected and then when you started to serve? Did you feel like you had to  alter what you wore in order to fit in?  Of course there was wearing a lot of suits. The men have to wear suits or  sports jackets and slacks. They do not go on the floor unless they have a  tie and suit or sports jacket. That is the dress code. When I would go talk  to young people in the schools I would say,    You know, most of you  have a dress code at school. Well, we had a dress code at the Capitol.     We were expected to wear suits or dresses. Most of the time I chose to  wear some type of suit because the chamber is cool. The temperature is  set for men   s suits so unless I wore something with long sleeves I would  get cold. I would always choose to buy suits and wear some type of suit  in the chamber. I enjoyed dressing up. Of course you wear high heels or  moderately high heels all day long and when you are going from eight to  eight by the end of the day it gets a little bit tiring but it was good.  How about your office? Did you have to share it with anyone?  In the Senate side   in the first year I had an office to myself but I also I  shared the common area of the secretaries. Senator LerBlance was on  12  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  one side for a time and Senator Gumm was on one side for a time the  first two years and I was up on the fifth floor in a really, really nice big  office. I had Senator Shedrick   s chair. I had Senator Taylor   s desk. And  I had Senator Henry   s parking spot. I said,    What more could you want.     (Laughter). I always had a really nice office. Then I chose to move down  on the fourth floor the third year because of the stairs. Going up and  down the stairs in high heels gets old. I had that office for two years on  the fourth floor and was a separate office. And I really enjoyed it. It was  a nice office.  Do you anticipate staying in touch with your secretary/assistants?  Yes, I visit with my secretary. In fact today, after I leave here I am going  to have lunch with her and another senator. I want to stay in touch but  probably not be at the Capitol that much.  What are your plans now that you are no longer in office?  I had a goal before I was elected. I thought I would like to do some  writing. I have been doing some research and some interviewing. I want  to write, we will see, maybe a book. My mother had some mental health  problems and I would like to do some mental health work and write  some of that in a book.  Do you have any advice for women who may be thinking about going  into politics?  I think if you are determined you want to go into politics, you need to  know that campaigning is hard work. It is expensive. But if you have the  determination, the goal, and are willing to get out and work really hard,  it is very attainable. You need to have family support because it takes a  lot of time away from your family. You miss a lot of things. I believe if  you do your job like you are suppose to do you miss some things with  your family that you might ordinarily do if you were home. It depends  on whether you live around Oklahoma City or farther away like I did. If  you want to attend the events, it takes a lot of evening time even if you  are closer. I wanted to go to those to be with the people in my district  and to be accessible. Even at church or in the grocery store people come  up and say,    I know that this is probably not the place but   ,    and they  go ahead. I always say,    This is great.    I think they should know ahead  of time that it is going to take time away from their families, especially  if they have small children. And for a spouse   to know that they need to  be involved. They are invited to a lot of the events up here. They can  come and try to be involved as much as they can be. I know some of  them have jobs or small children but try to stay involved and  communicate with your spouse.  13  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Do you have any special memories from your campaign that stand out?  Special stories, funny ones or sad ones?  I cannot really think of anything right now as far as funny. I just know  that people were always really good to jump in and help. You would ask  them to do endorsements     of course that is putting your name on the  line for someone else. I was always very fortunate to have people who  would come in and help me. A lot of times people do not distinguish  between Congress and state offices and sometimes they will think you  have been in Washington, DC. It is kind of hard to start explaining that I  do not go to Washington     (Laughter)    I go to Oklahoma City. People  get confused about that sometimes.  When history is written about you is there any thing in particular you  want to be remembered?  I think most of all I would like to be remembered as somebody that  worked really hard to serve the people, that always had an open door,  and that tried to put forth legislation that would help the citizens of  Oklahoma.  I always tried to be very careful what I carried and what I voted for as  far as legislation because there were a few bills that I wish I had not  voted for. Overall, most of them I am okay with what I had done. There  were two or three that looking back, there were mistakes in the bills and  I did not catch those. As you know they go through committee after  committee after committee and they go through lawyers. People look at  these and you would think there would not be any errors or mistakes that  would hurt someone or a group. There were a couple of those bills that  came back that I wish we could have done over. The hardest thing in the  world to get done is to try to correct a mistake in a bill. No author likes  to admit they made a mistake and they do not want their legislation  bothered with so it is really hard to try to re-do something that has been  done. I hate to say that but it is true.  Probably overall, I would want people to know that I had worked really  hard to serve the people and my constituents when they had problems. I  always want to be a problem-solver and I was sometimes upset that I  could not always solve the problem that they had. I know when they  came to me sometimes it was because they were at their wits end. It  would be red tape or government interference or things that they just  could not get anyone else to help them with. Sometimes they did not  have the financial means and I always liked to be able, if I could, to help  them.  Were most of your constituents rural or a mix?  14  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  It was a mix. My district ran from Stephens County which is south of  Comanche all the way to south Oklahoma City. Moore, in south  Oklahoma City, is in my district. I have the eastern end of Tuttle and  Newcastle. So I had a mix in my district.  We have talked about what it was like the first day on the job. What was  it like on the last day on the job?  The last day as far as the last day in session or the last day before I was  unelected?  How about both?  (Laughs) The last day of the session you are always excited and ready to  go home. You are glad things are wrapped up. Of course, this year we  had a special session again. It seems like we had several special sessions  when I was there. You hope you get the things finished but sometimes  things come across that are not like you want to vote on them. The sound  bite sounds good you know and the special interests are pushing for this  thing to get done. But there are things in the bill that would hurt your  citizens, things in the long run that would not be good for everyone. You  sometimes go into special session to get a bill that would be workable  and better and fair for everyone. We went into special session a couple  of times to get those bills done.  The last day of session you are always excited about going home. You  are tired and of course, living up here  Oklahoma City , you are ready to  move out and go home to be with your family. This year the campaign  was starting so it was time for me to go home and start getting my signs  out and getting all of those up and start walking. That is what I did. I  campaigned from June to November and walked the streets, walked and  knocked door to door. At the end it was election day, it was sad because  I lost. I lost by 495 votes out of 24,000. I knew it was going to be close  because of the sheer make up of my district. The Moore area is growing  significantly and probably three to one in that area are republican and I  am a democrat so I knew it would be close. When it came down to it, it  was. I had only won by eighty-seven votes the first time when I won and  so it was sad I lost. It was my grand-daughter   s birthday. She turned  sixteen that day, had gone to play a scrimmage basketball game, and she  had hurt her leg. It was really a very bad, no good, day.  That is a special memory you can share with her.  Yes. Then she ended up having to have surgery. Anyway, she will  remember that probably forever.  15  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Do you think any of your relatives will aspire to go into politics after  your experience?  I really do not know whether any of them have that desire or not. My  husband had the desire to start with. It was not something I was really  excited about when he first started saying that he wanted to run. The first  time he mentioned it our children were small and I said,    There was no  way. That those people over there are all just crooks. We are not going  to do this.    I had had a bad experience with politicians.  My parents, I had told you earlier, were dairy farmers and they lived in  an area that flooded. The people in the town, that flooded, south of them,  decided they wanted to build a dam    a lake. So it just happened that  their farm would be right in the south end of the lake right where the  dam was. They were going to, through eminent domain, take all of their  land. At that time, I think, Boren was governor and I was not happy with  those people. So that gave me a really bad perception of politicians.  There was no way I wanted my husband to be a politician. So time went  on and our children graduated from high school and college. He came  back again at that time, in the nineties, and wanted to run and I said,    Oh  okay I will help you.    That is when we began. Then after he was elected  I realized, these people were not bad people. They were just people like  me and everybody else, citizenry   people that had a desire to serve their  district. Maybe the issues important to them were different from what  was important to me and maybe they were more conservative or liberal  than I. They were representing the makeup of their district and that is  what they needed to be.  Since you helped with your own campaign and with his, was there a  difference in how they were run?  Mine was probably more of a woman   s campaign. Upon campaigning I  decided I wanted to be sure that since my husband had been in politics, I  wanted to run on my name, not on his name. I ran on my first name and  not my last name. The posters and things would have just my first name  on it and my last name real small. I find that a lot of college students,  high school students, and women will volunteer and actually get out,  walk the streets, and work more so than men. Men will give money in  that area and maybe have a reception but women will actually do the  door knocking, walking, and keeping your office.  That is interesting. Knowing and having experienced that did you feel  more obligated to push for women   s issues?  No. Whatever issue was out there was what I wanted to push forth. If it  was agriculture, when I was the chair of Agriculture, it was agriculture  16  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  issues and working in that particular area. When I sat on the Education  Committee, it was education issues. There were some issues that I would  have liked to have gotten passed. Financial literacy was one of the bills I  pushed for a couple of years. That did not get passed.  Sometimes it is real hard to get issues passed in education because of  resistance to change. Some of the senators and representatives think you  are trying to push an unfunded mandate even though it seems to be  common sense that young people need to know how to handle their  money. The credit card burden they end up with   Oklahoma is one of  the top in bankruptcies, one of the top in credit card debt, and one of the  top in divorce. All of those work with lack of knowledge on how to  handle your finances. My issue was if you have financial knowledge,  you will find a way through education that will lower the bankruptcies,  the credit card debt and the divorces.  These are related you think?  Absolutely. They find that about 60 percent of divorces are because of  arguments over finances.  Interesting. Did you do you own research for your bills or did you have  staff that helped?  We have staff that help and I would always save articles too. I am still  throwing away. It is a gradual thing. I still do some speeches so I am a  saver. That comes from being a school teacher. You save everything just  in case one day you might need it even though the staff at the Capitol  could have brought it up in just a short while. They did a lot of the  research. You can go to NCSL,  National Conference of State  Legislatures  the national legislature, online. There are a lot of sources  of information. I had the opportunity to travel to several meetings  throughout the United States while I was in session regarding education,  and human resources, the first two years. Then the last two years, I  attended more education and agriculture meetings where I had  opportunity to go to and visit with legislators from throughout the  United States and talk about issues and what was going on in their state.  Have I forgotten to ask anything? We have covered quite a bit.  I do not know.  We covered most of it. I was going to ask you to describe a typical day.  In September we have legislators go out into the classroom and my  favorite was always the eighth graders. They are interested. They want  17  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  to ask questions. I would always take one of my calendars with me and  let them see what a day would be like.  I started, typically, around 7:30 or 8:00am in the morning and sometimes  ended at 8:00 or 9:00pm. I would have a monthly calendar, a weekly  calendar, and a daily calendar. My assistant would print out a postcard  size index card daily calendar. It would have the time, the room and who  I would be with at that time. It would always be a different color so I  could keep up with it. I would have that card with me all day because  sometimes it was an hour increment, sometimes it was thirty minutes.  Sometimes I would have several places to go in the evening at almost  the same time and I would need an address. I would print off maps if I  was not familiar with the site that I would drive to. I would always try to  be very careful as a woman, a legislator. I would always go meet  someone at a restaurant so there would not be any doubt about what was  going on.  Did you keep all of these cards, these blue cards?  Oh, no. No. They always went, normally, in the trash that day. I did keep  the calendars.  So that person was very important to you then, the one that made out  your daily card?  Oh yes. Libby was my assistant and she was with me for four years. She  was very good with people. We were able to hire our own secretary and  she had worked for other senators, men, before me. So I was kind of a  different person. In fact I think one time she asked me,    Do you sleep at  night?    When I would come in and say,    Oh I have this idea and this is  something I want to do.     I had implemented a Junior Senator program where if first graders would  read, in the second semester, twenty-five books I would give them all a  certificate of reading achievement. If they would go ahead and read, in  the summer, another twenty-five books I bought t-shirts and had them  made up that said Junior Senator   s on it and had an Oklahoma seal on it.  I would take the shirts to them in the fall when they were in second  grade. Their parents would send me a letter and say,    My son or  daughter has read twenty-five books this summer,    and give the size.  If I saw in the newspaper that someone had had their fiftieth anniversary  or more, I always liked to send them some kind of citation. Little things  like that that I thought were important to people, to give them  recognition if there was something really special in my district that went  on I needed to bring attention to. The governor recognized some people  18  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  for being heroes a couple of times in my district; things they had done to  save lives. Of course that involved more work for her  Libby , anything  that I took on. The staff was always good to work with. They were  always good to help me when I had ideas, legislation I wanted to put  forth.  I had over thirty bills passed during the four years that I was in the  Senate. Sometimes it just seemed like common sense things to me. I  would have constituents with problems. This last session we had a  young lady that had witnessed a crime. She was the only witness. They  put her name in the media. She was a college student. Her family was  horrified that this person knew who she was and where she lived. They  were afraid for her safety so they asked us to pass some kind of  legislation that would keep their name, as a witness, out of the media.  And so last session a representative and I passed legislation to give a  witness the same protection as the victim.  It seems like common sense.  Another common sense one I had was the first year. I had a person work  for someone that put vision and something else on his insurance and he  had not asked for it. In order to add additional things to your insurance  policy you had to sign off for it, which just seemed like common sense,  and that passed.  Another area that I was very interested in was annexation. I talked to  you about eminent domain. I had some people in my district that were  being annexed into town. It was strip annexation and we were able to get  that passed. The area agriculture people loved that bill. This past year we  worked on eminent domain. We did not get it passed but we did get a  trespassing law passed that they had been working on.  Having passed thirty sounds pretty good. I have no idea if that is     I think my predecessor passed four in eight years.  Oh, that was excellent then. (Laughter)  I was blessed, I think, coming in during term limit time. With people  terming out, they knew leadership was going to change and you could  not sit back and just watch, you had to jump in. I believe that is the  reason they started implementing chairmanships right at the beginning,  to give you a chance to get acquainted with the system. There is nothing  like practice and experience to teach you how to do things.  I was the first freshman to get a bill passed on the floor during my term.  19  Finchum  Lawler  They always have kind of initiation for the first freshman that gets his  first bill passed. I thought, well, I am going to do a real easy one and it  was getting the reading program into Alva Prison. It was a pilot program  and did not cost anything. The prison warden agreed to it and it was not  something that people were against. It was like a win-win. You are  teaching people to read in prison so they can get out and get a job. I  thought this is an easy one. I will do it first. So I did, and looked up  expecting all green lights. Looked up and everything was red. I thought,  oh my goodness  And looked around then they just died laughing. Then  they all pushed the green button. It was an initiation that you do   to put  a person in shock with their first bill, when they are already nervous and  apprehensive. It is hard to get up on the floor and to speak and to debate  a bill.  I think it is a little different sometimes for women to get up and debate a  bill than men. Sometimes   if two women debate each other, there is a  different feeling among the men than if two men are debating each other.  Being a woman, it is a little different. I believe you have to work harder.  You bring a different perspective as far a perspective of a wife, a  mother, a grandmother into some of the issues. Perhaps women look a  little differently at the legislation, more detailed and sometimes do more  homework because of the questions. When you get on the floor you  never know what is going to be asked. Hopefully you are ready for  whatever question that comes up.  When you are not, what do you do?  Well you say,    I will find that answer and get back to you.    Sometimes  you just say,    I don   t know. I have not thought about that but I will find  that,    or sometimes when you see your bill is in trouble you say,    I am  going to lay this bill over and come back to it later after I find the  answer.    If you know that you are in trouble, you will pull the bill and  go to those people you know that are against the bill and try to see what  the problems were with the bill. You can amend it or allow amendments  on the floor to try to get your bill passed. And sometimes you know that  that bill is just going to die...(Laughs) because of who is against it.  I know when I did my drivers license bill, that I told you about earlier, I  had loaded it up with different things. I think if it had been a little bit  cleaner and just maybe one subject, that it may have gotten passed. I had  one bill, the insurance bill, that was just half a page, clean bill. Went to  the House, came back nineteen pages and had four different things in it.  You send it to committee, clean it up, bring it back, take out what you do  not want, and leave in what you do want. That way they get passed. It is  really a long process.  20  Finchum  Lawler  I had a tort reform bill. They laughingly called it the McDonald   s bill.  What it did was just say that if you ate 10 McDonald   s burgers a day and  got really heavy, that you could not sue the company because it was  your choice. The food industry would like to have that passed and in  itself it was a good bill. Because of the title on it and the fact that if you  got it on the floor it could be amended to be a huge bill. When I passed it  through the judiciary committee, it went from about twelve pages to 120  because it became    the    tort reform bill. My little bill was right at the  end of it, the last few pages and it never got passed because of the  magnitude of the bill.  It is amazing how the whole system works.  It is amazing but it is a good system. There are things that I would have  liked to have gotten passed that I thought was just common sense and  would be good for the general public but for some reason they did not  get passed because, as I said, not everyone agrees with you, and see  things like you do because there were some special interests against it.  Timing is important. The first year I was there I was interested in drug  court. At that time I was trying to get some fees put in to drug court so  we could expand the drug court system. At that time there were not very  many. I thought the drug court system was a very good system and that  it would keep people out of prison. It would give them a second chance.  People had made bad choices and it would allow them to either go to  school or to keep their jobs and try to be rehabilitated.  But in my bill, I also had education for judges. If they had not been  acquainted with drug court, either presided or had some acquaintance,  knowledge, of drug court they would take like a two hour course on drug  court. Well, I learned real quick you do not tell judges what to do. There  is about 20 to 25   of the senate that are lawyers and there was no way  that they were going to tell judges what to do. So that bill did not pass,  however upon failing, one of the other senators picked up the bill, put it  in his bill, eliminated the part about judges but kept all the rest. So it did  pass without my name on it, but the bill did pass.  Since then, drug courts have been real popular and have expanded over  the last few years. A perception is almost fact, they perceived drug court  to be soft on crime. No legislator wants to look like they are soft on  crime even though it was being smart on crime. Over the years the Daily  Oklahoman  Oklahoma City newspaper  got on the bandwagon and  started saying this was a good thing. That turned some people   s minds to  thinking,    Oh yes.    They did some research and it showed it did help  with recidivism. It is a good thing and as a result, drug courts have  expanded throughout Oklahoma.  21  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  Lawler  Finchum  You do not know what one little piece is going to do.  That is right and it is, and as I said, timing. People, maybe two years  ago, would not have thought something would work or was good. Two  years later, because of media exposure, research, and education of the  general public, they do not perceive it as being soft on crime. No  legislator, when you are getting out to run for office, wants to be tagged  that way.  You have to learn these little secrets as you go, I guess.  Oh, yes and that is part of the system.  I cannot think of anything else. Can you?  I cannot think of anything else.  Well thank you so much for sharing your story.  ------- -------  
