Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Today is October 7, 2008 my name is Tanya Finchum. I   m with  Oklahoma State University Library and we   re conducting an oral  history project entitled Women of the Oklahoma Legislature: Past and  Present. Today we   re interviewing Mary Fallin who was in the  Oklahoma House of Representatives from 1990 through 1994. And at  that time she was elected Lieutenant Governor of Oklahoma and served  12 years and is currently in the U.S. House of Representatives. So thank  you for coming to campus.  My pleasure to be here. It   s always good to be back on the OSU campus.  Okay let   s get started by having you tell a little bit about your childhood.  Where you were born and then where you spent your younger days.  Well, I was actually born in Warrensburg, Missouri at the Whiteman Air  Force Base when my dad was in the Air Force. They had grown up in  Tecumseh, Oklahoma which is where I   m original from but my dad had  gone into service and had left home for a short time to go to Missouri to  serve his nation and our nation. And so I was actually born on the base.  And then after I was born we moved back to Muskogee, Oklahoma  when I was about three. Lived there for about a year. Moved to Tulsa.  Lived in Tulsa until I was about five. And then we moved to Tecumseh,  Oklahoma which is where my family really is from. All of his parents,  my mother   s parents, where I grew up and attended high school and  graduated from.  And do you have any siblings?  I do. I have a brother who is about six years younger than me. And he  went to Tecumseh High School and still resides in the Shawnee,  Tecumseh area.  5  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Great. Well, how early did you get interested in politics?  Gosh, I got interested in politics probably in high school. When I was a  senior in high school I was asked to be a page in the Oklahoma  Legislature by our local representative who at that time was James  Townsend, Jim Townsend from Shawnee Oklahoma. He was good  friends of my mother and my father. I had the opportunity to go to the  Oklahoma Capitol and serve as a page. And I just found it very  intriguing and I liked being around the political side and the issues as a  page. Of course, as a very young girl and coming from Tecumseh going  to Oklahoma City to the state capital was a really big deal for me. Later  on as I continued into my college years, I went to Oklahoma Baptist  University my first two years and then transferred to Oklahoma State  University, OSU, which is where I graduated with a degree in now  Human and Environmental Sciences, Family Relations and Child  Development.  During my years in college, my father, Newton Copeland, ran to be  mayor of Tecumseh. And actually lost his first election as mayor, and  then was elected mayor of Tecumseh during my time at OSU and served  in office until I was 28 and then he passed away at the early age of   I  think he was around the age of 56 when he passed away and I was 28 at  the time. My mother who was a non-elected official was asked by the  Tecumseh community and City Council to actually step up to be the  mayor as a non-elected official which is highly unusual in politics.  Because normally a vice-mayor or someone on the City Council would  step into that open spot upon a death. But as a non-elected official, my  mother became the mayor of Tecumseh and the first women to serve in  office. I became very interested in politics from my time in high school  as a page in the Oklahoma State Legislature to the time I was in my late  20   s when my mother and my father both served in community services  as mayors of Tecumseh, Oklahoma.  Well, did you discuss politics around the dinner table then?  Well, of course I was pretty na  ve to politics back then but I can still  remember going out to campaign for my father. And the first race he  ever ran for he didn   t really campaign very much and he lost because he  just didn   t campaign. That   s a good lesson I learned. You   ve got to  campaign, you   ve got to talk to folks. I remember doing some better  flyers and brochures the second time he ran. I remember going out and  going door to door with him and campaigning with him and then of  course he won. And then after I had graduated from college, I actually  moved immediately, pretty much, to Oklahoma City and took a job in  Oklahoma City. And my early 20   s   probably when I was about 21  years old, and I   ve lived in Oklahoma City ever since then.  6  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Well is your party the same party as your parents?  No, you know my party is not the same party as my parents. Growing up  in rural Oklahoma and Tecumseh which was kind of considered on the  edge of little Dixie which is a very democrat area. My mother and father  were both democrats and I can remember when I went to vote, my  mother told me I should register as a democrat because that   s what they  were and that   s what rural Oklahoma, and in fact the majority of  Oklahoma was democrat during those days. So I registered to vote and  after I graduated from college from OSU and moved to Oklahoma City,  a friend of mine invited me to a Young Republicans meeting. I went to  the Young Republicans meeting and actually they showed me the  platform between the Democrat Party and the Republican Party. And I  actually read it  And determined I was really a conservative republican. I  liked fiscal discipline in spending, and I was conservative on social  issues and believed in limited in government. So I actually switched by  the time I was about 21 or so to be a republican.  I can still remember going home and telling my father, who was still  alive at that time, that I was going to become a republican instead of a  democrat and he said,    Well if you want to do something that stupid,  then you go right ahead.    And unfortunately he didn   t live long enough  to see me ever become elected to office. But my mother did, and as time  went by my mother   of course when I ran for lieutenant governor and  she could actually vote for me, my mother and my aunt and my brother  and my grandmother, who was in her mid 90   s, actually all switched to  be republicans because they did actually believe in the conservative  issues that I believed in, as most Oklahomans do, democrat or  republican. They all were able to vote for me and of course, worked real  hard for me.  What prompted you to run for the House, initially?  I ran for the Oklahoma Legislature in 1990. I was in my early 30   s. I was  a business woman in Oklahoma City. I was the District Manager for  Lexington Hotel and Suites statewide. I had a great career. I had just  received the District Manager of the Year nationwide for reducing the  expenses of the hotel corporation I worked for but yet increasing the  profits. And just basically good sales and marketing and management.  And had only been on the job a short period of time, that particular job.  A seat came open in our Oklahoma Legislature that belonged to a fellow  OSUer, Mike Hunter. His wife, Cheryl Hunter, who was Cheryl Plexico  Hunter, was actually one of my sorority sisters at Oklahoma State  University. He decided that he wasn   t going to run for the legislative  seat that he held. I had been active in Young Republicans and active in  helping with some campaigns, volunteering in Oklahoma City. And as  7  Finchum  Fallin  the seat came open, I was listening to all these different issues around  the state dealing with business, because at that time I was running a  business. I was always dealing with workers comp and health care  insurance and education and trying to find a quality work force. The seat  came open, and it was also during that time we were debating House Bill  1017 which dealt with education and improving education but also had a  large tax increase with that and so I was really paying attention to issues  at the Capitol.  And when the seat came open that December and he said he wasn   t  going to run again, I called Mike Hunter up and said,    Mike, if you  aren   t going to run again for the legislature, I am. Because I am so mad  about what   s going on at the Capitol. And I want to get out there and  improve education, healthcare, improve the business environment and  work on all these crime issues.    And he said,    Well, go right ahead.    Of  course, there were several other people that also ran for that seat and  unbeknown to me during that time period, which was in December and  the election was next year in August for the primary and then November  for the general election. I was expecting my second child. I announced  in December and still worked my job full time. I had my daughter who  was three. I was doing a lot of volunteer work in the community and  started to campaign nights and weekends because that   s when I  announced for my election, was in December around Christmas time. In  January I had the flu. In February I had the flu. And actually I didn   t  know that I was expecting my second child.  Oh gosh.  It was a wonderful surprise, a nice surprise. But my husband and I  hadn   t quite planned on that specific timing. I actually had my son  between the primary election and the general. So on election night in  August I was actually eight months pregnant. And my party had  someone that ran against me on the republican side because I was just  this young woman who was pregnant and running for office and she  would never be effective and wouldn   t be able to do the job. Actually it  was pretty rough, because they pretty much campaigned against me as a  young mother. Much like they do with Governor Sarah Palin right now  running for Vice-President.  But I was actually pregnant during the time, and then I had my three  year old daughter. They said I would never get anything done, that I   d be  ineffective, I wouldn   t win my election. The election night was in  August and I won that election against the republican opponent. I had  my son 30 days later on September 27. And then I had one month and  one week to go campaign against my democrat opponent, and won that  election. When I won my election I had a 1    month old baby and a  8  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  three year old. And that is how I started my whole political career in  politics.  Just to prove those people wrong, my first four years in office, my only  four years in the Oklahoma Legislature, I passed 16 bills into law. There  were only three republican women out of 101 members in the House and  only 30 something members to begin with. So we did not have a  majority to even pass legislation. But I just believed in building  consensus, selling people on why it was important to the state of  Oklahoma and then working across both sides of the aisle because you  had to, to get anything done. And I had a great four years at the State  Capitol and started out with a   well I was probably the   well I know  was the only one with a brand new baby and a three year old working at  the Capitol.  How did you juggle that? Did you have a house keeper or a nanny?  I didn   t have full time help. Obviously, I had to have some help with  child care. And I had some babysitters that helped me and then my son  did go into day care. But the good part about being in the legislature was  that it met basically February 1st through the end of May. So I had a little  bit more of a freer schedule that I could spend time with him his first  four years because I would be out of the legislature from June    til  basically December. Actually, it was a good time, if I had to work which  I did, it wasn   t an option for me and my household, I could actually  spend more time with my son and my daughter that way. There were  many times I would bring my son in his car seat with my diaper bag and  my bottles to the State Capitol and work. Of course, that was mainly  during the summer time, and even my three-year-old. By the time I  finished my years in the legislature they were four and seven. And then  someone talked me into running for lieutenant governor and that was a  totally different story.  And we   ll get to that in just a minute. Talk a little bit about your  campaign then, your first campaign.  Well my first     Strategy, colors? That sort of thing.  My first campaign was ran out of the dining room of our home, and ran  with volunteers. I did not have any money. I put a couple thousand  dollars of my own money in but I didn   t have very much money and it  was my own personal money. I had a lot of great volunteers in the  community. Mainly women, but there were some guys that would help  who were friends of mine. And we would set up voter list and  9  Finchum  Fallin  information on my dining room table and I pretty much left it there  during the whole time I was campaigning. I started in January basically  with my campaign. The election was in August and then in November.  My mother was a tremendous help to me, helping with both my children.  She spent a lot of time at our house and was always there for me. I door  knocked a tremendous amount of homes, pregnant. And at that time my  former husband was helping me somewhat in door knocking.  And then as it got a little closer and I was too pregnant to go out door  knocking I had to do a lot of phone calling. I had big phone banks set up  from which I would make phone calls. I can never forget this, but I came  home one night from phoning and it was really close to my election day,  and I was still pregnant. It was for my primary. It was a couple of weeks  out and I was so big and just kind of miserable from being pregnant.  That night my mother said to me,    Mary, why in the world did you ever  decide to run for the legislature?    and I said,    Well, Mom, I just did. I  just think it   s important. We need to work on some of these issues facing  Oklahoma. And it   s just what I feel in my heart is the right thing to be  doing for me for Oklahoma.    And I said,    What   s wrong?    And she  said,    Well there were people calling the house tonight and wanting to  know if you   re the candidate, if you   re the Mary who   s running for  office that is pregnant.    And I said,    Well Mom, there   s no way to hide  this. I am, just tell them yes. Why are they asking that?    And she said     Well there   s someone doing a phone bank and they   re asking    Would  you rather have a pregnant women or an attorney as your state  legislator?    I said,    What did they say after that?    They said    Well, if  you   re the pregnant one, they want you. They don   t want the attorney.     So she was upset that people were calling about that.  Actually to even run as a young pregnant mom in my 30   s was quite the  thing back in 1990. It was not the norm to do that and I did take some  criticism from those who said,    What about your children? Aren   t you  thinking about your children?    And of course I was and that was hurtful  for people to say that. Now my children are 18 and 21 and I know my  daughter would actually like to run for office and follow in my footsteps.  We   ll see if she ever really does it. And my son is quite the debater and  quite the politically astute person right now. Both of them have turned  out quite well and have done very well in school and we   ve all made it  through very well.  Did he go to DC with you? I   m just curious since he just turned 18.  Well, my son is actually just finishing up his last year in high school.  We had two years left when I was elected. And he wanted to stay in  school in Oklahoma City and he has. He   s doing very well. And he does  come to DC. But my daughter is the one that loves to come to DC. The  10  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  first year I was elected, she came up eight times. One time she came up  to stay just a couple of days and ended up staying a full month. I even  went home on the weekends and left her up there. Of course she   s 21,  but she   s got a lot of friends up there. A lot of her classmates have  actually worked in my office as interns both in Oklahoma City and  Washington. It   s been fun to be able to mentor our friend   s children and  my daughter   s classmates who have come to Washington. And even my  son   s classmates who have come to Washington and wanted to see how  government really works in the heart of our nation   s Capitol. And she  loves it. My daughter has spent a tremendous amount of time in  Washington with me and has traveled quite a bit. Been to the White  House many times. When my son gets out of high school, I   m hoping  he   ll be able to spend a little bit more time with me. But he   s kind of  interested in cars and sports and girls right now.  Well I guess they   re both learning how to campaign.  Both of them have spent many, many years, 18 years now that   s how  long I   ve been in office, going through campaigns. It   s really quite  funny. We   ve had some critical votes recently on the Wall Street  problems and some of the bail out money and the rescue money for the  economy. And both my children were text messaging me and calling me  and ask me how I was going to vote. Even found that their own friends  were calling them. Their high school and college friends were calling  them saying,    What does your mom think about this? And why is she  voting this way or that way?    So it   s been very encouraging and  interesting to see my own children have such a keen awareness of the  issues. I think it   s important that our young children and students do  participate in civic activities and to be aware of what   s important for  their state and what   s important for their nation.  So you   re mentoring them a little bit. Who mentored you? Did you have  someone in particular when you got into office? The first office?  People always ask me,    What was your inspiration for running for  political office?    And I can still remember back to that discussion with  my mother when I was campaigning and it was so difficult campaigning  while I was expecting my son. But I remember her saying,    What in the  world caused you to want to do something like this?    And it was one of  those nights where you   re having one of those difficult campaign nights  where your opponents attacking you. And my mother didn   t like her  daughter being attacked and I was trying to be a young mother and  campaigning and working my job. And I said,    Well Mother, it   s real  easy what caused me to want to get into public service. It   s you. And it   s  my dad. Watching both of you serve as mayors of a small town,  watching you give of your time and your effort and trying to make the  11  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  community better, that   s what caused me to have an interest in politics.  It was you as my mentor, Mom.     A good answer. You were close enough where you didn   t have to move  in order to serve.  Right. I did not have to move to serve. I was living in Oklahoma City  when I first ran for the legislature and lieutenant governor. So it was  actually very easy for me because I could go home almost every single  night and be with my children and cook dinner. I might have to slip out  to go and give a speech somewhere, but I was always home to try to be  there as much as humanly possible.  Did you drive down Lincoln to get to the Capitol? Or would you come  down a different way?  Yes. I would come down Lincoln Boulevard. I enjoyed watching  Lincoln Boulevard being transformed, especially after Governor Keating  took office and I was lieutenant governor, to see the great change in the  landscape. And, of course, Governor Keating had a passion to clean up  the gateway to our Capitol and to tear down a lot of the old buildings,  and to get rid of some of the eye sores that were along the way. We have  certainly done a good job along Lincoln Boulevard.  And the dome wasn   t there?  The dome was added when I was lieutenant governor. I was actually in  office during the whole time that issue was being debated about who  was going to pay for it and even raising the private sector money. The  legislature put in a smaller portion of that. I can certainly remember the  great celebration that we had when the dome was dedicated. It was one  of the most fantastic musical productions I   ve seen probably ever in  Oklahoma. Other than maybe the Centennial Celebration that we had  recently. It was a real spectacular night. I have to give a credit to Lee  Allen Smith who has been a wonderful civic leader in Oklahoma that  was responsible for the dome celebration and of course our wonderful  centennial, too.  Well, on your watch party, do you want to talk a little bit about your first  one? Who all was there and then going to swearing in day?  My first watch party. Gosh, I   ve got to remember back. I   ve had so  many watch parties I   ve got to remember where that first one was. I  think the first watch party I ever had was actually in the living room of  my home.  12  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Okay.  It was just with family and friends. We weren   t sure if I was going to  win or not. I had never run before and as I said I just ran my campaign  with volunteers. I hardly had any money to even spend on a campaign. I  basically printed up brochures and put up yard signs. I had a philosophy  back then that if I put up yard signs on major corridors where people  were going to be driving it would give the impression of lots of support.  Of course I tried to put signs in yards too in the neighborhoods but there  was limited time and limited people to put up signs. That if I put them  up on the major areas where traffic was going that everybody would  think,    Oh, my gosh, look at that woman. She   s really got a lot of  support.    Whether it worked or not, I don   t know. But I did do that. And  of course I did a lot of door knocking. Then my campaign watch parties  for lieutenant governor became a bigger episode and kind of bigger  crowds.  So your swearing in day, when you were sworn into the House, who all  was there for that? And what was going through your mind at that  point?  Well, I can still remember being sworn into the Oklahoma Legislature  and my son at that time was three-months-old and my daughter was  three-and-a-half. My family was all there and I   ve got a darling picture  of my son in a little Christmas outfit and my daughter in her Christmas  dress. We went to the Capitol early to take a pre-Christmas picture  before I was actually started in office. February was when the session  first started. And of course there was a little bit of   oh maybe a little bit  of thinking like,    Oh gosh, what have you got yourself into?    But you  know I always felt like as long as I put my family first, my career  second, and I should even add one thing to that, my faith first, family  and then my career, that if I had that fine balance between things that  were really important, that it would all work out. And it did.  And talk a little bit about the first time that you presented a bill on the  floor.  First time I presented a bill. Well the first time back then, I don   t know if  they still have this same tradition, but the first time you present a bill on  the floor, especially when you   re a new member in the Oklahoma  Legislature, the members always   when you put your vote up you know  you expect everybody to think,    Oh, that   s a great bill. They   re all going  to go green  vote yes . And I   m going to have all these wonderful people  who are going to support me.    Well, the first time you put a bill up on  the floor, there   s a little joke they play on you. And I   when I pushed  my button green, I wondered    will I get my first bill passed?    And  13  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  everybody went red on the board.    No    vote. They all put these red    no     votes. I thought,    Oh, my gosh, what   s going on? My bill   s great.  There   s nothing wrong with it. Nobody debated against me.    And it   s a  joke that they always do to the first time freshman in the Oklahoma  Legislature. So that was kind of a shock. But it was funny.  No warning? Or     I did get it passed.  No warning?  No warning. No, they don   t tell you. They just surprise you.  What   s the most memorable moment from those four years? Do you have  one or two?  The most memorable moment. Well, two things specifically. Two issues  that I focused on with a lot of passion back then. One was that I passed a  piece of legislation called the Stalker Law for Oklahoma. We were  actually the second state in the nation after California to pass legislation  that said if a person was being threatened or stalked or felt like their life  was in danger by someone that they could have some protection from  that person. And I worked very hard to talk about this new crime law. It  was a new concept because California was the first state to do it. As I  began debating this legislation and talking about in committees and  talking about it to the press I had a lot of people come forth who were  being stalked and said thank you so much for trying to protect us from  this person who I feel is trying to harm me or has threatened my life.  And we did get the bill passed and that was a big victory for victims and  was a good piece of legislation dealing with crime.  But another issue that was really fun and really probably led me to be  lieutenant governor was a debate over health care. President Clinton and  First Lady Hilary Clinton had been elected during my time in the  Oklahoma Legislature and I was very active in a group called the  American Legislative Exchange Council which still exists today. It is a  bipartisan group of legislators from around the nation. I actually was  state chairman for that particular group. But I had become very active in  health care issues because Hilary Clinton was, at that time, the First  Lady who was talking about wanting to nationalize, socialize our  nation   s health care. At that time there were some congressmen,  Congressman Dave McCurdy and Senator Boren who were conservative  democrats that were serving in Washington, DC, that people felt might  not be for nationalizing our health care system, socializing our medicine.  14  So they specifically asked me, the American Legislative Exchange  Council, if I could be a point person on healthcare. I had actually already  run three or four bills in the Oklahoma Legislature dealing with health  care and had passed a couple of them. I started holding town hall  meetings throughout the state, even though I was just a Oklahoma  county legislator. So I traveled in Oklahoma and held town hall  meetings to debate health care reform. The Clinton administration  actually sent someone from the White House who would debate me  everywhere I would go in these town hall meetings. I ran into him years  ago when I was lieutenant governor. I don   t even remember what his  name is now, but he remembered me. He said,    You   re that lady from  Oklahoma that I was always debating ten-fifteen years ago about health  care issues.    It was actually back in 1992-93 so it was longer than that. I  became an expert on health care back during those days. I actually won  the National Legislator of the Year on health care reform for this  organization.  One time there was this huge debate in Oklahoma City that was  scheduled and I was debating with Senator Angela Monson, who was for  that issue. And President Clinton had his person who was representing  Hilary   s policy and then myself and one other person and we were  debating in front of the state chamber, a pretty big crowd at the Marriot  Hotel. It was pretty rancorous during the debate. And as I finished that  debate, I stepped down from the podium, and an older gentleman who  was a great friend of mine, who later became Senator Inhofe   s Chief of  Staff, came up to me and said,    Mary, I need to talk to you about  something.    I said,    Okay.    So, we went back to a coffee shop. He said,     I want to talk about your future.    And I said,    Well, did I do a bad job  just now.    And he said,    No, no, you did a great job on debating on  health care. I want to talk about running for a different office.     Well, at that time I had my son who was four years old and my daughter  who was seven. I didn   t even have an election the two years prior to that  so I was moving along as a mother trying balance family and work. He  said,    I think you should run for lieutenant governor.    I said,     Lieutenant governor? I can   t do that. I can   t run a state-wide race. I  have a four year old and a seven year old. Have we ever had a woman be  lieutenant governor?    He said    No.    I said    How about a republican?  We are a democrat state? Has a republican ever won the lieutenant  governor   s position?    He said,    No.    I said    How much does it cost to  run for a state-wide position?    He said,    About a half-million dollars.    I  said,    You know what, that   s three stupid ideas. I   m not going to do that.  I   m not going to run for lieutenant governor.    He said,    Let me tell you  why I think you should.    So he started talking to me about the future of  Oklahoma and about the character I had and about the issues I stood for,  and how he believed that represented Oklahoma. He said,    I really think  15  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  you should reconsider and think about running for lieutenant governor.     And I was quite comfortable in the legislature. I   d been there four years  and loved what I was doing and had some good success and had my  family, trying to balance family and work. Sure enough he talked me  into it. He had several people calling me and I stepped out. There were  nine people in the race. I never did raise a half million dollars. I only  raised  199,000 and ran statewide which is totally unheard of these days.  I had a primary run off and a general. And won all three of those to  become the first woman and the first republican ever to be lieutenant  governor.  Was that campaign a little bit different from your legislative one? A bit  broader     Well, the campaign was tough because I had to travel statewide. I had a  tremendous amount of volunteers once again. I still could not afford a  political consultant in that campaign. I had volunteer staff. I finally  ended up, towards the end of the campaign, paying someone a  1,000 to  handle all the media because it was quite enormous to be able to handle  all of the press and the media issues and the position papers. I traveled  throughout the whole state of Oklahoma. I keyed in on certain counties  that I knew would be important to win. Spent the majority of my time in  those counties to get through the primary at least. Got into a run-off  against a very substantial person named Terry Neese who had won the  republican nomination and was quite a credible candidate, a good  business woman in Oklahoma. And she and I were in a run-off and I  won that. And then went on to go into the general election against  another lady who was very credible, whose parents had been publishers  of newspapers throughout the state. Her grandfather had been, I think it  was, Speaker of the House, if I remember right. She had quite a good  sum of money to put, personally, into the race. And her name was Nance  Diamond. And she was a good quality candidate, too. We went toe to toe  in November of that year and surprised everybody when I won the  campaign for lieutenant governor.  And that watch party, you said, was a little bit different?  That watch party was very interesting. In fact the primary and runoff  watch parties were in my campaign headquarters. I had a pretty good  crowd. There were 30 or 40 of my friends. Of course, people knew that  it was an uphill battle for a republican to win the seat. But they knew I  probably wouldn   t win this race so they were all there to kind of console  me and to be with me, at least that   s what they thought. I thought I was  going to win. I wasn   t in it just to be doing it for the heck of it. I   d given  up my seat in the legislature. I couldn   t go back. I   d given up that  16  Finchum  Fallin  opportunity that I loved to run for lieutenant governor and to take that  risk to do that. So I was in it to win and to be able to serve in that  capacity.  So election night, I had the media come to my headquarters early on in  the evening. And all of a sudden I noticed that TV cameras and the  people were leaving. And it was around 7:30 and the election had closed  at 7:00, and I thought,    Where are they going?    And one of my staff  people came up and said,    Well they think Terry Neese is going to win  and you   re going to lose so they   re all going to her headquarters.    I  said,   You   ve got to be kidding me.    They left and, of course, I was  crushed. I thought,    Oh, my gosh. They think I   m losing and they   re  leaving.    Well, as the night progressed on I was winning. Then, of  course, they had to all come back, with a little bit of egg on their face, to  my headquarters. And it was a couple of hours later. But we did win the  run-off. And the media all showed back up and it felt good when they all  came back and wanted an interview.  Yes.  Now, on the general election, it was a heck of a night, too. It was at the  Cowboy Hall of Fame. There   s a huge crowd there. Of course, Governor  Keating had his whole campaign team there, mine was there, and several  other candidates were having a big watch party. Once again it was up  and down and it was going to be historic if I won the position as  lieutenant governor. And the votes would come in and I   d be up in some  areas. Then they   d come back 15 minutes later and I   d be down and then  they   d come in and I   d be up, and then they   d be down. And it was that  way for hours on end and it was really so stressful. Because, one minute  people coming up,    Oh you   re winning     and the next minute they   d  come up,    Oh I   m so sorry, you know you worked so hard.    All night  long  It just went for hours.  Finally towards about 11 o   clock I had been watching the numbers and I  knew that there were some key precincts where republicans were more  concentrated and conservative voters were more concentrated that had  not come in on the tallies. And I knew once those district numbers came  in, that I should be leading in those areas. I felt good that, in the end, I  would probably win even though everybody else thought that it was a  little iffy. I just knew where the votes were. And by the time 11 o   clock  or so had come about 96  of the votes were in and I was ahead. And  the media came up to me and said    We want you      because everybody  else was gone by that time,    We want you to declare that you   re the  winner, give your acceptance speech.    And I said,    No, no I don   t want  to declare I   m the winner because the vote counts had gone up and down  all night and I want to wait until 100  of the votes are in.    And they  17  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  said,    Well you   ve got about 96  so either you say right now thank you  to all of your supporters, or they can just read it in the paper in the  morning.     Of course, I was scared to do a press conference saying I had won  because actually my opponent had gone on TV that night and said she  had won and she hadn   t. That was, I   m sure, a hard thing to have to go  through. So I didn   t want to make that same mistake. So finally they  said,    We   re leaving. So you either come in front of the cameras and let  us congratulate you or people can read it in the papers.    So I got up that  night and told the crowd    thank you.    The crowd was a little bit smaller  by that time. And it was 11 o   clock at night.  And I can still remember my son at that time who was four and there  was so much commotion going on when I won. People and media  pulling on me, and wanting to talk and congratulate me since my win  was so historic. I can still remember my son just bellowing out crying  because the people scared him. He just didn   t understand the  commotion. It was really just excitement but he didn   t understand what  was going on. I can still remember picking him up, holding him, and  saying everything   s all right, everything   s cool. It   s all right. It was just a  wonderful evening for us. I got home very late that night. A lot of people  came over to the house and I think I got to bed about two o   clock that  morning and I had to be up at five the next morning to go on early  morning news. So I got a couple hours of sleep which was pretty  impossible to do. Three of my girlfriends came to get me the next  morning to take me to TV and radio stations to talk about the election  and what I hoped to accomplish.  And what were some of those things?  Well, I talked a lot about economic development. I talked about  government reform. I had a particular interest in tourism and wanting to  work on the state lodges. I talked about business issues like workman   s  compensation reform which was a big issue for me. A lot about just  keeping taxes low and transportation and crime and education of course.  All of those things.  Did you get some of those accomplished in your first four years?  As lieutenant governor I spent the first four years dealing a lot with  some of the reform issues. I established the Fallin Commission on  Workmen   s Compensation Reform and brought in business, industry,  and government together to talk about how we could lower workmen   s  compensation cost in Oklahoma. Reform the system to where those who  are truly injured on the job would be able to get workmen   s  18  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  compensation benefits in a timely fashion. And hopefully work with the  employers so they   d have a system that was fair to them also, but yet  taking care of the injured worker. We did write a major piece of reform  legislation and as lieutenant governor that really was not particularly my  role as far as writing legislation. But being a former legislator I had a  keen interest in helping get reform written. Two democrats carried the  reform for me in the Oklahoma Legislature because democrats  controlled the House and the Senate. We actually did get that bill passed  into law.  One of my other goals was to try to help pass Right to Work in the state  of Oklahoma back in 2000, if I remember right. I took over the Senate to  try and get them to vote on Right to Work and held up the Senate for  three days. And all the senators walked out on me and didn   t want to  vote on that particular issue. And all heck broke loose on the Senate  floor. But finally the Senate came back in to vote on allowing the people  of Oklahoma the right to vote on a ballot on whether they wanted to be a  Right to Work state. Then I also worked on purchasing reform and  rewrote the purchasing reform laws in our state. Of course, worked on  privatizing state lodges which we did get two properties, two resorts in  our area privatized with private investment money rather than  government having to pay for everything. So those were some of the  bigger accomplishments. Aerospace Summit, I worked very hard on the  aviation industry and started the Oklahoma Aerospace Summit and  Expo. That was important to me. Those were some of the key things.  Had previous lieutenant governors accomplished that much?  Well, I don   t know if I can answer that. I think everybody has a  contribution to make and there have been great things that other  lieutenant governors have done. I really enjoyed working with the  legislature from the standpoint of I thought it was important to build  relationships on both sides of the aisle and to work with the governor. I  had the opportunity to work with a republican governor and a democrat  governor and to try to get things done. I know in Congress it has been  very frustrating in that it takes forever to get anything done in  Washington, DC. It   s actually a little bit easier in Oklahoma to get  things done. You have to be able to talk about why it is important to  your state, to be able to build consensus across lines while not  compromising your principles and your values and that   s what I always  tried to do.  Was it more difficult when the Governor was  a member of the  the  opposite party?  There   s a different role as lieutenant governor that may be played when  19  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  you have a governor of the same party and a governor of a different  party. Oklahoma   s former lieutenant governors were all democrats, prior  to me. In fact I   m still the only republican ever in the history of  Oklahoma to be the lieutenant governor. Former democrat lieutenant  governors served with democrat governors. Republican Governors  Bellmon and Bartlett had democrat lieutenant governors. But even if  they were of the same party, various former lieutenant governors have  expressed to me that there was still some shaky times with a governor of  the same party. And there   s always a little bit of territorial turf that goes  on between a governor and a lieutenant governor.  When I first entered into office as Governor Keating   s lieutenant  governor, I went up to him and said,    Governor Keating, I am delighted  to be your lieutenant governor. And that is my role in the state of  Oklahoma. You go be Governor. I   m the lieutenant governor. I   m not  looking to take your job. And you go enjoy, don   t worry about me.    Of  course that helped us to have a great partnership.  Now when you serve with a governor of a different political party and if  you   re at the top of the ticket on the state level like I was as Lieutenant  Governor with Governor Henry, then your political party also expects  you to step and be the leader and to be the person that   s talking about the  issues that are important to your party. Naturally there are issues don   t  match with whoever the governor might be. So that   s the role that you  play. But I did try to work with Governor Henry on issues when it was  possible and tried to communicate with him as much as he would let me.  When you ran for lieutenant governor the second time, did you have  major opponents then? Female? Male?  The second time I ran for lieutenant governor it was a much easier race.  And the third time it was a much easier race.  And what prompted you to switch to run for the U.S. House?  I was already to run for my fourth term as lieutenant governor. However,  I had a lot of people talk to me about running for governor. There was a  time during my term when Governor Keating was being mentioned as a  possible Vice Presidential Candidate or even as Attorney General. There  was huge speculation that he was going to be leaving and going with  President Bush. I was having to think about succeeding him as lieutenant  governor to governor. That was the year that President Bush and Vice  President Al Gore got into such a long waiting period to see who  actually won the Presidential election with the hanging chad situation  and the Florida vote count. And that went much past the November  election clear into December. There was still a lot of speculation that  20  Governor Keating might be leaving, lots of stories, and people coming  up to me, talking to me about transitioning and what would need to  happen if it happened. And lo and behold, it did not happen. Vice  President Dick Cheney was chosen to be President Bush   s Vice  President. And Governor Keating did not leave and so the next time the  gubernatorial race came back through people talked to me again as they  do frequently about whether I would consider doing that.  I had decided the last time around in 2006 to not run for governor. I was  not going to run against an incumbent governor. Governor Henry had  and was and is popular and I knew what the poll numbers were. I didn   t  always agree with him on all the issues but that   s why we   re in different  political parties. There were things that I would have done differently.  But I decided that I wanted to stay as lieutenant governor. Then  Congressman Ernest Istook decided he would run for governor and  announced to leave Congress. When he announced to leave Congress  and run for governor then the pressure started back on me again but this  time not for governor but for Congress. I knew it was a job I would  enjoy and it was a job I thought about doing sometime in the future. I  hadn   t particularly planned on doing it right at that point in my life but I  thought maybe some years down the line that I might consider running  for Congress. But then I also know that timing is critical on any type of  career move and the right timing is also important and I had actually  decided I wasn   t going to run for Congress.  It was really my children who ended up talking me back into it. I hadn   t  announced what I was going to do either way. I just was trying to decide  and pray about it and trying to figure out what was the best for me, the  best for the state and the best for my family. I took my children to lunch  one day after church. I had made up my mind I wasn   t going to do it. I  was just going to run for re-election. I had my daughter on one side of  the table and my son on the other and I was sitting right in the middle.  My daughter said,    So Mom, when does your race for Congress start?     And I said,    Well sweetheart, Mommy   s not real sure that it   s going to  be the right thing for our family for me to run for Congress right now.  I   m really thinking about just running for re-election for lieutenant  governor.    And my son said,    I   m not real sure I want you to do that  right now either.    And my daughter and he were having this  conversation about me.  I   m sitting right in the middle of it listening to my children talking about  their mother   s future and what my career was going to be. My son was  concerned because at that point of time he was a couple of months away  from driving. I drove him everywhere, (of course his dad drove him  places too) and he was worried about how he was going to get around.  And as we were having this conversation, my daughter said,    Well,  21  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Mother, I just feel like it   s your destiny to be in Congress.    And I said,     That   s a big word for you to use.    She said,    I just feel like it   s what  you   re supposed to be doing, Mom. You need to run for Congress. It   s  an open seat and someday you may wonder what would have happened  if you had done it.    And my son said,    I don   t know about that. I need  Mom here.    And she said,    Price, if you   re worried about getting around  town, you   ll be 16 when Mom   s elected.    And he said,    I will?    And  she said    Yes, you   ll be 16. You   ll be driving yourself.    And he said     Oh okay, and then run for Congress. We don   t care.     Actually I   d been praying very hard about what was the right thing for  me to do for the state and for my family. And I can still remember  praying to God. I said,    You know if you   ll put it on my son   s heart that  it   s okay for me to do this and he tells me that, then all right God I   ll  listen to you. But I have reservations.    Then the minute he said that that  day, I thought    Okay God, you answered my prayer. I get it now.    And,  of course, here I am today in Congress and it turned out fine.  How was that campaign?  The campaign for Congress, of course, was very rough. There were five  of us in the primary on the republican side, one independent, and then  democrats on the other side. Nine of us total. And I had a run-off with  the mayor of Oklahoma City who had just won an election three months  prior to that and had come fresh off that with a big win. Then I had to go  into the general election which was not as tough. But the primary was  the big race. I had very substantial, credible, financed opponents who  were all my friends and I highly respected. And it was challenging to  have to run with your friends in a race but I tried to focus as much as  possible on issues and what I hoped to accomplish in Congress. That  worked out good too, and I became the first woman in Oklahoma since  1920 to go to Congress.  The first one would be Alice Robertson.  Yes, Alice Mary Robertson was the first woman from Oklahoma to be  elected to Congress in 1920. She served one term, served for two years  and was actually defeated. She was a republican from Muskogee,  Oklahoma which is unheard of because Muskogee has typically been a  very democrat registered area of our state. But she won. And actually  just this past week, our last week of session, I actually passed a  resolution to honor her because she was the second woman elected to  Congress and she was the first woman ever to sit in the Speaker   s chair  in the U.S. House of Representatives. And she was a woman from  Oklahoma, so I passed a resolution the last day of this session to honor  her.  22  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Do they compare you to her some? Does anyone?  I don   t really get compared to her because she and I were quite different  as far as personalities and backgrounds. But people recognize how she  paved the way for other women to come along the way to serve in  Congress.  Eighty-some years later.  Eighty years later. I tell the young girls when I speak to them that it took  me 80 years to get to the US Capitol after Alice Robertson.  Well you haven   t lost an election have you?  No, I have never lost an election. I have been very fortunate, knock on  wood. A lot of people talk about taking risk in life and a lot of people  aren   t always willing to take a risk in life. They always want to know  that there   s a sure thing. I   ve always been a big risk taker. I   ve taken  three huge risks. When I left the legislature to run for   well I took a risk  running for office pregnant was a big risk for me because I wanted to do  the right thing for my family and I wanted to be effective on the job as a  state legislator. That was a big risk. I left a job that I   d just been named  Manager of the Year, nationwide, to risk running for the legislature. And  then actually having a huge personal hurdle to go over. Running for  office expecting my second child, so that was my first big risk.  My second big risk was leaving the legislature which I dearly loved,  (even won the National Legislator of the Year my four years there), to  run for lieutenant governor. I won that. My third big risk was leaving the  job for the lieutenant governor after 12 years to run for Congress when  we had not had a women elected to Congress since 1920. Financially,  running for Congress was a huge risk, again, because I   ve been a single  mom for ten years totally supporting myself, no help from anybody. I   d  be risking losing my job one more time. My strong faith has given me  the confidence to take these risks, trusting God to work all things for the  good no matter what the outcome.  You   ve been the first women to serve as Lieutenant Governor, first  republican woman. If another lady came up and asked your advice  about running, what would you tell her?  I would tell anyone who wants to run for public office that it   s a very  rewarding experience. To me, it   s been like going back to college. You  learn so much about so many different issues. And you have the  opportunity to actually make a difference. I   ve actually had people come  up to me over the last several years and offer me jobs out in the private  23  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  sector that paid a lot better than government jobs. I really thought about  it for awhile because I have two children that I support, and myself, and  you think about those things. But in the end, I had a girlfriend one time  tell me,    Well, you can go work for this company but when someone  calls you up and they need something fixed you may not be able to help.  You have the personality that enjoys being able to call up Veteran   s  Affairs or call the Social Security Administration or whatever agency it  might be to try to resolve problems for people. But if you   re out in a  private sector company, you won   t be able to make those phone calls  because people, frankly, won   t care if you call or not. But if you call as a  Congresswoman or as a lieutenant governor, then they pay attention.    I  really thought about that because I enjoy being able to help people,  being able to help the state of Oklahoma, and be able to make things  better.  You mentioned you had four friends that went around with you that  morning. Are you still close friends with those ladies?  Well let   s see. One of them moved off to Florida and got married. One  of them is still around. She actually worked for me in my Lieutenant  Governor   s office for quite some time until she retired. And the other  lady is just still around the community, but she   s not working. But yes,  we   re all still friends.  Is this the first time you   ve been back on campus since you were a  student here?  Oh, no. I come back to the OSU frequently. I was here Saturday for a  football game.  Okay.  I try to come back to the campus and on occasion I   ll speak to various  associations or groups. And of course meet with the various division  heads of the campus. I had a great briefing today on the research work  being done for bio-fuels on the aviation, the aeronautics engineering side  of OSU, the great partnerships and how we   re trying to work with the  private sector and higher education to meet the needs of the work force  in the future. I   ve had great briefings on many different issues and in my  capacity in Congress I want to make sure I   m always here to listen and  support and to take what   s being done in Oklahoma and be able to share  it on a national level to show the great things are being accomplished  here.  What   s been your biggest obstacle along the way?  24  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  My biggest obstacle? In public service?  Mm-hmm.  Probably the biggest obstacle I   ve had in public service is just the self  arguments that you have, if that makes any sense. It   s your mind arguing  with yourself about is this the right thing to do for your family? And  probably just the balancing between family and work. There   s always  tough decisions you have to make when you   re in leadership for voting  on a piece of legislation or maybe it   s running a campaign. But the  balancing act of making sure you   re family is taken care of, that you   re  able to give them appropriate time. Although, it is a sacrifice. The time  that they loan their mother or their father, whomever it might be, to  public service is really a sacrifice of a family. But I don   t ever want to  do it, to serve at the detriment of my family.  I took my son to dinner on Sunday night. Just the two of us, we try to do  it every single weekend. Just down time by ourselves. Nobody else  around. I always ask him this, and he gets mad at me now, he   s eighteen.  I said,    Honey, is it still okay that Mom serves in office because I  always want you to understand that you   re the most important thing to  me, you and your sister. And my job does not come before family. I do  have to work and I do enjoy what I do, but if this is ever too hard on you  or your sister know that I   ll change and I   ll find something different to  do.    I told him that the other day and he said,    Mom, we think what you  do is really fun. We enjoy getting to see it.    They don   t like me being  gone as much as I am. They wish it could be different but they  understand the importance of the work, and they understand why I   m  doing it.  Talk a little bit about your first couple of days in DC. Actually, in the  Capitol and     The first night I went to DC to actually prepare to go through all the  orientations as a new member of Congress and as a freshman, I got in  late that day. Everything was very hectic even after the election. Even  though there was a time when I didn   t actually start into Congress, there  were a lot of orientations. And I took my Chief of Staff, who was my  current Chief of Staff in the Lieutenant Governor   s office. We were  driving into DC that night and the Capitol was at the end of the street.  And it was lit up with these gorgeous beautiful white lights. It   s a  stunning sight to see the nation   s Capitol. As we were driving up to see I  caught this glimpse off in the distance and we were in the back of this  taxi and I said,    You know what, we work there. That   s our new office.     And just to feel the tingle to think that you would have the opportunity  to work in your nation   s Capitol and to be able to represent Oklahoma in  25  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  the nation   s Capitol on very important work was a humbling experience  and a tremendous honor to even think about.  And you   re first day on the floor, actually sitting at the desk?  Well, my first day to ever go on the floor was during orientation, they  took us there one night. I was kind of surprised that people don   t have  assigned seating. You just sit wherever you want to. But typically the  republicans sit on the right and the democrats sit on the left. But it   s all  open seating, you sit anywhere you want. As we   re going through our  briefing, there was a small group in our freshman class and they were  showing us the rostrum where the Speaker sits and the well where the  speakers can speak and then the chairs where the congressman and  women sit. And as they were briefing us, the guy said to us,    If you   ll  reach down under your seat there   s a bag and that bag contains your  chemical gas mask. If there should ever be an attack upon the nation you  will put the mask on and we want you to go out this door and down this  hallway and down this place and understand that as a member of  Congress you are the number one target of terrorist, as an official of the  United States Government.    And my heart kind of went,    Boy, this is  heavy stuff here to think about that.    But you know to feel the weight of  the responsibility of being able to represent your nation is a tremendous  honor. It was a   really an enlightening moment to think about that.  Have you had the opportunity to meet Bush? President Bush?  Oh gosh, President Bush just called me in Oklahoma a couple of days  ago. He called me on my cell phone and wanted to talk to me about my  vote on the economic rescue package. But I   ve met President Bush many  times. I   ve met him many, many times over the years. And had the  opportunity to go to the White House and talk to him on the phone and  introduce him at various places. Even had the opportunity to travel on  Air Force One, Marine One, and even in his Presidential Limo, which  was a nice honor. And he does that with other congressmen too when he  visits their states. But it   s a huge responsibility to serve as President and  he has my great respect and admiration for his sacrifice that he has made  for our nation and for his leadership. It   s a tough job.  Well, do you have any plans in mind for the next ten years that you want  to talk about?  Any plans for the next ten years?  I guess re-election is this year, isn   t it?  Re-election will be in a month and so I   ve been actively working on  26  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  Finchum  Fallin  campaign issues and we just finished up our Congressional session a  couple of days ago. So I   m trying to get oriented back into home and  going to various meetings, and having briefings, and talking to folks,  and giving speeches, and campaigning a little on the side too. And of  course seeing my family, which is important. And you know next year  will be a brand new year. We   ll have a new President and we   re going to  have challenges with our economy which I   m very concerned about. I   m  going to do all that I can to make sure that we help put Oklahoma   s best  foot forward and our economy to help Oklahomans protect their assets  and to make sure we have a vibrant economy so that people can have  good paying jobs. And of course having a government system that works  the best it can for our people. So I   m going to be working on that. I  don   t know what the future holds after that. I don   t have any plans at this  point of time to leave public service, but there are lots of opportunities to  be able to serve Oklahoma. It   s been a real pleasure to do that.  And there   s not term limits in the U.S. Congress, is there?  There   s not term limits in the U.S. Congress. But I   ve always limited  myself.  Well, usually my last question is when history   s written about you, what  would you like it to say?  When history   s written about me, I would like history to remember me  as a woman who truly cared about her state and worked very hard on her  state   s behalf.  I   d say it will definitely say that without too much more work even.  Thank you.  Is there anything I haven   t asked that you want to be sure and cover?  I think you   ve got good questions.  Well thank you very much for coming. It   s been a pleasure meeting you  and hearing your story.  Thank you, I appreciate it. It   s been a lot of fun.  --------------  
