Oral History Interview  with  Laura Boyd  Interview Conducted by  Tanya Finchum  December 20, 2006  Women of the Oklahoma Legislature  Oral History Project  Special Collections   University Archives  Edmon Low Library     Oklahoma State University     2006  2  Oklahoma State University Library  Women of the Oklahoma Legislature Oral History Project  Interview History  Interviewer: Tanya Finchum  Transcriber: Tanya Finchum  Editor: Tanya Finchum, Juliana Nykolaiszyn  The recording and transcript of this interview were processed at the Oklahoma State  University Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma.  Project Detail  The purpose of the Women of the Oklahoma Legislature Oral History Project is to gather  and preserve memories and historical documents of women who have served or are currently  serving in the Oklahoma Legislature.  This project was approved by the Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board on  November 10, 2006.  Legal Status  Scholarly use of the recordings and transcripts of the interview with Laura Boyd is  unrestricted. The interview agreement was signed on December 20, 2006.  3  Oklahoma State University Library  Women of the Oklahoma Legislature Oral History Project  Laura Boyd     Brief Biography  Laura Wooldridge Boyd, born in 1949 to Oscar and Martha Wooldridge in Charlottesville,  Virginia, served in the Oklahoma House of Representatives from 1992 through 1998. In her  first legislative full session as a freshman in the House, she introduced 11 bills and three  were signed into law. While in office she sponsored legislation to get tough on elder abuse;  to create jobs in Oklahoma; and to establish the College Savings Plan. The Ryan Luke Act  was Boyd   s landmark legislative contribution. In 1998 Boyd was the Democratic nominee  for Governor and received 41  of the votes. In 2004 she was the Democratic nominee for  Lieutenant Governor. Boyd holds a Bachelor of Arts in German from Duke University, a  Master of Science in Humanistic Education and Counseling from Marywood University, and  a Doctorate in Psychology from American Commonwealth University. Boyd operates a  policy and consulting firm, is an assistant adjunct professor at The University of Oklahoma,  is a licensed marital and family therapist, and is the National Field Director for the Women  Legislators Lobby (WiLL). She also serves as Executive Director of the Oklahoma  Therapeutic Foster Care Association. Boyd has two children and is married to J. David  Rambo.  4  Oklahoma State University Library  Women of the Oklahoma Legislature  Laura Boyd  Oral History Interview  Interviewed by Tanya Finchum  December 20, 2006  Oklahoma City, Oklahoma  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  My name is Tanya Finchum. I am the project director for the Oklahoma  State University Library   s oral history project entitled    Women of the  Oklahoma Legislature: Past and Present.    With me today is Laura Boyd  and today is December 20, 2006. Dr.Boyd served in the House from  1992 to 1998. Thank you for sharing your story with us today. Okay,  let   s get started. Tell me a little about your youth, your hometown, your  siblings, your childhood.  Tanya, I grew up in North Carolina. My father was the chaplain at North  Carolina State University. My mother was a secretary for the North  Carolina state legislature for thirty five years. That is very important to  me. My father was very involved in the civil rights movement. He  participated in the sit-ins, the early sit-ins, in Walgreens drug stores. He  was the first person to encourage African American students at North  Carolina State University. While my father passed away two years ago,  to this day, students of his contact us around Christmas or at other times  regularly during the year to talk about the impact that he had on their  lives. So I share this because I think that it has a whole lot to do with  who I am, being very involved from the time that I was six in issues of  fairness, equality, in confronting systems, confronting cultures, being  accepting, being willing to take risks and having it engrained in me that  it was my responsibility to make this world a little better place for  everybody.  When did you come to Oklahoma?  I came to Oklahoma in 1978. So I have been here now for about thirty  years. I say, it is not accurate, but I tell people that I spent the first half  of my life in North Carolina and the second half in Oklahoma.  When I came to Norman, almost thirty years ago, it was very much like  Raleigh, North Carolina    university town, small, very comfortable. I  5  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  came as a single mom and so it was like putting the other glove on with  all the demands that a single mom has. I just felt like I had moved very  much into my old town because I was familiar with the feelings.  How and when did you decide to become involved in politics?  That is also an interesting story, surely because it is important to me. I  was not interested in politics and I was afraid of politics. I worked very,  very hard to be a good mother, to be a good small business person. I  have a PhD in psychology and I earned and directed my own clinic. I  worked very hard to be the best professional possible and the idea of  politics just seemed overwhelming. I did not know anything about it.  What I knew, I did not like. It did not seem very nice and I was fearful  of it. I share that because I think that a lot of really good, smart people  today are still fearful of it and yet I know, having been an elected  politician how very important it is to vote each and every time.  I received a phone call on a particular day. I guess it must have been a  Monday, from my predecessor in my house district asking would I run  for the House of Representatives and I said I did not know anything  about taxes. I do not know anything about roads and bridges. I do not  even vote regularly. And she said to me,    You can do this. You   re  bright, you like people, you learn quickly. You can do this.    And so I  said, well let me think it over, talk to my husband, think it over  overnight and we will make a decision. And she said,    You have an hour  and a half until filing closes.    So my husband and I went back and forth  very quickly and decided our life was good, our life was busy. I was  making a good income. I was home every evening and he said, well let   s  just let this pass. And at the point I said to him, no. This is a door that  has been presented. I never looked for it and I think it is something I am  supposed to do. And he said go for it. So I did and that   s how I got in  politics.  Was your first opponent a man or a woman?  My first opponent was a woman actually. It was an open seat. I am a  Democrat and the Republicans put forward a woman who had run for  the same seat at least one time prior, maybe two, but at least one time  prior. So she had actually much more political and campaign experience  than I had.  Were your constituents rural, urban, or a mixture?  They are suburban. In Norman, my district is suburban families,  educated because of the university   suburban.  6  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Who are some of the more important people, both in Oklahoma and  nationally that inspired you to go into politics?  Well, looking back, my father and my mother. It seems kind of strange  but with my mother having been a secretary for the North Carolina  legislature for thirty-five years     both of them actually had laid a lot of  the groundwork unconsciously that I was not aware of and my husband  gets a lot of credit for it too.  My husband and his family had been very involved in Democratic  politics. My husband had run for district attorney in Cleveland County  prior to my ever meeting him. So he had a little bit of that interest. His  brother had been very involved in Democratic politics. He was in David  Hall   s administration, the Governor of Oklahoma. He ran John Glenn   s  campaign in Kentucky and in Florida when he ran for President at one  point in time, all of this prior to my marrying into the family. But again,  when my husband gave me his support, it has been there continually. He  knows about politics. His brother, especially, was very important to me.  I think of the time of John F. Kennedy that was so important as a young  child. My father took us to Washington, DC the weekend Kennedy   s  burial happened and I remember how cold and rainy it was and how  important that was to me, in terms of my philosophies more than my  desire to be in politics.  Any one person stand out as a mentor?  As a woman, Barbara Jordan. Barbara Jordan was an African American  congresswoman from Texas   in a wheelchair...very outspoken. Took on  huge challenges. Another woman whom I admire so very much is  Hannah Atkins of Oklahoma.  Once you were in office did anyone take you as their prot  g  ?  There are a number of young women that I have mentored over the  years. I was one of the first ones to start an internship program at the  capitol. I had interns for a semester from OU  University of Oklahoma ,  UCO  University of Central Oklahoma  and I believe I had one from  Stillwater  Oklahoma State University . They would come for a  semester. The school required fifteen hours a week of those women I  mentored and they are still very much part of my family. One of them is  now thirty-five. She   s married and I was the matron of honor in her  wedding. Another one of them is single, has always been single, and we  are still very close. In fact, last year I picked up another young woman at  N.E.W. Leadership  National Education for Women   s Leadership  at the  University of Oklahoma, which takes graduate and undergraduate  7  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  women and encourages them to participate in politics and public service.  This young woman is going to meet me after this interview for lunch and  we have been really working on her career. I am very proud of her.  Another young woman is in Washington, DC. We got her through her  master   s degree and she is part of the family. So I always pick women  and yet they have stayed part of the family. I consider myself as having  five or six grown up daughters as well as my three natural.  Tell me a little about your campaign, who were your sponsors, main  supporters.  Should we talk about the governor   s race mostly since I am the only  woman in Oklahoma to ever run for governor on the general election  ticket?  You can do a little bit of both if you like.  I had much support from my Norman constituency when I was in the  House. My most difficult race was my first race and I won that with  fifty-four percent. And then each year it went up. I tried to work very  hard to stay in contact with my Norman electorate and we had quite a bit  of support. Once you are in the House of Representatives you get  support from the PACs  Political Action Committees  and the general  groups that are going to be lobbying. So it is really not difficult to  maintain as an incumbent once you are in.  For the governor   s race it was quite different. Here I was, a woman   I  did not have much support from the Democratic ranks which were run  by men. I did not have any opposition; I just did not have support. And I  had so many people in high positions across the state, whether they were  in Democratic politics or just strong Democrats with money backing and  had been players in campaigns of the past, who said to me in that first  year afterwards,    if we had known you were going to do so well we  would have gotten out there more.    And of course that irked me, and I  use to think,    are you trying to make me feel better because you  certainly do not. I think you are saying it to make you feel better for not  having come out to stand up for a woman.    So there was not the support  that should have been there from men, from women, from the party.  One of the things that I think is important that I have said over and over  again since that race is    because we did do very well    we were  outspent about ten to one by an incumbent Republican   is that we  taught Frank Keating  Boyd ran against Keating during the 1998  Governor   s race and lost  that you cannot win a campaign if you do not  have a message that truly resonates with the people. Frank Keating  taught me that you cannot win a campaign if you do not have enough  8  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  money.  That was a hard lesson.  Hard lessons.  Running for office takes much time and effort. What were some of your  biggest challenges in running for office?  The biggest challenge was money. The biggest challenge for Governor  was money. We ran a very grassroots campaign and we were also  running against an incumbent who had name recognition and because he  was a sitting Governor, he could command the press at any time. Those  were very difficult. I do not recommend that women run against  incumbents. I think it is still, in 2006 very, very difficult. However, we  ran a grassroots campaign where we put a hundred thousand miles on  my car and were well received in every city, town and hamlet in  Oklahoma. And my family supported my being gone. If I was home, I  would leave at six o   clock in the morning and be back at dark. Many  times we spent the night on the road. We always stayed in the home of  someone in whatever county we were in    people I did not know. I met  so many people. I had a wonderful field team who really believed in me  and they were out there setting up these homes where I could just drive  in at any time during the day or night. That also taught me a whole lot  about Oklahomans all over the state.  That was a great experience. Now tell me about your political  philosophy.  I believe that our work particularly as women leaders is not done until  every child has someone who cares about him or her for the duration of  their childhood    until they have a roof over their head, adequate food,  and health care; until women are paid on the same salary scale for work  done that men are; until our seniors can live out their days, again with a  roof over their heads, access to food and health care, and someone who  cares about them. And it is incumbent upon us to lead in those directions  and to make those issues of fairness and health and well being for all  generations our goals. Because if we do not do it, no one else will.  When you took office, what were some of your goals?  My goals when I first went into the House and when I was running for  Governor stayed very much the same, a lot of the philosophy I just said.  Our mantra running for Governor was,    every child   s right to enter  school healthy and ready to learn.    Well lo and behold, that   s not new  news anymore. We have heard a lot about that. We did immediately in  9  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Oklahoma in Governor Keating   s second term, but even nationally we  are hearing that now. And so when I came into office, my concerns were  around health care and were around education. And I talk about early  childhood education, but I was also blessed to chair Higher Education  when I was in the legislature. That was a joy to work with. At that point  in time the twenty five colleges and universities across Oklahoma as  their leader was so enriching for me. These presidents were organized.  They were energetic. They were all men except one and they could not  have been behind me more to succeed as chair of Higher Education.  Can you describe a typical day?  It is hard to say. I know when I would drive up from Norman every  morning I had a couple of little prayers that I would say about the day in  terms of    Thy will be done    and I also had another little one that was,    I  ride on the wings of angels and eagles,    and that comes really from  native American influences and just as well as my belief that I am a  vessel for better and bigger things than I can imagine. So I have my  mindset.  The day was very busy meeting with people. I had wonderful legislative  assistants and if it were not for those legislative assistants I could not  have done nearly the things that I was able to do because they took care  of constituents when I could not be there. It is a very busy and  demanding day. You have no time to talk to your colleagues except on  the floor of the Chamber. I think we get criticized a lot for the chaos and  the noise. Well, that is well deserved, probably a third of it, but the other  two thirds is the only time you get to see your colleagues unless you are  one of the ones who hang around to go out to bars and dinners at night  but I did not do too much of that. I should probably have done more of  that because that was part of the culture. But the days are very, very  busy and they are very, very long.  Can you think of any obstacles you faced during your first term?  The biggest obstacle is being a woman. There is also an obstacle of  being a freshman. And they tell you, or used to, that as a freshman you  ought to sit down and shut up for a year. I pass that information on and  advice on in a little nicer way because I did not do it. So I had the  obstacle of being a woman but I also had the obstacle of being a very  energetic, very outspoken freshman. In fact they give an award at the  end of the year, every year, called    Mouth of the House,    and I am  honored to have received that the end of my first year because it  basically reflects someone who would not sit down and be quiet,  whether that is good or bad, and for me in many ways it was. And there  were times when I should have been quiet. There are other times when I  10  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  am glad I was not quiet. But I think at the end of my freshman year I  was kind of perceived, this is the way I put it, as everybody   s bratty little  ten-year old sister. I was always asking questions.  Now, I support that I needed to learn and I wanted to learn, but what I  learned to do after my first year was how to do that a little more  gracefully and it did pay off very well in terms of just being able to work  more successfully as a budding legislator as well as a woman. When I  was in, there was only six women and so we were not   they did not  know how to deal with us. The boys    system did not know how to deal  with us. And we did not know very well how to integrate into the boys     system.  How many of those six women were freshman?  I was the only freshman woman. So perhaps that makes my learning  curve a little tougher.  Do you still stay in touch with those women?  Yes, I do   with some of them, I do. Again, out of six, some of us were  so far apart philosophically that we never created a relationship. Three  of the others, yes, I do stay in touch with them.  Do you have a particular leadership style? Were you a chair of a  committee?  Yes. I chaired Higher Education. I also chaired a committee called  Children and Family Services. I am more aware of my leadership style  now than I was then. I think I listened to everyone and I wanted to make  sure people felt involved and included. I also felt very directed about  where we needed to go and some of the risks I took was standing up as  the leader of committees especially, for example, for the Higher  Education Committee. That endeared me to the people I represented. It  did not endear me to my colleagues from time to time.  On those committees were there other women or were you the lone  woman?  I was pretty much the lone woman. Again, there were not many women.  On the Higher Education Committee we did have one other woman  present back then but it was pretty much lone territory.  Were you free to define your own political behavior or did you feel  compelled to operate within the gendered norms and boundaries?  11  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Well, that is a very good question. I felt I was more successful when I  conformed to gender norms and boundaries. I watched my predecessor  have to do that too because I tried to pass some legislation or I was  involved professionally in legislation for marriage and family therapists  back in the eighties. And I remember watching her from the glass room  having to kind of flirt with the boys on the floor. I drove down Lincoln  Boulevard one day saying to myself,    I will never do that job,    in my  feminist self.    I will never do that. I would not compromise,      to have  to get along in that environment. I ate those words. Again, bratty little  sister did not work and my second year, which was still my freshman  term, I conformed to the culture more. I did a little more flirting. I let  them flirt. It was just flirting. I was very uncomfortable about that  because I did not know whether it was flirting or not at first from the  men. And as I began to just take it as jokes or see it as jokes, it was real  clear that they were jokes.  I was able to be a much more effective legislator by conforming to their  culture. I am sorry to say this but I think until there is a mass of women,  a larger mass, a more meaningful mass, a cadre of women who can  change that culture, then your choice is to,    get along to go along,    or     go along and get along,    or    make some changes as you get along,    and  I think that is what I did and I think that is what I saw three or four of  my colleagues have to do to make a difference and to represent their  constituencies.  It has been almost six or seven years since you were in the House. Can  you tell if there has any improvement since then?  Well I think it has improved since I have been there. Number one, there  are about   I think there are twenty-two women total in the House and  Senate right now, I believe. So we have almost four times the number of  women as when I was there. We have enough women for a women   s  caucus and they have even recognized that they have a significant mass  so that they have talked about having a caucus between the Senate and  the House of women. I think it has changed. I am still up there  frequently. I know the women. I do not see   as was between the six of  us that were there, there is not the huge political split that divides that  tiny group even more significantly. And I support more and more  women. We have had more women run for office since I was there. We  get a few more of them in. We still need many more of them to both run  and to be elected.  While you were running or once you were elected did you feel any  obligation to or did others place obligations on you to support women   s  issues in particular?  12  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  Yes   well I do not know whether they did it to me or not or whether I  did it   to support women   s issues. Again, I come from a very   when I  was in Norman the registration between Democrat and Republican was  very close. They were not interested in my party status. They were  educated, informed, progressive, vocal    They were only twenty-five  miles down the road so they were here at the capitol all the time. They  were interested in representation around issues that mattered to them.  Progressive issues for families, for education    for women. My  naiveties said when I came to the capitol that everybody thinks like  Norman. Wrong. No one thought like Norman. And so I learned that  very quickly. But in my district there was not the pressure to represent  women. But when I came up that was very important to me and I have  often said     I passed the Ryan Luke Law in 1996. I had tried for at least  four to five years prior to that to pass the same legislation that benefited  women, children, families, domestic violence and it failed every single  time. And we would debate for three days whether we should change the  length of quail season  We would debate for three days whether your  dog could ride free in the pickup truck much less your child not being  restrained in the bed of the pickup truck  Kid   s bills were killed  immediately. Nobody cared about what we called kid   s bills until little  Ryan Luke died at the hands of his caretakers in 1995. And that window  opened and we ran with it. We put everything in the Ryan Luke Law  including the kitchen sink and we were successful. So was the pressure  from out there on me, I really cannot say that it probably was because  my district so supported me but indeed I carried from day one the  traditional women   s issues.  Describe any expectations from colleagues and the public that may have  differed for women and men elected officials that you experienced or  observed. Can you tell if there were any differences between how men  and women were expected to perform?  Yes. One of the first things that comes to my mind of course is dress and  attire and that was prevalent not only at the House but that was prevalent  when I ran for governor because the news articles would talk about what  I had on as well as what I was saying and they did not do that for male  candidates or incumbents. So I was noticed in terms of attire.  I also noticed some of the things that we have heard that if I were strong,  certainly if I were irritated, then I would be described in less flattering  terms. I would not be described as strong, committed, intelligent,  decisive. I would be described more as shrill or in terms that dealt more  with emotion. Those were clearly biased statements I believe and they  came from people   s lack of familiarity with women leaders. I also  approached     we had a race for Speaker of the House early in my  career and I was always very forthright, outspoken and probably also  13  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  na  ve, but I said to one of the candidates who asked for my support that I  was going to support the other candidate, that I truly believed the other  candidate would be more open to women   s leadership and treating  women with equality. And of course my candidate got eight votes and  the other candidate walked away with like ninety-three votes which  certainly did not put me in very good stead with the incoming Speaker  for the next couple of years. So in trying to make a change, in my  thinking I did not mind the other individual becoming Speaker, I wanted  to support him and would support him as Speaker, but I did not  anticipate a grudge being held because I had not been there for him.  I do think there is prejudice in the Legislature to this day from  individuals who think they are not biased against women and they truly  are. The women see that and they know it. It is very small and very  subtle but it is there and yet I do want to say those individuals, and the  reason I will not give any names is that they have no idea that they are  being prejudice against women, but that still exists. I think you can see a  different break with those males who are forty-five and older and those  who are younger who do not have that instilled in them to the same  degree today.  Do you have any advice you want to give women who may be  considering elected office?  I want them to run. I want them to take that risk. Number one you must  have your family behind you. You cannot do this job if you do not have  your family supporting you, so you need to check that out. They should  talk to other women who have been there    early    and get their advice.  They must be willing to ask for money. They must be confident and  capable of raising money. Other women can help mentor them and make  this much easier for them. We need more women. I want to recommend  that they take that leadership they have, that desire, that passion. Women  run because they have a philosophy, a goal, something they want to  accomplish. Men tend to run primarily     still     for the power, and the  recognition. Women run for the goals and they need to become more  comfortable about dealing with power but that is one of the things we  can help them with.  You have mentioned support networks several times. Can you talk a little  more about that and how it may have changed before, during, and after  office?  I think my support network is even stronger today because the people     I still have so many of those relationships whether they were elected  people or friends from Chocotah, from Tahlequah, from El Reno who  were just involved in my campaign whom I would put on my short list  14  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  of women friends that I go to when difficult things happen.  Four and a half years ago my husband was diagnosed with stage four  throat cancer and those women have been there for me through anything.  My support network is in some reasons broader than it was because we  are time tested now with each other through many things. When I was in  office, my support network almost did not exist because, again, there  were very few women and we were so busy working to do the best we  could that our support networks were really our families. That was our  support network during that time. During my campaign it was my  campaign workers and our families. So something women need to think  about very carefully is a few close, close colleagues because you need  them, you need them.  It sounds like you need time management skills.  Women are usually pretty good about that except that we always over  do. It is still true that a woman has to do one-hundred and twenty-five  percent of what is expected of a man and they still do not get recognition  or credit for it. So I think women are really pretty good at time  management skills. I think what women probably need is they need  permission to somewhere put themselves on that list of priorities  whether it is a bath, whether it is that drive for thirty minutes where you  turn off the cell phone. Whatever it is, women need to put themselves  somewhere on that priority list before they are so depleted that it costs  them in ways that they cannot recover.  You have alluded to the social life of the legislator, can you talk a little  more about that?  I was very lucky actually. I was only from Norman but for four years I  did rent a room in a house with six guys and I laughingly say the only  way my husband would have let me live in that part of Oklahoma City  was to have six roommates. And the only way the proprietor would have  rented to this group was if there had been a woman there to keep a lid on  things. These guys were great. I was always in by nine or ten o   clock at  night and I would hear them come in at all hours of the day or night. The  guys grouped together with guys and I could have gone but that was not  my choosing. We would have friends over to our place which we did  very regularly probably many more nights than we did not have them.  We would all be friendly and gather and that was fine. Then I could just  go to my room and read or get ready for the next day around nine or ten  o-clock at night and there was never a problem. I think one of the stories  I really treasure, when I really knew I was part of the boys, was when we  did go out one evening to a bar where the guys frequented (and if I did  go out with them we went to this particular bar), and we were sitting  15  Finchum  Boyd  there as a group of six. I remember having a diet coke and they were  having beer and suddenly the guys got up. They said they wanted to go     trolling   . So we had gone to this bar and I thought trolling was a fishing  term. My husband and I fish, so I thought trolling was a fishing term.  The guys got up to go pick up women to dance and I am going,    I   m  here,    and none of my housemates even asked me to dance and I  laughed and thought,    you know you are one of the guys   you are one  of the guys. They do not even see you as somebody they want to go out  and dance and they ought to ask to dance.    And I took that as a real  compliment and that is kind of the way it was. I think I was one of the  guys and at that point for those last three years in my career I did not  have to prove that I could either be one of the guys nor did I have to be a  woman to flirt to get along   to move into that culture so much. We  bridged that together and I think that was a real tribute to me and a real  tribute to the men I worked with and to the other ninety-seven, ninety-six,  ninety-two, whatever it is the math, men that were in that legislature  that I did somehow cross that gender barrier in ways that were good so  that I could work as a colleague without some of the limitations that had  been there.  Any other memorable moments?  I have one for women who aspire to run for office. I had a driver who  drove me into Tahlequah, Oklahoma about ten o   clock one night. We  had never stayed at this person   s house. I was tired and I came around  the corner and it looked like Christmas. The house had lights on it. It had  Boyd signs all over it and this African American woman in her sixties  came running out the door with a hat on that had    Laura Boyd    and she  had    Boyd    all over her and welcomed me into the house.  We walked up the very modest steps and she was there with her husband  and she showed me the house and she had two grandchildren who were  living with her for the summer from North Carolina. We went into this  little tiny living room, the dining room was connected behind that and  then there was a little kitchen and went into a large room in the back that  had been added on which was the master bedroom. The grandpa was  going to sleep in this great big area and king-sized bed with the two kids  that night.  When you first come into the door and turned immediately to the right  there was a front room with a couch that had been pulled out which was  the guest room of honor where I was going to sleep and I knew that  because it had a little tiny TV in there and the plastic was still on the  pad, the sleeping pad. There was a connecting bathroom and then there  were two bunks in this other room where my driver was going to sleep.  To this day, I do not know where the woman of the house slept that  16  Finchum  Boyd  Finchum  Boyd  night because I had the room of honor. And I had gotten into my room  and was getting ready to get ready for bed and she knocked on the door.  She said,    Laura, I have something for you,    and she gave me an  envelope. I said thank you very much and she went away and I opened  that envelope and there was a check for a thousand dollars. And I lay in  that bed, and this was early in my campaign and I listened to the rattling  of the plastic and I said,    God don   t ever let me get discouraged in this  campaign. Don   t ever let me forget this moment because if someone of  these modest means believes in me this much, I have nothing to fear. I  don   t have a right to ever get frustrated or to ever get discouraged. Just  let me remember this moment. Let me feel this crackling and listen to  this noise and remember this moment.     I have told that story to other candidates, but that also set the standard  for me for that one hundred thousand miles and for that campaign for  Governor. And I tell that story to women candidates because they need  to hear it and they need to know it. You want to win that election. You  want that fifty plus one percent of the vote, but if you do not get that,  you still win that election. There are ways to still win and they need to  know that.  When you think about your time in office are there any other memorable  events, work related?  I never walked into that chamber that I did not feel blessed to be there. It  is overwhelming. It is beautiful. You are aware that you are sent there by  people to do their work and there are so many privileges that come to  you in elected office. Things you get to do that others do not get to do. I  was in office when we had the bombing in Oklahoma City. President  Clinton came twice. I got to do many things that are very, very important  to me today, special. It is a privilege to serve. You can never take it for  granted. You should never take it for granted   some do. You should  never take it for granted that you are there to do the people   s work and  that you are blessed to have these special privileges and honors that you  get to have.  When history is written about you, what would you like for it to say?  I would like it to acknowledge me as someone who made a difference  for women in the way she lived her life as well as in the things she  fought for; who believed in women; who believed in children; who made  the world a better place and who truly was a leader. I would like to have  led with grace and with intelligence and just have that be a legacy. I  would like the women that I have mentored to know how much I love  them and that they have meant at least as much to me in my life as I  think they have let me know I mean to them.  17  Finchum  Boyd  Thank you very much. I hope your voice here today will be heard for  many, many years to come.  Thank you Tanya.  ------- -------  
