Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Today is January 21, 2009. My name is Tanya Finchum, I   m with the  Oklahoma State University Library and we   re conducting an oral  history project called Woman of the Oklahoma Legislature. Today I   m  with Ann Coody who is in the House of Representatives representing  District 64.  Yes.  She was elected in 2004 and continues to serve.  Yes.  Thank you for joining me today. Let   s start by having you tell us a little  bit about your childhood, where you were born, that type of thing.  All right. I was born in Shreveport, Louisiana. I lived there until I was  12 years old. My parents divorced when I was four and my mother  remarried when I was nine. When I was about 12, we moved from  Shreveport to San Antonio, Texas where my dad was stationed at  Randolph Air Force Base. We lived in a little town called New  Braunfels for a couple of years before we moved to the base. When we  moved to the base I was able to go to Alma Heights High School in San  Antonio. I graduated there and then attended Hardin-Simmons  University in Abilene, Texas and graduated from there with a Bachelor  of Arts degree in speech and drama and a minor in English, and earned a  secondary teaching certificate.  Before I went to college I met my husband, met him on a blind date.  Dale Coody from Oklahoma came down to San Antonio with a friend of  his who dated a friend of mine. We met and dated that summer and then  he decided he would go to Hardin-Simmons University, too, and so we  dated when I was a freshman. He had already had a year of school and  5  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  came there as a sophomore.  Did you get married while you were in college?  No. Actually I   ll have to tell you the story of how he decided to go to  Hardin-Simmons. He happened to ask me as we were visiting where I  was going to school and I told him Hardin-Simmons University. And I  said where are you going to school? He said,    Hardin-Simmons  University.    He had never heard of it before. But when I arrived on  campus he was waiting for me and helped my dad move me in. So we  dated all my freshman year. After my freshman year my father was  transferred to Tachikawa Air Force base in Japan. I wanted to stay there  at Hardin-Simmons because I loved it there. But my mother said that no  18-year old daughter of hers was going to stay in the United States while  she went to Japan. So I joined my mother and my dad and my little  sister, who was 11 years younger than I, and we went to Japan. My dad  was stationed at Tachikawa Air Force base which was about 30 miles  from Tokyo. We lived on Showa Air Base. We bought a home there. It  was a three bedroom home, and it cost  3,000. That was one of the most  wonderful years of my life. I certainly didn   t expect it to be, but it was a  wonderful experience and a wonderful influence on my life. It gave me  an insight that I   d never had before because I had rarely traveled outside  of the south and the southwest until that time. But I loved it there.  Then when you came back to the states, you went back to Hardin-  Simmons?  Yes I did. My dad was stationed there three years but we realized that  there really was no future for me as far as education was concerned. So I  returned to the United States and my folks stayed there two more years.  I think I cried all the way across the Pacific Ocean because I was so sad  that I was leaving my parents and my little sister and I knew that I would  not see them for two years. It was a very hard thing to do. But I knew  that I wanted to come back and get my degree at Hardin-Simmons, and  so I did, and enjoyed the remaining two years and a summer and then  graduated from Hardin-Simmons.  While I was a student at Hardin-Simmons I had the opportunity to serve  as a summer missionary in Hawaii. And part of the reason I was allowed  to go there was because of the experience I had had in Japan. So I was  selected to go and spend the summer there. I think I spent ten to twelve  weeks there. I stayed in Hilo and lived with a missionary, a life-long  missionary, and served in the Kinoole Baptist Church in Hilo, and it was  an experience that I   ll never forget. It was a wonderful experience.  And then what?  6  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Well, when I graduated from Hardin-Simmons I was already engaged to  be married to Dale Coody whom I had met four years before. So we  married in August. It took me a little longer to graduate. I had to go  through that summer to graduate because of my year in Japan. So we  actually married about two weeks before we graduated. My husband was  called as the music and educational director at First Baptist Church of  Seagraves, Texas. So we spent our first year there. I was named as a  teacher in Seagraves High School. I taught everything at Seagraves. I  taught English and speech and drama and I taught health. I was the  assistant coach of the volleyball team. Those girls could play volleyball  a lot better than I could. But it was fun, that first year of marriage and  that first year there in Seagraves.  Then he was called to a church in South Texas in Refugio, Texas the  next year. Our son, our first child, was born while we were at Refugio.  Refugio was about 40 miles from Corpus Christi, in South Texas. I  taught for one semester in a little town called Woodsboro near Refugio.  Then I was able to get a job in Refugio for a semester and taught there.  And our son was born there. Shortly after that Dale was called to Red  Fork Baptist Church in Tulsa. So we were excited about coming back to  his home. He was the music and educational director at Red Fork Baptist  Church, and I taught at nearby Berryhill. I taught English and speech  and was the junior high librarian and the senior high librarian there. So it  was a varied experience for me and I really enjoyed teaching there.  Incidentally, the Speaker of the House, Chris Benge, was just a little  baby in the nursery at the church when we were serving there. Little did  I know that some day that little baby would become the Speaker of the  House and I would be a representative in the House of Representatives   We enjoy reminiscing over that. He certainly doesn   t remember me, and  I don   t really remember him but I knew his family very well. So I feel  sure he was in the nursery when I was working in the nursery there at  Red Fork.  So you came back to Oklahoma in what year?  I came to Oklahoma, actually, in 1962. Incidentally, my daughter was  born on the way. She came a little early. She came about two weeks  early. We thought we could get established in Tulsa before she was  born, but I guess the trip just made her want to come. My husband had  brought me halfway between Refugio and Lawton where his parents  lived and then his parents picked me up there, brought me home. The  second night that I spent with them, I was going to wait for a few days  for him to come up so I wouldn   t have to make that long trip when I was  so close to having a baby. During the night, my little daughter Nina  made it quite evident that she was going to be born. So my mother-in-law  rushed me to the hospital, I never having seen the doctor who was to  7  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  deliver her. We got there about 5:00 in the morning and I think she was  born about 6:30. So she came very fast. She was born in Lawton.  So she   s a native Oklahoman.  Yes, she is a native Oklahoman. She is. She certainly is.  And have you lived here since?  Well, for most of the time. My husband was called to Trinity Baptist  Church in Lawton in 1963 when our children   Jeff was three and Nina  was about a year and a half   and so we went to Trinity Baptist Church  in Lawton. That was in 1963 and we have lived there most of the time  since that time.  40 years.  Yes.  And you taught school there?  Yes, I did. I was employed at Tomlinson Junior High to teach seventh  grade English. In fact I went there to substitute for a teacher who was  very ill. I taught as a substitute for three days when the principal asked  me to stay because the teacher was not going to be able to come back.  She was too ill to come back. I taught at Tomlinson for one year, and  then I decided that I wanted to stay home with my children. So I quit my  job and decided to stay home with my children, and then I discovered  that I really wanted to continue teaching. So I was employed at Central  Junior High teaching ninth grade English and speech and taught there for  two years. At the end of that time, my husband was invited to go to  Honolulu for a revival, for several revivals. We just decided we would  take the children over there with us. Our son was in the first grade and  his teacher Ms. Bernice Wilson said,    This child does not need to go to  Hawaii for three weeks. But since you   re going to go, I want to give you  all of his lessons to do while he   s over there.    So she gave him his  lessons and he would do his lessons over there, and then we   d send them  back into her at the end of each week.  We did those revivals and then the pastor of the church asked Dale to  stay there as the music and educational director for the rest of the year  and help them with their choir and with their educational program and  with their Sunday school program. So we stayed there, and his mother     my mother-in-law   had to send us all of our clothing because I had only  taken enough clothes for three weeks for all of us. So she just packed up  all of our clothes, bless her heart, and sent them to us. Rented our house,  8  Finchum  Coody  furnished, while we were there and sent us some things to wear.  Incidentally, when we first arrived in Honolulu I had no idea   it was in  November, and I had no idea it would be warm in November. I went in a  wool suit and was just all ready to spend those three weeks in winter  clothing. Now, I had been to Hawaii before but it was in the  summertime. So there was no question about the clothing. When I  discovered I was there with no clothes to wear for the revival, I had to  go to the store and buy some clothes for all of us to wear that would not  burn us up during those revivals.  So anyway, we remained there for all of that year and he helped them  with their music and educational program. Then that next summer   and  Jeff attended school there, I might add. He attended first grade at a  Baptist school and got a very good education there so he could quit  doing Ms. Wilson   s work. She was satisfied to send all of his work to  him for the whole year but we finally relieved her of that responsibility  because he was able, of course, to enroll in a school there.  We came back to the mainland after that wonderful year in Hawaii; it  was a wonderful experience. We met some great people and just really  loved serving the Lord over there. But we came back and I was  employed again at Tomlinson, this time with ninth grade English. Our  children would ride into school   we lived in the country. We had  bought an old house   some land out in the country that had an old house  on it. We remodeled it and every day I would drive into Lawton and my  children would come with me. Jeff would go to school; he went to  Garfield school. Nina was in kindergarten at first. And then when she  started school, she started at Garfield. They would go with me to  Tomlinson and the principal put me into a portable building so my  children could stay out there in that building with me. Then they would  walk a block over to their school, Garfield, and then walk back and stay  with me until it was time for us to go.  At that time, my husband was in full-time evangelistic music. He would  go to revivals and then we   d drive to wherever he was on the weekends.  We   d sing together, and stay there for the weekend, and then we   d come  back and we   d go to school during the week. Then on weekends he  would pick us up and take us with him or we would drive out there. So  we had an adventurous life. And a very busy life  Teaching and going to  school all week and then singing in revivals on the weekends.  You got to see some of the countryside?  Oh, we did. It was fun and worthwhile. Our children grew up learning to  meet people and never knew a stranger because of that. I taught there at  9  Finchum  Coody  Tomlinson for seven years. During that time, I went to OU  University  of Oklahoma  and got my master   s degree in guidance and counseling. I  enjoyed it so much that after I did that, after I got my degree and  certification in guidance counseling, I decided I wanted to do some  psychology. So I continued going to OU and worked on a certificate for  a psychologist. During that time, I had an opportunity to interview for a  job as counselor at MacArthur High School. So I was hired for that job. I  began a 26-year experience at MacArthur High School. That became my  new home, educationally, and I really, really loved doing that.  Almost 35 years teaching     Well actually my career in education was 39 years. Yes. I spent 12 years  as a teacher and then I spent nine years as a counselor. During that time I  was counseling, I went back to OU and earned a certificate in secondary  administration, I earned my principal   s certificate. So after nine years as  a counselor at MacArthur I was hired as Assistant Principal in charge of  discipline. I was the first women in Lawton to serve as Assistant  Principal strictly in charge of discipline. There had been another woman,  or two, who served as Assistant Principal, but their duties were some  discipline and some instruction and some other things, but my total job  was discipline.  I served there at MacArthur as the Assistant Principal in charge of  discipline for six years. Then I became   you know, that   s pretty  stressful, to be an assistant principal in charge of discipline. So then I  became the assistant principal in charge of curriculum and instruction. I  stayed there two more years, and then the superintendent decided to  move me to Lawton High School as the assistant principal in charge of  instruction and curriculum. So I went there for one year. And then after  that year, I was hired as the principal at MacArthur High School. I  stayed there for nine years serving as the principal there.  You know I loved all of my jobs. I loved being a teacher and I miss  being in the classroom to this day. And I loved being a counselor. Now  being the assistant principal in charge of discipline was very stressful,  but I loved that too, because I tried to help young people who had  problems and who had disciplinary problems. We were able to establish  a very firm disciplinary policy in that school. That was a privilege to be  able to do that. Also we helped to establish in the district an alternative  school, which was the first time we   d had that in our district, for children  who were not able to function in the school without some help, some  disciplinary help. So we started that. The Student Adjustment Center we  called it, or SAC.  I retired in 2000 as principal after 39 years in education. Not because I  10  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  wanted to leave, I really didn   t. I really loved it. I was not burned out. I  was just totally satisfied with it. But I felt like the Lord had something  else he wanted me to do in education, and I felt like I probably needed to  retire while I was still young enough to do it. I didn   t know what it was,  but I did retire in 2000. I enjoyed retirement for a couple of years when I  just felt that I wanted to run for the House of Representatives.  Just out of the blue?  Well, no, it was not really just out of the blue. I   m a Christian and I have  always tried to do what the Lord wanted me to do. I felt that I was called  to be a teacher and a counselor and a principal. And I felt that the Lord  was calling me to run for office. I didn   t know if I would win or not, but  I knew He would take care of that. So I did run in 2002 for the House of  Representatives and I lost, which was okay because I just left it up to the  Lord to tell me what I should do. So I was perfectly happy to continue in  retirement.  But after the end of those two years, I still felt as though he were leading  me to run. The interesting thing is that I ran as a democrat the first time  around and lost. I   d been a democrat for 45 years. I   d always been a  democrat. When my husband and I registered, we registered as  democrats. We never thought of anything else. Our parents were  democrats, our grandparents were, and, you know, everyone was a  democrat. But during those years I realized that my beliefs   which  didn   t change   were not the same as certainly the national platform, of  the democratic party. In fact, my children registered as republicans when  they were old enough to register, and they always told me that I was a  republican. I said,    No, I   m not a republican, I   m a democrat. I   m an  educator and you can   t be an educator as a republican.    Well after I  became a republican I found out that there were a lot of educators who  were republicans. I just didn   t know it because I thought everybody was  a democrat. I felt that I should become a republican before I decided to  run again. I knew that I had to make a change because I had realized in  running before as a democrat that my philosophy was not that of what I  felt was a change in the democrat party. So I became a republican. Then  after that I decided to run for office again in my new role as a  republican. So in 2004 I ran for office, and this time I was elected.  Did you use different campaign strategies between the elections?  Yes. When I first ran I pretty well did it myself along with a lot of  people who helped me, a lot of dear educator friends, and a dear man  who was the father of some of my students at MacArthur who sort of  guided me in running for office. We just did it   you know, we just  knocked on doors and visited with people. When I decided to run as a  11  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  republican I consulted a consultant, a professional consultant, who had  helped other people. His methods were, I think, a lot wiser than the  methods that I, the novice, had used. So he really helped me a lot. And  again, I had so much help from friends who really helped me a lot.  But the main thing I did was to just knock on doors and tell people how I  felt. My district is only 29 percent republican. But most of the democrats  in that district are conservative democrats, just as I had been. And when  I would knock on their door and tell them my story and what I felt and  what I believed politically, most of them said,    That   s just the way I  feel.    So we really weren   t that different, the conservative democrat and  the brand new republican.  Did you have opponents?  Yes, I had an opponent.  I assume you did the first time.  Yes I did, I had an opponent.  Was it an open seat?  It was an open seat at that time. The first time I ran against a 10-year  incumbent. And this time it was an open seat because he was term-limited.  I ran against a very experienced politician; he had been a senator  and a representative for, I believe, about 20 years. He had been out for a  while, but there was no doubt in the mind of anybody in town that he  would win. He was very heartily supported by the people in my district.  But I didn   t know any better than just to get out and knock on doors.  Again, I felt it was what the Lord wanted me to do, so he would decide  whether I was going to win or not. And incidentally, this gentleman was  a very fine man, very fine man. I have never had a race   I have run in  three campaigns   I have never had an opponent who ever treated me  ugly. We just didn   t have campaigns like that. They were always very,  very nice. They were all nice people and I just never had anything like  that. I was so grateful for that because I don   t like things like that.  Let   s talk a little about election night.  All right. Well even though I knew that the Lord would determine  whether I won or not, and I was perfectly satisfied at that, I felt that  since he was so heartedly supported by most of the leaders in my district  that he would probably win, and when the returns started coming in, he  would be ahead of me in most of them. But you know, the interesting  thing is, when they announced my precinct, which is the largest precinct  12  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  in my district, and it was a precinct that contained my high school where  I had been principal, and the housing areas where my students lived and  their parents lived, it was an overwhelming victory in that district. Then  in the other districts, he won most of the others by just a few. But  because of that support from those parents and grandparents and some  students who had become adults during that time, I won.  I barely beat him, it was very close. I just couldn   t believe it. Of course,  there were TV cameras there watching the returns and they were there  when it was announced that I was the winner. They said,    Well how do  you feel?    And I said    Well, I guess I won     or    I think I won     or  something like that. Because I was very surprised, and very thrilled, and  very honored that I would be selected to be a member of the House of  Representatives. It was such a thrill and such an honor. It was  overwhelming, just overwhelming. It was very scary because, of course,  I had never been involved in politics of any kind and here I was. But I  knew in my heart that God had selected me to do that. So I knew that he  would see me through it.  Now it was very interesting, that the very thing that I thought was really  a sacrifice in a way, because keep in my mind I really liked retirement. It  was really fun. And at that time I had a little grandchild and I loved  being with her. So I really felt it was a sacrifice that I was happy to make  because the Lord led me to do it, but the very first time to come to the  Capitol and meet the wonderful people who served here, I just couldn   t  believe it. I knew I was going to love it, because the people were so  wonderful  And I found out that they were here for the same reason,  most of them were here for the same reason I was, because they felt that  God had led them to do this. That was so confirming to me that it was  the right thing to do. I just thank God for the opportunity to serve  because I knew that I would have his leadership and I would join with  others who were like-minded and that our purpose would be the same.  So when you walked in the Capitol for the first time     It was so exciting  I could not believe   and I   ve heard so many other  people say this too   I can   t believe I   m going to get to work here. I  never drive to the Capitol to this day that I don   t look at it and think,    I  can   t believe that I have the opportunity to work in that beautiful  building.     It is very pretty, coming down Lincoln.  It   s such a wonderful, wonderful experience.  Well do you want to talk a little bit about swearing in day?  13  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Well, that was a momentous occasion. In 2004, republicans took the  majority. It was our first time to be in the majority. All of my colleagues  had served in the minority, had never known anything but the minority.  Republicans had only had the majority for two years back in the    20   s.  So they just didn   t know how to act. It was such a wonderful experience  to be there and to realize that we were going to be in the majority. So we  took our places on the House floor and as I repeated the oath of office  there were tears in my eyes and in my heart because I was so touched.  And so thrilled and excited at the awesome responsibility of serving the  people of Oklahoma and the people of my district.  Who was in the gallery for you?  Well my family. My entire family was there. We had our picture made.  We also had   there was a young man who had graduated from  MacArthur who helped me a lot in the campaign, of course with many  others. And there were many others in the gallery as well who came to  see me sworn in. But in the picture we had made following the swearing  in ceremony were my family, my son and his wife and their little girl  Addie, and my daughter Nina, and my husband and I, and then Josh, my  wonderful student friend, and then Don Armes because he came two  years before I did and he also graduated from MacArthur. So he was  also, then and now, very special to me. I had been his counselor in high  school. We have often joked about the fact that I was his counselor years  ago but now he was my counselor and my mentor because he arrived  two years before I did.  Were you the first women to win your seat?  Oh yes. Yes. I was the first republican to hold my seat and one of the  first women in that area. Certainly the first woman to hold that seat. So  that was a great experience.  Other than Armes did you have anyone else that you used as a role  model?  Oh, yes. Oh, many. There were many. Our Speaker, Todd Hyatt, was a  great inspiration to me. Chris Steele, he   s now our Speaker Pro  Tempore, he was a great inspiration to me. He mentored me when I first  wrote my bills. I went to him for advice, and he would tell me if a bill  was just a little too far out. If I was asking for a little too much, he would  tell me I needed to tone it down a bit, so I did. He was a wonderful guy.  Lance Cargill was a good friend. And there were many others who just  inspired me a great deal. Pam Peterson, Sue Tibbs and Susan Winchester  and Odilia Dank and there were just so many women who were  inspirational to me.  14  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  There were five of us, maybe, who were freshman together, who were  women. Sally Kern, Lee Denney, Marian Cooksey, Lisa Billy, and I  were all new legislators. So we became good friends and stuck together  with the women who were already here. And that was such a pleasure.  We all had similar philosophies of life though we all five came from  different backgrounds. We   ve been good friends, we   re all still here. All  of the new ones are still here. So I   ve enjoyed serving with them. Susan  Winchester has left, of course she was Speaker Pro Tempore. Odilia  Dank term-limited out. But these women were a great influence on me  and still are. Still are very good friends.  Do you see some of them outside of the office?  Oh yes, I do. Yes, I do.  Did you notice any gender differences when you came in 2004?  I don   t remember exactly how many we had that year, but there weren   t  very many of us. We have one of the smallest percentages of women in  the United States. So there weren   t very many of us. Yes, certainly.  Certainly. It hasn   t been perhaps as much of a battle for me because I  found support in the men that I served with, and also because I had been  a principal in a man   s world, and had to do some jobs that normally men  did in my district. But yes, there are some gender differences.  I remember the very first bill that I presented on the House floor, a dear  friend from the other side of the aisle gave me a hard time. They always  give the freshmen a hard time with their first bills. It was always a lot of  fun, but I was serious, so I didn   t think it was very funny. I did get the  bill passed finally after taking his concern to heart and changing the bill  a little bit, I got it passed into law   that very first one I presented. And  incidentally I did get four out of the eight bills that I introduced   they  were passed into law.  Your first session?  Yes. That was a big thrill to get four out of eight, so that was exciting.  Do you want to talk a little bit about what they were?  Well yes, if I can remember what they were. The very first one I  presented was at the request of a judge in Lawton. He had asked that  CLEET certified bailiffs in the courtroom be allowed to wear a gun. So  if there was ever a problem   this was a time, while where we hadn   t  really had a serious problem in Lawton, all over the United States you  were reading about problems in the courtroom. Sometimes a lawyer  15  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  might be killed or a judge might be killed or injured in some way  because of a criminal with a weapon of some kind. He felt that a bailiff  that was CLEET certified and licensed and authorized to carry a gun,  that that could be helpful in a situation like that. So we got that passed.  Then the Senate passed it and the governor signed it. So that was a big  thrill, and I think a very important bill and very helpful to our  courtrooms and our judges and our attorneys and our citizens that are in  the courtroom. Another one was a bill that encouraged schools, it didn   t  require it, but encouraged schools to teach character education. That   s  very important to me that our children develop good character. Honesty  and integrity and dependability and responsibility, industry, hard work.  So it was just a bill that would encourage young people to develop  character.  And it passed?  Oh yes, it passed into law. Another one was a bill that Susan Winchester  asked me to carry for her. It was to decrease the amount of paper work  that teachers had to do in schools so they could spend more time  teaching and less time doing paperwork. Of course this would be the  encouragement of electronic reporting and things like that. It passed.  Let   s see, there was one other one. I can   t remember what it was.  That   s a pretty good percentage for your first semester and first session  out.  It may have been the most important one, but right not I can   t think of  what it was. But it was exciting to get four passed. Oh, I remember it  was a very important one  Because I grew up in a military family, the  military are very important to me. And military families are very  important to me, and we are a military town. Fort Sill is located at  Lawton and we have many military people, and we have many retirees.  No one asked me to carry this bill, no military person asked me to do  this. But I just felt that we ought to do everything we could to help our  veterans and our military retirees to be encouraged financially. And also  I felt that it would bring more military people to Oklahoma to retire. So I  asked that military retirees not have to pay any income tax on their  military retirement pay. I learned that it probably would not pass nor  would the governor sign it if it was a 100   exemption. So I was told I  would need to reduce it to 50  . So reluctantly I reduced it to 50   because I wanted to at least give them some help. And sure enough, it  did pass and it was signed by the governor that the military retirees  would not have to pay income tax in Oklahoma on 50   of their  retirement income.  Have you noticed as a result of that more people come in?  16  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Yes  Yes it has. I have been told that because of that more people are  coming to Oklahoma. Then I believe it was the next year, perhaps, that I  ran a 75   exemption and that passed into law. So currently the law  states that 75   of military retirees don   t have to pay income taxes in  Oklahoma. And yes, it has resulted in more retirees coming here.  Are you going to try for 100  ?  Well, yes I did. I believe last year I did. Didn   t get it. It passed through  the House probably unanimously. But I was not able to get it passed  there. So I had the bill again this year. But I had so many bills that I  asked a friend who also has military people in his district, he   s a new  legislator, I asked him to carry that bill and he said he   d be glad to. So I  will be supporting him heartedly as he carries that bill.  Have you had any major disappointments?  Well it   s always a disappointment when a bill doesn   t pass. You know,  because if I run a bill it   s because I really believe in it and I really work  hard to get it passed. So that   s a disappointment. It   s also a  disappointment to me when a bill someone else runs that I think is very  important, and often that is a bill regarding family values and things of  importance to our families and the people of Oklahoma, and that   s  always a disappointment when it does not pass. So I would say that  those would be the major disappointments that I have had.  What   s on your agenda for this year?  Well this year I   m going to be running a health education bill. The  Oklahoma Institute of Child Advocacy has asked me to run a bill that  would require health education somewhere in grades 6-8, one semester  of health education. That would include things like diet and exercise and  nutrition, to help children learn how to take care of themselves  physically. You know one-third of our children are overweight in  Oklahoma. That   s just a horrible thought because they will grow up with  those same practices and habits that they have learned as children. If  they can learn early in life what they need to do to take care of  themselves, I think that will be extremely important and carry over into  their adult lives as well. That   s one of the bills.  Another is a bill that would help the mentally ill to get treatment that  would be long-term treatment rather than just three days, which is not  long enough if someone is mentally ill before they commit a crime. That  is one that has been asked of me by a parent of a mentally ill son and  also by some workers in the mental health field. I would like to share  with you some bills that I have run in the past that were important to me.  17  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Sure.  One was the Interstate Compact for Military Children that passed last  year. This is an interstate compact that we signed onto   we were the  sixth state to sign on   that would enable children moving from state to  state to have a little easier time in transferring their credits, getting their  inoculations, and not having to repeat some courses they   ve already  taken or repeat inoculations. Just things that would make it easier for  them when moving from state to state. It required ten states to sign it and  11 states have signed it so it has been enacted now. That was a big thrill  to get that done.  Another one that passed the year before was the Personal Financial  Literacy Act, the    Passport to Financial Literacy.    That was requiring a  course somewhere between the 7th grade and the 12th grade that could  either be a full semester course or it could be inserted into other courses  on personal financial literacy, such as how to write a check, how to  balance a checkbook, what is bankruptcy, what are the dangers of  gambling, credit card debt. This one passed into law and is now being  taught in our schools, grade 7 to 12. That was a thrill because we   re one  of the highest states in bankruptcy. Credit card debt is at an unbelievable  high and is ruining lives, and so our children are learning how to be  financially responsible. So those are some bills that have passed that I   m  really thrilled about.  Education oriented ones, primarily?  You know, naturally that having been my life, my mind runs toward  education.  I   m assuming you   re on the Education Committee?  Well actually, I   m so thrilled that   I have always been a member of the  Education committees   last year I was privileged to serve as chairman  of the Common Education Subcommittee. This year we did away with  subcommittees and I am chairman of the Common Education  Committee. That has been my dream and I am just thrilled to death to be  chairman of that committee.  You could do that for six more years, huh?  That would be fine   Describe a typical day here in session.  Oh my. I   m sure people do not realize how busy we are and how much  18  Finchum  Coody  work goes into being a representative. The big joke around here is about  our part-time job. It   s definitely not a part-time job. We work on it all  year long. We   re doing things in our districts, speaking and trying to  help constituents with concerns that they have. All year long we do that.  And that is a privilege for me to be able to serve in that way, and to be  able to speak at meetings and to be able to speak in schools. Tomorrow  I   m going to get to talk to one of my former counselee   s classes. She   s  now a teacher, and I   m going to speak to one of her classes on how we  use debate in the House of Representatives. She   s teaching speech and  she   s teaching a unit on debate, so we   re going to try and show them the  practical aspects of debate. I   m excited about that. I love to do that.  But you asked about during session   of course we have to file our bills  before session even begins. But during the time that we are presenting  those bills, introducing them, we may have to rewrite it several times  because we like to have input. I like to have people together that are  affected by bills and let them tell me what is wrong with the bill, what  we need to do to change it to make it a good bill. So I often rewrite a bill  several times. First there would be a committee sub   we call it a  committee substitute. And then there might be a floor substitute. We  have to re-write bills because we want them to be just right. So we   re  working on that all the time. When we introduce a bill, it first has to be  heard in committee. And then if it passes in committee, if the floor  leader decides to hear it, then it will be heard on the House floor.  Then if it passes there, then it has to go through the Senate and the same  thing has to happen there. So you have to get a good co-author from the  Senate who will then introduce it in the Senate committee and then on  the Senate floor and then if there are any changes, the bill may have to  go to conference. So you have to get consensus among senators and  representatives in conference. And then if it finally passes from both  chambers, then it has to go to the governor and he has to decide if he   s  going to sign it or not. If it   s vetoed, then it   s dead unless you can get a  veto override. If he signs it, then it becomes a law. And that is a great  privilege. But it has to go through all of that before it can become a law.  Did you know that before you started?  Yes, I knew that, but I didn   t know how involved it would be. I had no  idea. I read every bill; you don   t have to read the whole thing, but you  do have to read the part that is the change. Sometimes you have to read  the whole bill if it is affected in some way by that. So we are constantly  reading bills and if you   re a chairman of a committee then you have to  decide what bills you are going to hear and what bills you are not going  to hear. Because in the case of the Education Committee, I believe last  year I had 64 bills. Well you can   t hear 64 bills in just three meetings.  19  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  If one is a committee chairman then he has to decide what bills he is  going to hear. If you have a committee as I do, the Education Committee  has so many bills that you can   t possibly hear them all. So that means  that you have to go through and read all those bills carefully and decide  which ones to hear because physically you can   t hear them all. So that   s  very difficult.  Feelings are hurt if a bill is not heard because a legislator works very  hard to get a bill heard. Then if a bill isn   t even heard, that   s very  painful. But I have learned that you have to surely employ three  important efforts. You have to have patience, persistence, and  perseverance. If you   re going to get a bill passed, you have to do all  three of those things. You don   t always get it passed the first session.  Sometimes you have to try many, many times and I   ve experienced that.  I still have some I   m working on as a matter of fact.  Does your assistant help you do some of the research?  Oh, my assistant is wonderful. She   s just been grand. I   ve had two  assistants since I   ve been here, they   ve both been wonderful. My present  assistant just does a wonderful job. Another thing she does is to help  constituents with problems. She does the research on that and directs  them. For instance, if a person is concerned about a problem which is  really a federal problem then she will direct them to the correct federal  legislator to receive help. She is a great help to me.  Also our staff is just wonderful. We have staff attorneys, staff research  people, staff writers that write our bills in the correct legislative  language and they   re so experienced and so knowledgeable about the  legalese and the correct way to write a bill in order for it to do what you  want it to do. So there are so many people to be thankful for. And of  course fellow legislators are so helpful. We try to help each other all we  can. Fellow legislators have been very helpful. Our leadership, our  Speaker, our Speaker Pro Tempore, the floor leader, the Whips are all  just a wonderful help to me. I   m so appreciative of that.  Do you have an opinion on term limits?  Yes, I like term limits. And of course I can say that as a fairly new  legislator. I probably would never have been able to be a legislator if it  hadn   t been for term limits because I won in an open seat. It   s very  difficult to beat a lifelong legislator. Another thing is, I believe in citizen  legislators. I believe when you have someone who   s not been a lifelong  legislator, who   s had experience in the real world, I believe he brings a  more valid approach to legislation. He knows what it   s like to live and  work in the real world. We have teachers, we have attorneys, we have  20  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  business people. We have veterinarians; we have doctors who are  legislators. And they know what the real world is like. I think that brings  an entirely new point of view to legislation.  If a woman comes up to you and asks your advice on whether or not she  should run, what would you tell her?  Well only she can make that decision. But I would say unless you really  feel that this is what you are willing to dedicate your life to, then you  don   t want to do it. A lot of people think that it   s just a romantic,  exciting thing. But it   s not that at all. It is exciting. It is very exciting,  and it is a wonderful privilege to be here. But it is a lot of work. You  give up your private life; you give up time at home with your husband  and you children and your grandchildren. If you   re retired, you give up  your retired life because it   s not a part-time job, it   s a full time job. So  you need to be dedicated to do it. You need to be sure that your spouse  fully supports what you want to do. And my husband   I never would  have run had it not been for my husband. He wanted me to do this, and  he fully supported me. He was my sign man. He put all the signs out.  He   s knocked on doors for me. He has driven me around to all the  houses to knock on the doors. He drives me up here every week and  picks me up so that we can have more time together. So it has to be a  family affair.  So you live here in town during session?  I do. I have a room here in town where several of us legislators stay.  Hotel or an apartment?  It   s a hotel. Actually, it   s the Character First training institute. This is an  organization that trains people from all over the United States in the  building of character. They do educational seminars and they have the  old Holiday Inn downtown that they have converted to their institute,  and they have allowed legislators to stay there. And I love it. The people  are just wonderful. They   re just very kind and good people. I feel very  safe there and really enjoy staying there. I   ve stayed there the whole  time.  Roomies   or not roomies but hall mates?  Yes, hall mates, right. I have a room by myself because my husband  comes up and stays with me. But I enjoy people who stay up there  because they are fellow legislators and we enjoy each other   s company.  What do you usually do for meals?  21  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Well, of course when we   re in session, I have a   now I bring up to my  room, because there   s no TVs there. It   s strictly a business place. The  people who come there for the seminars don   t have time to watch TV,  and I don   t have time to watch it much either. But I do have a little TV  and I have a little microwave and a little refrigerator. So my breakfast is  usually a very simple little meal in the morning. At noon I eat here in the  Capitol. And then in the evening I either go out with other legislators or  stop at a cafeteria or something and have my meal. Occasionally I have a  little snack meal at night. But I just usually don   t get home until very  late at night. Our days start early in the morning and end late at night. So  I   m not in that room very much.  So if you live that close, what time do you usually get here to the  Capitol?  Well it depends on what   s going on. It depends on what time a  committee meeting is, what time session starts. In the past, well it   s been  different things different years and different sessions, but as I recall, I  believe last year, we would have an afternoon session on Monday and  Wednesday and a morning session on Tuesday and Thursday. So that  leaves room for committee meetings on the mornings where you   re not  having session and committee meetings in the afternoon when you   re  not having session. Of course when we get real busy towards the end of  the first cycle and towards the end of the session, we   re meeting all day  and sometimes into the night. So it just depends on what is going on. But  even if I   m not in a committee meeting or not in session at a particular  time, there   s so much I have to work on as far as bills are concerned.  You have to read, read, read.  Read, read, read, that   s exactly right. And I do most of that reading in  my room at night usually, unless I   ve had time to read it in my office.  Usually we   re just so busy that our reading has to be done in private.  Do you have many constituents that come to visit here?  Yes, we do have them from time to time, and that   s always wonderful to  me. We have a lot of children who come up with their classes, and that   s  a lot of fun. It   s fun to introduce classes and organizations that come up.  So yes, I have quite a few constituents who come up. That   s always fun.  We have our picture made together, and we visit. There are a lot of  student groups and teacher groups, and veterans come up too. There are  just a lot of visitors. It   s fun. It   s fun to watch them observe the  legislative process. I had visited not very many times before I became a  representative.  22  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  But you had been?  Well I had been a few times, yes. Both to observe the legislative process,  and then one time as principal I got to come with a group of singers who  were invited to sing before the Senate. That was a big thrill to watch  them do that.  It   s a juggling act it sounds like.  It is a juggling act, that   s right. That   s right. But I love it so much. I  enjoy it so much and I believe in it so much that even though it   s a lot of  work and it   s intense and there   s a lot of pressure, I just love doing it. I  really enjoy serving. I really enjoy people sharing with me concerns that  I can help them with. I love it when someone shares with me an idea for  legislation that can make life better. Most of my bills are request bills  from people in my district or somewhere else in Oklahoma that see  something that could happen that could make life better for Oklahomans.  That   s what it   s all about. I love to do that.  Is there anything that I haven   t asked that you want to be sure and  cover?  I encourage young people to consider this, and one way that they can  become more involved in the legislative process is to become a Page.  Each one of us is allowed to have four Pages during the session. I  normally have a waiting list of people who want to come up. And I find  that out of those who come up and serve as Pages   and they are a big  help to us. They run errands for us, and they bring us bills on the floor,  they have their own mock legislative session during the week. I have  found that about one out of two decides that he or she would like to be a  legislator someday. Now whether or not they carry that out is one thing.  But just the fact that they have enjoyed it enough that they think that  might be something that they   d want to do is very exciting to me.  They appreciate the process.  Yes, that   s right.  How do you pick which ones to come if you have a waiting list?  It   s usually just first come first served. It   s just first come first serve,  because I feel like whoever got on board first. They just love it.  They stay a week?  They stay four days. Our sessions are from the first Monday in February  23  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  to the last Friday in May. Unless we get through before then. Now last  year we were able to short it a week, so we finished before the last  Friday in May. Sometimes we have had to have a special session in June  and go on because we didn   t get through. But we have our sessions then  Monday through Thursday, so they   re here for four days.  Just at one time? One full week session     Yes they just come one time. Occasionally there might be somebody  who comes twice for some reason. But there are just so many young  people who want to do it that you really can only afford one week. And  they can   t really afford to be out of school more than that.  So do your children aspire to political office?  Well my daughter does not. She incidentally is an assistant principal in  charge of discipline. Isn   t that something? When I retired, she became a  teacher. She was in business before then. She became a teacher and now  she   s an assistant principal in charge of discipline. But no, I don   t think  she has any aspiration.  But neither did you.  Neither did I. Neither did I until after I retired. My son is very busy  making a living for his family, his wife and two little girls. But he is on  the school board. In fact he   s running again for school board. So he  enjoys doing things like that. He serves on different boards in his small  town.  Civic minded.  He is very civic minded, yes. And you know, I don   t know what the  future holds. But it is difficult. You have to have a special kind of job  that would enable you to keep that job and be a legislator as well.  Certain jobs, you just can   t do it. In his job, he needs to be in that job  every day. He can   t afford to be a legislator for part of the year and then  do his job. But some people have jobs that they can handle.  Like insurance or real estate?  Well my son is an insurance agent, but he couldn   t do that and this too.  But you never know. I didn   t do it until I was retired. It   s perfect for a  retiree. And frankly, we have several people who are retired. We also  have some young women who have some small children at home.  That   s difficult.  24  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  And we have young men who have young children at home. That is a  real sacrifice for their families, for them to leave their families to come  up here. It   s very difficult. And I think that most people don   t realize  what a sacrifice they make to be here in order to serve. Because it really  is   it   s a servant   s job. You can   t do it unless you   re willing to be a  servant. But it   s a joy to be a servant.  Do you want to make any comment about yesterday   s ceremonies at the  U.S. Capitol?  Referring to the presidential inauguration   Well, it   s a very exciting thing. Our new president and I are not of the  same political party and our philosophies about life are quite different.  But I do feel like history was made, and I am thrilled for those who were  able to take part in that ceremony. Seeing the tears in their eyes and their  thrill at this momentous occasion is very thrilling for them. I pray for our  president. I   ve always prayed for our presidents and I will continue to  pray for this man, that God will guide him to make the right decisions,  the God-given decisions, to do the right thing for our country.  We are at a turning point in the life of our country. America is a  Christian nation and I believe when I vote for legislation, I want to be  sure that it is always a policy, a law, that God would be pleased with.  There are things that are going on in our nation today that God is not  pleased with. I   m confident of that because when I read the Bible I see  that he is not pleased with them. So I pray that our new President will  seek the leadership of the Lord and make his decisions based on what  God would want and what the Bible teaches rather than what man  believes is the current thing that ought to be. Rather than the easy thing  and the popular thing. We   ve strayed a long way from what our  founding fathers believed. You know most of our founding fathers were  Christian and our country was founded on the Judeo-Christian  foundation and I long to see us return to that. And I pray that for our new  president.  I have one question left, unless there   s something you want to say before  I ask you?  Well it   s a privilege to have the opportunity to do this. I thank you for  doing this. This is exciting to be able to go online and see this wonderful  collection of these women from all over our state   from history who  have served and are serving and will serve. I   m just so honored to be a  part of that. Thank you for letting me do this.  You   re quite welcome. So my last question is when history   s written  about you, what would you like it to say?  25  Coody  Finchum  Coody  Finchum  I would like it to say that I did my best to serve the Lord and make  decisions based upon his guidance and leadership.  So far, so good, right?  I hope so, I hope so. Thank you.  Thank you very much for your time.  ---  ---  
