 Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program. Today is August 29, 2018, and I’m here with Dr. Nanette Gartrell, noted psychiatrist and Stanford alumna. We’re conducting this interview at Dr. Gartrell’s home in San Francisco as part of the Stanford Pioneering Women Alumnae Oral History project. Doctor, I was hoping we could start by just having you restate your name and tell us when and where you were born. Gartrell: [00:00:30] Nanette Gartrell. I was born June 28, 1949, in Santa Barbara, California. Marine-Street: You did a recent interview with the Stanford Pride Oral History project where you covered a lot of things about your early life, but I had a couple of questions that I wanted to ask as an addendum to that interview. The first was could you tell me what Santa Barbara was like in terms of any kind of lesbian or gay population and what was your awareness of this identity when you were a child? 15 Gartrell: [00:01:08] I was unaware of any lesbian or gay population. I grew up in the 1950s and only heard passing references to people being “queer” or “homos.” I had a very homophobic uncle who lived in San Francisco and once when we came up to visit for one of the holidays, he piled us all in the car and then he drove us around the Castro and Polk Street and pointed out “the homos” and “the queers” in a very disparaging way. That was my introduction to what I already knew that I was from the time that I was three years old. Marine-Street: About when was this that he drove you around the Castro? Do you have any sense about how old you were? Gartrell: [00:01:59] I was probably eight or nine years old. Marine-Street: That’s interesting to me that you said since the age of three, you sort of had an awareness. Could you tell me a little bit more about that or give me some examples? Gartrell: [00:02:10] It just became clear to me that my attractions were to females not to males. I really had no interest in physical closeness to males. I didn’t have an interest in having a boyfriend or even male friends. Later, as I got older, I had crushes on females and, again, just no interest in males. My maturation in that identity happened at the same time that I got older, but it was just a clear identity that I had from the time that I was three. The interesting thing about it was there was also no dysphoria other than the fact that I was aware that people like my uncle and everyone who laughed at those kinds of jokes had very negative feelings about what I was and what I was to become. Marine-Street: Were there any lesbian couples in Santa Barbara that you were aware of? 16 Gartrell: [00:03:13] There was a possible lesbian couple, one of whom lived in our neighborhood. Both women were married and my father and mother and other neighbors made negative comments about these two women because when they became friends, they both cut their hair short. They both got the same kind of car, which I think was a Ford--some kind of small Ford convertible--and they would race up and down the streets together. They wore the same clothes, and they spent all their time together when their children were in school. There were negative comments made about them and suspicion about their being lesbian. Marine-Street: Did you ever interact with them in any way? Gartrell: [00:03:55] I babysat for the one who lived in the neighborhood, but I had no information about what was going on in her personal life. Marine-Street: You also mentioned in the other interview that you had kind of a traumatic childhood. In your papers that are at Smith College, you have a biographical statement that you wrote. In it you talk about some instances of sexual violence that happened. I wonder if you’d be willing to just talk a little bit about those. Gartrell: [00:04:30] When I was six years old, we lived next door to a physician who had three sons. One of them was a teenager. He and a friend of his lured me and my brother over to their treehouse and said, “Wouldn’t you like to come see our treehouse?” He said, “You go up first” to me and I started climbing, and I said, “Come on, Greg” [to my brother]. And he [the neighbor] said, “No, no, you wait down there.” They wouldn’t let him up. They got me up there, and they had a .22 rifle and they pointed the rifle at me and demanded 17 that I engage in sexual activity with them, which I don’t think there’s a point in describing, but it was phenomenally traumatic. I thought that they were going to kill me, and they threatened to come get me if I told anyone. What happened afterwards was I got down, and I burst into tears and ran to my home. My mother and father were both home at the time. My father examined me physically, which was further embarrassing, and then went over and screamed at the neighbors and told them he was calling the police. Then they consulted--I don’t know whom--who said that it would be very traumatic for me to go to court to testify against these boys, and it was better just to leave [it as it was, with] whatever threat my father made against them. We lived in that house for another year and a half. I was terrified every single day. I was terrified every single night. I was afraid they were going to crawl into my window. I actually was terrified throughout the rest of my childhood about the prospect of being raped or assaulted after that incident. Marine-Street: Were there any ramifications for the assaulters? Gartrell: [00:06:35] None whatsoever. When we moved to a new home far across town from where they lived, there was an unfortunate response on my mother’s part to a question I asked in a veiled way, hoping that it wouldn’t be obvious why I was asking the question. I said to her, “Do you think there’s any chance those neighbors know where we live now?” She said, “Oh, of course, I’m sure they know,” which just took away any feeling of safety that I could have had at this new home. Marine-Street: Did you get any kind of counseling or help? Gartrell: [00:07:13] No. 18 Marine-Street: What did they call what happened to you in those days? Gartrell: [00:07:22] Teenage boys acting badly. Marine-Street: Has your understanding of that changed over time? Gartrell: [00:07:32] It was sexual violence at gunpoint and very, very, very traumatic. Marine-Street: You also mentioned to me that you almost were kidnapped. Was that about that same time? Gartrell: [00:07:48] It was a few years later. We lived next to a lemon orchard. Our house backed up against the lemon orchard. We were not a family of means. We lived in a small track house in Santa Barbara. Our school bus dropped us off about, I would say, a fifteen-minute walk from my home. I had seen a car that followed the school bus frequently, and it was an old man driving an old car. On most days when we were dropped off, there were many of us children. On this particular day, I was the only one. I got off the bus, and I was walking in a fairly leisurely way next to the lemon orchard to my home. This car pulled up next to me, and he rolled down his window, and he said, “You need to get in. You need to get in.” He looked very frightening to me, and I started running, and he started following me. There was enough room where he could follow me off the road. I started screaming and running, and I ran through the lemon orchard [so] he couldn’t take his car through the lemon orchard. I got into my house the back way and went into my room and looked out the window, and I saw that he was cruising by trying to find me. I told my parents. They then called the police and they allegedly looked for this person, but I [often] saw the car [parked] within a mile of our home and no one ever apprehended 19 the person. It was another instance in which, again, there was a complete lack of feeling safe. Marine-Street: What did you do as a child after those instances to kind of make yourself feel safe? Gartrell: [00:09:57] I didn’t feel safe. I felt frightened all the time. I felt frightened in my home, outside of my home. I was always afraid of being raped. I was always afraid of being assaulted. Marine-Street: How can you function if you’re always afraid? Gartrell: [00:10:12] There are a lot of things that contributed to fear in my life and my parents unfortunately were not psychologically healthy. There was major mental illness in my family so I had that factor contributing to my state of not feeling safe. My father had severe panic disorder, and he was pretty much afraid of the world and afraid of going anywhere. When you have a role model of one parent who is afraid of the world and another parent who was quite mentally ill in a different way, it’s not an environment in which a child grows up being given an opportunity to feel safe. On top of that, I then had teachers who hit on me before I left for college. For instance, when I was a tenth grade student, I had a Latin teacher who said to me he wanted to start driving me home. I thought that I needed to comply with that, [but when I] told my father and mother, they said, “Well, he can come here and meet us, but he’s not driving you home.” He touched me in ways that were very creepy. Touched my body and his hands were not where they should be. I mean, here I was doing well academically and having somebody trying to paw me and trying to drive me home. 20 Marine-Street: I know you were a good student. You mentioned that in the last interview. I wondered if you would talk a little bit about your studies in high school. You set sort of a mission for yourself, I think you mentioned. Gartrell: [00:12:12] I had a mission. My parents did not leave Santa Barbara. My father was too afraid to leave based on his panic disorder. He wanted to go to medical school, but he was too afraid to leave Santa Barbara because that was too foreign to him. My mother was mentally ill. They wanted me to stay in Santa Barbara and take care of them. They wanted me to go to UCSB. They were happy to have me go to college, but they wanted me to stay in Santa Barbara. And that was the last thing I wanted to do because I had already been taking care of both of them since the time I was eleven years old when my mother was psychiatrically hospitalized. I was the oldest child and the parent in the family at that point, and from that point on. So I wanted to get out of there. We had no money. In fact, as soon as my mother was hospitalized, we had very, very, very little money and no resources, no opportunity to understand how one went about getting a scholarship. But I did have a sixth grade teacher whose name was Dr. Will Hayes, who, in a way, took me under his wing to offer a few meetings to talk about what I needed to do in order to get into good colleges because he had done that for his own sons. He had chosen me as a student to be in his class in sixth grade. What he said was basically, “You have to get straight A’s. You have to have activities. You have to get good letters of recommendation. In order to get good letters of 21 recommendation, you need to ask the teachers who think that you’re the most impressive student they’ve had in a long time.” I knew that my classmates--we were tracked into [three levels]-supposedly the smart students, the students who were average, and then the students who were really tragically not unintelligent but very often immigrant children whose first language was not English. [Sadly], they didn’t get the same kind of education even in public schools that those whose first language was English did. The message was basically you need to do very, very well. My classmates in this upper track were predominantly the sons and daughters of engineers--aerospace engineers--because Vandenberg Air Force Base was nearby. There were a lot of engineers in firms that were developing around Santa Barbara. There were [also] professors’ children from UCSB and [others who] were physicians’ sons and daughters. Many of them were already talking about going to Stanford. Stanford was the place to go. I had it on my radar, and my goal was to do well enough to obtain an academic scholarship because we couldn’t afford anything and barely the application. I don’t remember whether there were application fees, but certainly no prep courses. There weren’t that many those days in the way there are now, but really no formal counseling. [00:15:46] I mean, in fact, the counselor in my high school said, “Oh, you shouldn’t apply to Stanford. Stanford just throws the applications up a series of stairs, and whichever ones land on top, they get in.” And, “Don’t waste your time. There’s no chance that you’ll get into Stanford.” And also, 22 “You’re not the son or daughter of an alum and those are the students also who get in, so don’t bother to try.” Marine-Street: Right. It had a real reputation as kind of a country club school, huh? Gartrell: [00:16:20] It had the reputation of being a very academic, very privileged university. Marine-Street: I forgot to ask you, were your parents college-educated? Gartrell: [00:16:45] My father went to UCSB. In fact, I went to his college graduation when I was two years old. My mother, who was very, very, very intelligent as a young child, was accidentally hit in the head by a baseball bat that her brother was wielding when she was four or five years old. She’d already taught herself to read as a three-year-old, and she went from that to having double vision, severe dyslexia, long-term head trauma, [and] multiple episodes of meningitis. She could barely read after that head trauma. She had no treatment for it, and so she barely made it through high school. Marine-Street: Did they have expectations for you, in terms of what they thought you should do as a career? Gartrell: [00:17:35] [laughter] I decided that I was going to go into medicine because my sister was four years younger and a very talented writer. My siblings were very, very academically successful. I never had confidence in my success. I always felt that I worked hard, but I wasn’t really very smart. I knew my brother was brilliant. Because he wanted to be an astronaut, he studied physics when he was ten years old--just laying on his bed reading physics--so that by the time that I took physics, he was actually helping me with physics, 23 and he had never taken a physics course. My sister was a really talented writer. I had confidence in their abilities, but not in my own intellect. My sister was getting a lot of attention saying she was going to be a physician. One thing I knew I was very good at--because I had advanced to algebra when I was ten years old on independent study in my public school-I knew I was very good at math. And I loved math. I would tell people that I wanted to be a mathematician. People just glazed over when they heard that. “Mathematician--oh, how boring. Yvonne, tell us about wanting to be a physician.” [laughter] After a few years, I decided I was going to ditch the mathematician part, even though I was studying math and loving math, and just say I was going to be a physician. Then people were interested. “Oh, that’s great now that you want to be a physician. Tell us about that.” Actually, I got into becoming a pre-med student really not through an inherent interest but because [Yvonne] was getting more attention than I was from her career path. Marine-Street: It’s interesting to me that you and your sister both chose as your kind of dream jobs, whether it be mathematician or physician, something that was not really typical for women at the time. Had you ever met a female physician or mathematician? Gartrell: [00:19:30] I met a female pediatrician when I was 17 years old when I asked not to go back to the same old--to me--creepy white man, general practitioner I’d been seeing as a child. Every time he would come to our house to see us when we were sick, it was so completely embarrassing. There I was an adolescent, and I got pneumonia, for instance, and he came to 24 examine me. He pulled down the sheets, pulled up my nightgown with my father and mother standing right there and everybody standing around, with my breasts exposed, and put his stethoscope--cold stethoscope--on my chest. I did actually for a short period of time get to see a woman pediatrician. She just was wonderful and so inspiring and so thoughtful about how she did the exam and thoughtful about my privacy as she was doing it. She did my first pelvic exam. I mean, I was kind of mortified, but she helped me be less mortified. Marine-Street: That’s really interesting because later, of course, that will be something that you care a lot about--the way patients are treated. But you didn’t feel a kind of pressure to conform to--? I’ve interviewed other people who grew up during that time that tell me, “Well, my choice was I was going to be a teacher or I was going to be a nurse or I was going to be a physical therapist.” But do you just want to talk a little bit about gender expectations? Gartrell: [00:21:10] Yes, there was a very vital part of that decision--which was I knew I was a lesbian. I already knew I was a lesbian from the time I was three years old, so how was I going to support myself? My family didn’t have any money. I didn’t even know if I was going to be able to have the money I needed for toothpaste when I went to college. So how was I going to support myself? The role modeling in a heterosexually dominant culture was for women to be dependent on men who earned money, who supported them and the family. I didn’t have that so I needed to support myself. I needed a career in which I could support myself. 25 Marine-Street: Just one more question about that earlier time and this is jumping forward a little bit but, as you think back to those years and what I think was an awfully traumatic childhood, how do you think it impacted what happened later in your career? Have you thought about that or can you pinpoint it? Gartrell: [00:22:17] I mean, certainly I went into psychiatry--a big motivation for going into psychiatry was that I started doing research as an undergraduate at Stanford in psychiatry and I just loved it. It really was part of my mission around doing studies that looked at stereotypes and assumptions about lesbian and gay people. However, there was a parallel track, which was [that] I came from a family of mentally ill parents, how [can] I achieve some feeling of control over that in relation to my own life? I didn’t like the prospect of having the same experiences that they had, and I really didn’t want to go there. So if I could understand something more about their illnesses, perhaps it wouldn’t happen to me. Marine-Street: One more question and then we’ll really get to Stanford. During this early time, before you came to Stanford, did you ever tell anybody else that you were a lesbian? Gartrell: [00:23:42] Oh no. Oh no. No. Absolutely not. Didn’t act on it. Didn’t tell anyone. Marine-Street: You get to Stanford. Tell me what Stanford was like when you arrived in-was it 1967? Gartrell: [00:23:57] Yes. First of all, I was given a full academic scholarship, and I was thrilled. It was really my dream coming true. I thought the campus was beautiful. I loved how it smelled--the sage and the--I don’t know if oak trees 26 smell but whatever the smells are that as we walk around Stanford campus, we smell--sage and brush and trees and eucalyptus and so on. I just loved everything about my entry to Stanford. I hadn’t had close friends ever before. I didn’t have a best friend ever. I always wanted to. When I was small, I read about girls having best friends. I never had that. Part of that I attributed to the fact that my mother’s mental illness was known in our community, and I felt that there was a stigma to having her illness be known. I do know that there was a time when I invited a friend over, and there was this very long conversation at the other end of the phone where she was talking to her mother about coming over to our home. I’m certain it was all about whether or not it was safe for her to allow her child to come into our home. I really wanted to have friends. I chose to be in an all-women’s dorm-Roble. Actually, I think it was the last year that there were all-women dorms. I wanted to be with all first-year students, all women, and there were 400 of us arriving at Roble. That was really exciting to me. Within the structure of Roble, we had corridors, and we were on the furthest away corridor from the front door on the third floor. I was lucky enough to get a single corner room so that was thrilling for me. There were twenty-three of us or twenty-four of us on this corridor, and so I was just very eager to make friends because that [corridor] became our first identity. In fact, I made friends very rapidly [with women] who are close to me to this day. That was absolutely thrilling to me to have the opportunity to make friends and to be part of a community. The community was our corridor. Marine-Street: How well prepared were you academically did you find? 27 Gartrell: [00:26:54] I was actually over prepared it turned out. I mean, we didn’t have any money for any kind of preparation for testing or anything like that. I was a very anxious test-taker in high school, and so I was petrified of taking the SATs. When I got to Stanford, I found out that kids who went to prep schools had practiced for the SATs. I thought, “Oh wow. Wouldn’t that have been nice?” [laughter] Marine-Street: What a concept. Gartrell: [00:27:25] Yes, what a concept. Because I’d studied really thoroughly and I knew that my only chance of doing well on the SATs was to try and remember everything I could remember from chemistry and physics and whatever. As a pre-med student, I had to repeat those same classes. It was complete repetition of what I already knew so it was very easy to do well, despite my father’s parting advice when they dropped me off. He said, “You know you got straight A’s in high school but you won’t get straight A’s at Stanford because it’s much harder. It’ll be much harder so just prepare yourself. You’re not going to get perfect grades.” That was pretty much of a downer, you know. It’s like, “Don’t aspire. Settle for less. You’re not good enough to do that.” Marine-Street: Did you have any memorable courses that you took? Gartrell: [00:28:26] Let’s see. Memorable really related to Human Biology, but that’s jumping ahead into my senior year. I did not declare a major until I was a senior because I couldn’t find a major I really enjoyed after the first preliminary class until Human Biology was created. I just thought it was fabulous to have an interdisciplinary major. It is no surprise to me that it’s 28 [laughter] become the most popular major at Stanford and it’s been copied all over the country and is an incredibly popular major. Marine-Street: Did you have a class with Phil Zimbardo? Gartrell: [00:29:08] I took the first class he ever taught at Stanford, Psych 101, and he was quite a showman then as he is today. I will say also that right after the most recent election--2016 election--Dee [Dee Mosbacher] and I and another colleague spoke out about the mental instability of the person who is now occupying the White House. That went viral and, subsequently, a book came out of that to which Dee and I contributed the final chapter before Noam Chomsky’s end-of-the-species epilogue. Phil Zimbardo and a co-author [Rosemary Sword] contributed a chapter as well. It’s called The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 27 Psychiatrists and Others Assess a President. It’s interesting to me to have had him as a faculty member, and both of us now at this stage of our lives contributing to [the same] book. Marine-Street: Can you give me a little bit of an idea of what the kind of political and social environment is at Stanford? I’m thinking you’re arriving there in 1967. It’s during the Vietnam War. I know there was some activism on campus. I just would like to hear a little bit about those aspects of Stanford. Gartrell: [00:31:13] Well, I came out. On my corridor there was an RA who became my first lover. So I basically came out in 1967 in that relationship with her. She was a rabble rouser and really wanted to shake all of us up in terms of our political thinking. Shortly after we arrived, we were all sitting around having what were called “spreads” where dessert and things were brought in to just hang out, probably on a weekend night. She said, “How many of you 29 are Republicans?” Every hand went up or almost every hand went up. [laughter] She just went, “Oh, how terrible. Oh my God, I can’t believe it.” Then within weeks when that question was asked again, the hands were sort of at half-mast, and then soon after that they just never raised again. She exposed us, happily, to a lot of the political activism that had been developing. Her brother had been close to David Harris and so we all learned who David Harris was and Joan Baez. And then the antiwar movement became a really big force in our lives. So much so that there was a big movement across campus to have classes all pass/fail rather than graded so that we could spend our time both doing movement activities as well as studying, which was a little bit problematic later in applying to medical school because I had to justify a “pass” in organic chemistry. Of course, I hated organic chemistry [laughter] as everyone does, but, the long-term usefulness of that kind of strategy was not really something that was probably carefully thought out. In any case, the antiwar movement happened. And I was involved not as a leader, [but] as a participant. What I saw was the evolving effectiveness of this mass movement that was happening not only at Stanford but all over the country in terms of changing the thinking about what we were doing in Vietnam. That was a powerful lesson to me. What I did not like about the movement is that it was totally male-dominated and it was a continuation of the so-called “free love movement”--which meant free sex for men, [the] consequences for women be damned. The expectation was 30 that women were there to service men, and men should be entitled to have sex whenever they wanted or demanded it. That was a pretty appalling aspect of that movement. Marine-Street: I want to ask you if you could maybe give me an example of something that you observed that made you see that kind of dynamic? Gartrell: [00:34:46] First of all, I have heard from you that there were some women who were actively involved in a leadership position. I didn’t ever see them. We basically had men telling us what to do and how to do it and men who were urging violence and smashing windows and things like that, which did not, to me, seem like a useful strategy. The only time that I actually advocated something in a large group that happened was [when] there was a huge number of us outside the corner of the Quad closest to Hoover Tower-is it still called HooTow and things like that or is that language not there anymore? Marine-Street: I haven’t heard HooTow. Gartrell: [00:35:49] MemChu, none of those? Marine-Street: MemChu is still there but Hoover--they just call it Hoover Tower or Hoover. Gartrell: It was MemAud, MemChu, HooTow, things like that. Okay. Anyway, the men were saying, “Let’s go smash all the windows, let’s go do this--.”And I’m thinking, why is this effort destroying Stanford’s campus? Why don’t we march into Palo Alto where outside people will pay attention? What is destroying the building doing for us? So I just yelled out, “Let’s march to Palo Alto.” The police were on the outside of the campus anticipating such a thing. I didn’t know that. The word just kind of went through the crowd and 31 then we, in fact, did march to Palo Alto and then the police [started charging the demonstrators]. Then everybody started running and some were arrested and some weren’t and so on. That became a new trend in how people seemed to be demonstrating and marching. It wasn’t just violence against Stanford’s physical property but taking the movement into communities [where] many other strategies were used. [The former strategy] was another example of the male wish to use violence as a resistance to violence and death in Vietnam, which did not have logic for me. Marine-Street: Interesting. What about the free love movement you mentioned? Can you tell me how that manifested itself in the environment as you experienced it? Gartrell: [00:37:33] I’ll say something about encounter groups. The summer before we entered Stanford, to my knowledge, every one of us received a letter offering the opportunity to participate in an encounter group when we arrived. It was described as an opportunity to have a member of the Counseling and Testing Center meet with a small group of us to talk about our experiences and to get to know one another well and share things that we might not feel comfortable sharing just in general. But, you know, in a safe environment. I read it. My parents read it. At first I thought, “Why not, it sounds good.” My parents read it and thought, “Oh, wow, free therapy. Great. So do it.” I signed up to do it and we met. In my group, for some strange reason, my RA who happened to become my lover was in my group but there were no other women. There were about five other men and then we had a male who was a member of the 32 Counseling and Testing Center staff running the group. We met in Escondido--in one of the Escondido apartments--I don’t know if they’re still called Escondido Apartments. Are they still called that? The tall buildings that are across from the firehouse. Marine-Street: I think they are--Escondido, yes. They’re doing a lot of reconstruction up there right now. Gartrell: [00:39:00] I know. Everything’s changing. There were apartments that senior students could live in. So two women who were seniors lived there, and they allowed us to use their apartment. It was clear from the very beginning that the conversations were going in the direction of sex and talking about sexual feelings and that was something that seemed to be thrilling to the men to be able to do and felt creepy to me. Early into these meetings, we were told to pair off and there were all those kinds of touchy-feely things that were done back then in group dynamics where you close your eyes and, you know, see what you can communicate to another person through holding their hands like this and things like that. That kind of pairing off, we were given some instructions about that. I found out later that the woman who became my lover, my RA, and the man she was paired off with--what he did was he reached around, undid her bra, and was feeling her breasts during that encounter. That made me feel incredibly freaked out. She didn’t complain. She just went along with it. She was sexually involved with men before she became involved with me. I guess, I don’t know, some number of sessions later, we arrived and the group leader was on the couch holding the hands and stroking one of the women 33 who lived in the apartment. He said, “Well, let’s resume later.” She went into the bedroom, and we started our meeting and he stopped it after, I don’t know, five or ten minutes. And he said, “You know, I have some unfinished business to do with what’s-her-name and so why don’t you carry on without me.” We kind of, I don’t know, carried on somehow without him. I had to go to the bathroom, and I got up to go to the bathroom, and the door to the room was open and they were having sex. And I, from other women classmates, heard similar stories of power and sex abuse by these people who supposedly represented mental health professionals affiliated with Stanford, which was just appalling. Marine-Street: Was he a student? Gartrell: [00:41:43] No, he was a member of the Counseling and Testing Center staff in the Dean of Students Office at the Old Union. Marine-Street: The girl that he was having sex with was an older student? Gartrell: [00:41:55] Student, yes. She was a senior. Marine-Street: But an undergraduate? Gartrell: [00:41:57] Yes. Marine-Street: Well that’s an encounter group I guess. Gartrell: [00:42:01] Yes, that’s an encounter of a sort. Marine-Street: Yes, of a sort. Anything else on that topic? You wrote somewhere that it was “an environment of daily sexual harassment” during that time. Gartrell: [00:42:14] Yes. It was. Another illustration of the kind of commentary that was just routine and so irritating when it happened was initially when I got there, I guess miniskirts weren’t in fashion yet, but they kind of became in 34 fashion. I wore skirts and shorts. I wore a lot of shorts while it was hot and then I wore skirts some of the time. Actually, they were culotte skirts so that they were kind of like shorts. And my skirts got somewhat shorter as time went on because that was the fashion. I happened to generally make my own clothes because we didn’t have the money to buy them. As I came out and became involved in--or had much more awareness of--feminism and got really excited about the beginning of the second wave of feminism, I started changing my clothing style and wearing clothes that were comfortable, not clothes that attracted attention from men. Because my short skirts--well, I mean, I figured all women attracted attention from men--but I felt that the way I dressed attracted attention and it was unwanted attention. I started wearing comfortable clothes that felt so good and so safe. That included overalls and turtlenecks when it was cold. One of my classmates said to me, after I had started wearing these clothes, turned over to me before our class started and said, “You know I liked you a lot better when you were wearing miniskirts. You really look terrible in overalls.” Marine-Street: This is a male classmate? Gartrell: [00:44:26] A male classmate. Marine-Street: How did you respond? Do you remember? Gartrell: [00:44:29] I just looked kind of horrified and I felt just invaded, and I felt it was an indication of this kind of entitlement to dictate the clothing of a classmate and very aware of the difference in my feeling of safety wearing overalls and a turtleneck versus a short skirt. 35 Marine-Street: Interesting. We’ll go for just a little longer and then we’ll take a break. Did you ever talk to any of your female friends about these issues about dress or the encounter groups? Did others feel your discomfort? Gartrell: [00:45:26] Others talked about their encounter group leaders then, but my very close friends and I have talked about the abuse of power since then. It was something that none of them felt good about. Back then, my friends were dating males and I was involved with a woman. The friendships were very, very important to me and I didn’t want to do anything that criticized men as a group and potentially jeopardize the friendships. I didn’t really have a peer group with whom I could have these conversations since they were part of--they were dating the patriarchal structure and I was not. Marine-Street: Your friends that were dating men, do you know did they have access to birth control through the health service or anything? Gartrell: [00:46:35] They must have but they were quite private about those details. Most of my close friends were virgins when we arrived at Stanford. So we talked a lot about virginity and then when people started going on dates and the envelope was being pushed, when they would come back, we would say, “So what did you do, what’d you do?” Then people starting being more circumspect about what they would share. The sharing kind of stopped once they actually became sexually involved with their partners. I just had a lot of questions about how they managed it. Marine-Street: You mentioned that there was a story about an experience you had at the Health Services that you wanted to share. I wonder if you could talk about that? 36 Gartrell: [00:47:39] I was a first-year student and went for a gynecologic exam and the gynecologist asked me about contraception. I said that I was involved with a woman, and I didn’t need to have contraception, and I was a lesbian. She said, “Oh that--that’s ridiculous. That just can’t be. That’s going to be something that’s in passing. Occasionally people say things like that, but I’m not going to take that seriously.” Which was very insulting. Marine-Street: So she didn’t advise you to get counseling or anything? She just sort of laughed it off? Gartrell: [00:48:30] Just laughed it off as a non-reality, just basically denied my existence. Marine-Street: But she had offered you contraception? Gartrell: [00:48:43] She [was] happy to offer me contraception and hoped that I use it. Marine-Street: One more question related to this. Did you have any knowledge of sexual assaults that were occurring on campus? Was that something that happened then? Gartrell: [00:49:00] Yes, we were told periodically about rapes that happened and women being assaulted outside our dorm. This was starting our first year at Stanford. The lighting was very poor. Our bikes were parked in really dim lighting. I already came to Stanford as a frightened person--worrying about assault and violence. This was not helpful to me at all. We did, as our peer group of women, talk about our fears of going to the library at night. I was petrified of going to the library at night because it involved going out to get my bike where it was dimly lit, where anyone could be grabbed, riding my bike through dark streets to the library, and at both of those places locking the 37 bike. All of these things, if there’s nobody else around, made me quite vulnerable and then being in the library, studying until whatever hour, and then making my way back. I was petrified. I mean, from the moment I left the dorm I was petrified. The whole process of thinking about going to the library made me petrified, which meant that I didn’t go as often as I wanted to or needed to, which meant that I felt that my [education suffered]. Well, I mean, it was my choice about safety or my fears about safety that prevented me from making adequate uses of the library. At that time, there were no [alarm boxes]. I know now that it seems like every twenty feet, there’s an alarm box and I also know that there is [00:50:53] a lot of attention to safety. I’m not talking about the kind of safety that involves drinking alcohol and saying no. I’m talking about just trying to go to the library or trying to go to a night class. I mean, there were things that were happening at night that unless I was going as a member of a group, it didn’t feel safe attending. Marine-Street: Did you and any of the other women students do anything to try to feel more safe? Gartrell: [00:51:25] No, we just didn’t feel safe and--I mean, it didn’t occur to us that we had an opportunity to do anything. Marine-Street: Was there any kind of like self-defense courses or anything? Gartrell: [00:51:37] I don’t remember what year it was, but I think it was probably my senior year that a self-defense course was offered, not as an elective but just as a campus activity, and I took it. I found out about it however--going to school at a time when there was no internet, any information you received 38 was word-of-mouth, you happened to have the time to read a flyer in White Plaza, or you happened to have time to read the Stanford Daily, or you had access to the Daily regularly, which I didn’t always, especially if I was living off-campus. It was really a matter of luck if you found out about something that you really wanted to do and needed to do. But somehow I found out about it. I attended this class and I loved it. I loved the concept of being taught that I was entitled to pay attention to my fears and that whenever I did feel afraid--whenever something happened that made me feel more afraid--I should pay attention to my feelings because they were a good indicator of my potential risk. My lover who had sex with men before she met me, [and] had sex with men throughout the time she was with me--she was not comfortable being lesbian, didn’t want to identify as lesbian, wanted to get married, [and] spent the whole time that I was at Stanford looking for a man to marry at the same time she was involved with me--always said, “Oh, you’re just a wimp, you know, stop being so afraid. What are you so afraid of? You’re so afraid of sex with men? Why are you so uptight? You’re just incredibly uptight?” Always the message, “You are really, really uptight.” To have this validation in this self-defense class that paying attention to [my feeling of fear]--granted, I came from a background of more fear that I carried within me than I wish I ever did--but that if something kicked it up to a higher level, that my feelings were valid and I needed to pay attention to them and I needed to do something about them immediately. Then to learn self-defense techniques to fight or to fight back or to release myself was 39 fabulous. It was such an incredible opportunity to have--to create a sense of empowerment. Marine-Street: Was it a male instructor, do you remember? Gartrell: [00:54:27] Absolutely not. It was all women. Marine-Street: All women? Gartrell: [00:54:29] Yes, I wouldn’t have taken a course from a man because how could a man possibly have come from our experience and seen the world in the way we saw the world? Marine-Street: It was another student that was doing it? Do you recall? Gartrell: [00:54:45] Yes, I believe it was another student or somebody from offcampus who came. Marine-Street: Do you remember where they taught the classes? Gartrell: [00:54:52] They were taught in the Roble Gym. Marine-Street: Does anything stick with you about what they taught you like specific techniques? Gartrell: [00:55:03] They were techniques about releasing yourself if someone grabs you and there were techniques about the most vulnerable [ways] to fight back if you were assaulted. I go from that, fast forward to many years later when I got to know Pauline Bart who was a very eloquent writer about rape and women fighting back. She did studies about women who were trained to or learned to fight back versus women who were trained to lie down and take it. I had heard always growing up that if you’re assaulted; you’re going to be killed if you fight back--until I took this class. 40 When I got to Pauline Bart’s readings and then got to know her as a colleague and heard that there were actual data that the women who fought back, very often, got away and were not raped versus those who submitted were a hundred percent raped. There was no guarantee they weren’t going to be killed. It was an incredibly eye-opening experience. Marine-Street: I’ll say. Let’s take a quick break. Gartrell: [00:56:29] Okay. [End of Part 1 of 5 - Interview with Nanette Gartrell - August 29, 2018] 41 42 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PIONEERING WOMEN ALUMNAE ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: NANETTE GARTRELL INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 29, 2018 PART: 2 OF 5 Marine-Street: Before we move on, is there anything else you’d like to say about the selfdefense course? Gartrell: [00:00:06] One other thing that just came to mind is in Pauline Bart’s research about lying down and taking it versus fighting back--and fighting back included using strategies to extract yourself. There were accounts that she provided of women who actually talked men who had weapons out of their weapons and then managed to escape without being assaulted. It’s really quite phenomenal but not only did she find that if you do fight back or use a strategy to escape that you have a chance of not being sexually violated. But even if you were raped and you fought back, that the psychological sequelae for those who resisted versus those who didn’t was dramatically different. That is fascinating. That was always fascinating to me. The fighters ultimately did better than those who thought that they had to comply and didn’t try any strategies. Not that they’re to be blamed-those who are to be blamed are the police and the men who told us, “Don’t 43 resist, don’t resist.” They are to be blamed, and I have strong feelings about that. Marine-Street: Let’s switch to a different topic. Were you an athlete at Stanford? Gartrell: [00:01:37] [laughter] I was. I joined the Stanford varsity swim team when I arrived. I started on the team before Title IX, which came after I graduated, which meant that Stanford women’s athletics had no special funding. Pam Strathairn [Pamela Strathairn] was the director of Stanford women’s athletics. We had our own gym without all the fancy accoutrement that the men had. It was the Roble Gym. We also had the Roble pool. We swam in the Roble pool. That’s where we practiced. It didn’t have--hmm, I don’t know-sufficient lighting for our late afternoon swim meets. It was freezing out there, but I loved it. I was a proud member of the varsity swim team. I swam freestyle, and one of the things that makes me happiest about it, in retrospect, is that every five years for my reunion, I’m invited to swim with the current varsity team, [which means that in 2016], I had the opportunity to swim with the Olympians who had just come back from winning all the gold medals at the Olympics, including sharing water with the likes of Katie Ledecky, Simone Manuel, Lia Neal. It was a phenomenally wonderful experience. I wore a snorkel and mask. I started in the pool. I don’t dive anymore. Out of the eight of us in my heat or my race, I came in, not surprisingly, eighth. [laughter] But I was very, very happy. Marine-Street: So you couldn’t keep up with Katie, huh? 44 Gartrell: [00:03:36] [laughter] I couldn’t keep up with one of them. I was the oldest alum who was participating in the varsity versus alum swim meet by, I think, three decades. Marine-Street: That’s really awesome. I wanted to ask you about what the status of gay life was at Stanford at the time? Were there any kind of organizations? Gartrell: [00:04:18] Non-existent for me. Again, everything is word of mouth or what you happen to read, but I knew of no other lesbian until I was a junior. I met one other lesbian. I knew of no gay men. When the Gay Student Union started, which I don’t even know how many people there were, I only heard about it after the initial meeting. What made me aware of the possibility of other lesbians on campus was when Maud Haimson, who was in [my] class, wrote a letter to the Stanford Daily about being a lesbian in early 1971, [I believe, and also] where she identified herself. I was thrilled to hear about that. Following that, I and a couple of people I knew organized the first meeting of Stanford lesbians at our off-campus apartment. I don’t even remember how we got the word out, but, in my life experience of doing research back in those days, when we needed people [laughter] as volunteers, we would put up fliers. So I’m guessing we probably put up fliers and [used] word of mouth [among] the few people I knew. And people showed up I’d never met before, including one woman I took a class with [whom] I saw occasionally in class. I had no idea she was a lesbian. Marine-Street: Did you know Maud before? Gartrell: [00:06:09] No, I did not. 45 Marine-Street: After you read her letter, did you sort of seek her out then? Gartrell: [00:06:16] I don’t remember how I ended up meeting her, but ultimately this group included her. The Gay Student Union, although it’s in retrospect described as women and men, maybe that’s the case because perhaps Maud was there. My experience of joining gay/lesbian groups at the very beginning, it was always me and men. Since I was interested in meeting with other lesbians, I wouldn’t have sought out that group unless I had a really good idea that there were lesbians present. And I didn’t have any expectation that there would necessarily have been. Marine-Street: Do you recall about how many people showed up to that first meeting? Gartrell: [00:07:14] I think that there were about eight or so--eight or nine. Marine-Street: If was off-campus? Where was your apartment? Gartrell: [00:07:20] It was on--is there a Forest Street in Palo Alto? It was parallel to University [Avenue] and it was past the town about four or five blocks--well I don’t know how far the town has spread at this point but past what was downtown Palo Alto four or five blocks and over a few blocks from University in an apartment building. Marine-Street: Do you recall what you all talked about at that first meeting? Gartrell: [00:07:52] I don’t. [laughter] I don’t. I mean, the typical thing in all subsequent meetings of that type was for people to go around and tell their stories. I would not be at all surprised if we didn’t go around and tell our stories. Two of the women who showed up were lovers and first-year students. One of them had a set of parents who were potentially going to be 46 ballistic if they found out--and ultimately were. I don’t know if that came up during that meeting, but that was something I found out about later. Marine-Street: Just remind me again. Is this 1971? Gartrell: [00:08:42] Yes. Marine-Street: Okay, 1971. Did you have more meetings? Gartrell: [00:08:48] We had more meetings and we also, at some point, invited Del Martin [Dorothy Louise Taliaferro Martin] and Phyllis Lyon, who started the first lesbian organization in the United States, Daughters of Bilitis, which was started in the 1950s. It was started as a social alternative to the bar culture, which was really the only, as I understand it, culture that existed for lesbians prior to that. They were leaders--both nationally and in San Francisco--of this lesbian movement. So we invited them down, got to know them, and I’ve known them--I knew them--ever since, up through Del’s illness and death, and still know Phyllis. Marine-Street: Did they come to your apartment? Gartrell: [00:09:44] Yes. Marine-Street: The meeting was at your apartment? Gartrell: [00:09:47] Yes. Marine-Street: Did the group grow in size, or did it stay about those eight people? Gartrell: [00:09:51] It never formalized as a group. We had those meetings, and I can’t even say how many of them. I mean, I have a vague recollection there might have been four or five before the end of the quarter. I didn’t reinitiate them the following year. I became an RA. Then I had a network of more lesbians that I knew, but I don’t recall having anybody else take responsibility for 47 continuing the organization of those meetings. I was very involved already in my research so that became my priority focus. Marine-Street: Do you have any memory of what Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon--what kind of advice they gave to you all, or what the subject of the meeting was? Gartrell: [00:10:53] I think they were thrilled that this was happening at Stanford. They were thrilled that we were a bunch of young academically-oriented women who were thinking about various careers. I know that they talked about being out. I think they probably saw themselves as potential mentors for us. In knowing them over time, I remember a decade or so after that bemoaning to them that we hadn’t come very far in our efforts despite all the progress that had been made. And they just said, “You know, you just haven’t been alive long enough. If you’ve been alive as long as we have, you would see just this enormous progress. You just wait until you’ve been alive as long as we have and been out as long as we have and have been working on this as long as we have, and you’ll sing a different tune.” They were, in fact, right. Marine-Street: Before we talk about your research, I just wanted to ask you did you go abroad during your time at Stanford? Gartrell: [00:12:09] I did. I went to Austria in 1969. Why Austria? Well I had a crush on Julie Andrews [laughter] when I was in high school because I saw the Sound of Music. I mean, I didn’t have real relationships. I had crushes on movie stars. The first one was on Kim Novak when I was about thirteen. The second one was on Julie Andrews when I saw the Sound of Music, and I thought “Oh, Austria. Oh, I’ll study German and go to Austria, and maybe I’ll find my Julie Andrews in Austria.” I studied German. Also my family had 48 no money and I’d never been out of California. We’d driven up here [San Francisco] and back home because I had relatives here and stayed with the relatives, but I’d never been out of California. The opportunity to go abroad and being given enough money to actually go to see Europe was something that was just incredibly inspiring to me. I chose Austria and Julie Andrews and didn’t find Julie Andrews but had another fabulous opportunity to have a community of friends, a new community of friends, who were both men and women. I made some really great friends who are lifelong friends who are men through that Austria group. There were eighty of us living in Vienna. We were there at a really momentous time. The Stonewall Riots happened in 1969, which was the first time that LGBT people fought back against the police when they came in to arrest them for being at a bar in New York, the Stonewall bar, and also we landed on the moon, and the antiwar movement was continuing actively back home. I came back to this whole concept of lesbian and gay people not taking it anymore. That’s a great concept. I had already decided because I was pre-med and [had] the experience in Cowell [Stanford] Student Health Services of a very bad interview by the physician I saw as a first-year student that I was going to become a lesbian physician who would provide nonhomophobic care for lesbians and gay men. Non-homophobic care meant not judging and making assumptions and telling people what they were or weren’t and what their identity was or was not in the course of the interview, but really asking and being open to learning and helping them with whatever 49 path they were on. I also decided because I was in academia, there were a lot of paths open to me to do something about the fact that when I was at Stanford, being lesbian was tantamount to being considered somebody who was committing a sin. It was criminal, and it was considered a mental illness. So I had an option [to consider]--what [was] I going to do about that? Homosexuality was a diagnosis in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, and it seemed to me that I could use my resources to do research that addressed stereotypes and assumptions about lesbian and gay people and find out why homosexuality was in the DSM. Was it there just because there were stereotypes and assumptions being made--which seemed highly likely? Was it there because there was so much stigma that the sequelae of stigma-the sequelae of involuntarily psychiatrically hospitalizing LGBT people because they were LGBT and then treating them, shocking them, giving them hormones, giving them medications, [and] giving them terrible homophobic treatment--[created] these traumatized individuals? And then you examine these traumatized individuals, and you say, “Well, they’re really disturbed.” Well, duh! [laughter] I really wanted to get involved in doing research in some way. So that became my mission even before Human Biology was created. Marine-Street: That’s so striking to me because, you know, for someone as an undergraduate to basically decide I’m going to create this new thing, this new way of being a physician that challenges centuries of stereotypes and prejudice. Did you have any kind of model or evidence that this might work? 50 Gartrell: [00:17:45] No, I had determination and I had anger. Anger about the discrimination fueled my mission. Marine-Street: Were there psychologists at the time or psychiatrists that were studying homosexuality academically that you were aware of or had read? Gartrell: [00:18:09] I’d certainly read Freud [Sigmund Freud] because I knew that I would be needing to study Freud. I read a number of the old ancient analysts and what they said. But no. No, I mean, there were not individuals who were actually studying it from the perspective of let’s do a non-biased investigation of non-institutionalized lesbian and gay men and see how they are. Those who were studying lesbian and gay people were studying institutionalized people. That’s not a representative sample of anything. Marine-Street: Right. I wanted to ask you about something because I have a memory from my childhood about when I had asked somebody about gay people and why wasn’t it okay to be gay. The answer that I got was a very strange Cold War answer. It was, “Well, they would be liable to be bribed. They can’t work for the government because they could be bribed if somebody found out that they were homosexuals and that’s bad for national security.” I remember thinking, “Oh, well I hadn’t thought of that.” Was there any kind of Cold War context that was influencing things or that you were aware of? Gartrell: [00:19:40] I mean, later, yes, because we all learned about J. Edgar Hoover who was gay himself, who ran that witch hunt and his lover. Yes, so in retrospect, yes, and that continued for a very long time. I mean, all the way up to the time that I was on the faculty at Harvard and I was seeing very, very, very closeted people who worked in the government and were closeted 51 because they were afraid that they would lose their security clearances. I had people fly up from Washington to see me under assumed names. Marine-Street: That worked in the government that were worried about-Gartrell: [00:20:23] That were high up in the government and were worried about losing their security clearances. Marine-Street: Let’s talk about the research. How do you get this off the ground then? Gartrell: [00:20:34] Human Biology started. I was an enthusiastic [member of the] first graduating class of Human Biology. I finally declared a major, and I needed to stay an extra year because you couldn’t complete Human Biology in one year, which was fine with me because I was given money to do that. [laughter] We needed to do a special project with a faculty member from Human Biology. I had been spending some time trying to think about it when Jane Goodall gave her lectures. You had asked me earlier whether I had any female faculty and I couldn’t think of anybody until I realized Jane Goodall gave some lectures in Human Biology. I’d had one woman teaching assistant and a German teacher in Austria, and I cannot think of a single other female faculty member during my entire time at Stanford. This did not change. I mean, those kinds of numbers did not change when I went to medical school nor when I did my residency at Harvard. I mean, it was phenomenal back then. When Jane Goodall came and started talking about her chimps and going to Africa, she had people trailing her out of the building, of course, wanting to do a special project with her. At a certain point, Keith Brodie, who was a young assistant professor who had just come from NIH, came to lecture us on brain 52 biochemistry. I was fascinated by it. I just thought it was amazing and interesting. So dynamic. And he was such a wonderful lecturer. I had the great opportunity to listen to his lectures and then I thought, “Could I possibly--?” I’m inherently shy. I [put on] a very good act of being an extrovert. But I spent a lot of time contemplating whether I could possibly be brave enough to make an appointment to go see him, to ask him if I could do a special project with him. I worked that over quite a bit before I made the appointment and went into his office and asked. He was just so nice and so enthusiastic. “Oh, I’d be happy to have you as a student.” He said, “I’ve had a couple of others and you [get to] decide what you want to study. You could study anything. You should do some research. I mean, you’re going to medical school. You should do some research. So you can study anything you want. You can study homosexuality. You could study--.” Then he listed all these other things, and I thought, “Homosexuality? I hadn’t really walked in and said ‘I’m a lesbian.’ How did he know?” [00:23:26] He said, “Go think about it and come back and tell me in a week.” I went back in a week, and I said, “Well, I’d really like to study something related to homosexuality.” He said, “Oh, that’s great. Are you gay?” I said, “I am.” Then “gay” was a term for both women and men and subsequently terms have changed, as you know. I identified as lesbian. He said, “That’s fantastic because then you’re going to have an inside knowledge 53 of anything that you would decide to study so that’s fantastic. So what would you like to work on?” I said, “Well, homosexuality is a pathological diagnosis, and I would like to do research that can help clarify whether there’s any validity to having it in the DSM.” He said, “That’s just fantastic. You know, of course, I think it’s ridiculous that it’s there. I don’t know why it’s there. I don’t think we have any data to support it being there so let’s figure out what you want to study.” Gartrell: [00:24:40] The first project I did I said I, “Keith, you said that--.” It was Dr. Brodie, then. I knew him forever--so [later] it was “Keith.” But, “You thought that maybe the consensus about whether [there should be] a diagnosis has changed and maybe there would be usefulness in documenting that change.” He said, “And how would you do that?” I said, “I don’t know, maybe survey psychiatrists.” My first study was to survey psychiatrists about their attitudes toward what we called female homosexuality back then. We surveyed the Northern California Psychiatric Association and found that a number of psychiatrists really thought that there was no validity to having homosexuality in the DSM. I was very excited about that. That became my first publication. At the same time that we were working on that, Masters and Johnson’s group had just put out a study--the lead author of that was a person named Kolodny [Robert C. Kolodny]--in which they reported that gay men had lower testosterone levels than straight men. They hypothesized that that’s 54 why gay men were gay--that they were effeminate because they didn’t have enough testosterone. Keith said, “You know, we should repeat that study. So can you gather some gay men and straight men here at Stanford and let’s do a study.” I knew a guy--his name was Tom Rhue, who was in the administration--who was gay. I went to him and said, “Can you find twenty volunteers who would be willing to give their blood and participate in this study?” I asked other friends. I looked for twenty straight men. And these were not people I knew, but I just used my resources and I gathered together twenty of each. We drew their bloods and got their consents and so on and found out that gay men at Stanford had higher testosterone levels than the straight men. [laughter] Not only did it demonstrate that this theory--this [simplistic] hormonal theory of the origins of homosexuality--was unlikely to have tremendous validity, but it also was an early contribution to the research that was looking at biologic origins to sexuality. Marine-Street: How did you get like all the blood drawn and everything? Gartrell: [00:27:48] Keith had funding. He was a Stanford faculty member, and he could devote funding to various resources, and he was a researcher. He came from NIH, so he was expected to be a researcher. He could just devote some of the funding that he had to this project. I mean, the most expensive part-we had the top statistician at the Medical School perform the statistical analyses. That was great since I was no statistician. Basically I would write up [the papers], and Keith would edit, and we’d go from there. He, from the very beginning, complimented my writing and told me I was a great writer 55 and he was really excited about working with me since I created less work for him. [laughter] The most expensive part was really the analyses of the blood. That was an expensive laboratory procedure at that time. He used funding that he had. Marine-Street: The Medical School did the analysis of the blood? Gartrell: [00:29:08] I have this vague recollection that it was actually sent out somewhere. I think it may have been sent out. Marine-Street: Were you using computers yet at this point? Gartrell: [00:29:20] Computers? [laughter] We’re talking 1971 and 1972. Computers? Marine-Street: How were you doing your work and your analysis? Gartrell: [00:29:34] The laboratory analysis, that was done--I mean, there were things like gas spectrometers. I actually would have to go back and look at how they actually did that. Marine-Street: I was just curious if you were using a computer lab or anything. Gartrell: [00:29:56] No, I mean, access to computers was not something that I had until 1986 or something. We’re talking 1970 to 1971. I mean, then the concept of computer was something that was the size of half of Stanford or something. Marine-Street: So they’re doing all their calculations by hand? They’re not using punch cards and feeding them into--? Gartrell: [00:30:25] Whether the statistician did that in terms of her analyses, I don’t know. That punch card concept I seem to remember it from back then for testing and things like that--like SATs and stuff. 56 Marine-Street: I was just curious. Sometimes people remember quite well working with those big mainframe machines before they had PCs. Gartrell: [00:30:54] I remember quite well not having access to anything resembling the computer. Marine-Street: Did you say the statistician was a woman? Gartrell: [00:31:01] Yes. Marine-Street: Did you know her? Gartrell: [00:31:03] I met her a number of times, Helena Kraemer [Helena Chmura Kraemer]. She is a very distinguished statistician. Marine-Street: Oh, very interesting. Gartrell: [00:31:12] A very nice woman. A very wonderful woman. Marine-Street: What was the outcome of the research? Did it gain any attention? Gartrell: [00:31:20] Master’s and Johnson’s group got publicity all over the country. That’s how we found out about it. But ours and a couple other studies that followed that showed no differences or differences in favor of the gay men didn’t get publicity at all, which then taught me, at that time, that the media reported what they wanted to report that was consistent with stereotypes. But, we were also right on the cusp of [the efforts to change the DSM]. Keith was the program chair of the APA meeting that I think was held in Hawaii-the American Psychiatric Association--where there was a lot of confrontation by gay male psychiatrists of the psychiatric establishment. He also approved to have on the program a panel or something related to homosexuality per se, which was probably focused on men because it was probably men doing the presentation. I did the first one that was 57 focused on lesbians in 1975. In any case, this meeting, which, again, I think was in Hawaii, was a time when there was a lot of attention to the issue of removing homosexuality from the DSM because there was no research to support a pathological diagnosis. In 1973, I’ll call it the first step of removal occurred. [Homosexuality was removed from the DSM], and ego dystonic homosexuality was [inserted instead]. It was a very long struggle to extract all pathological references to sexual identity from the DSM. But, it was a great victory in 1973. All of the work that was happening right around that time, including ours, contributed to this new understanding that there was no basis for the pathological diagnosis. That did not mean that the culture just woke up and said, “Oh, okay, right. Love your lesbian and gay neighbors.” No. “Let lesbian and gay people who come out and divorce their opposite sex partners and want to share or have custody of their children have their children.” No. The cultural change was very slow in coming. The legal changes were very slow in coming, but this was an incredibly important step in terms of the whole concept of mental illness and homosexuality. Marine-Street: Do you remember that time in 1973 when they decided to take that first step to take it out? Gartrell: [00:34:23] Absolutely. I mean, it was just vital. It was really vital. As I mentioned, I had no sense that there was anything wrong with me from the very beginning. My perception was it was all about the rest of the culture not understanding that we could be okay. We were just like everyone else with this exception. I was thrilled that the prospect of having that diagnosis 58 leveled at me, or ever finding myself in a situation where someone could decide that they could involuntarily hospitalize me based on it, couldn’t happen anymore. I, of course, didn’t understand fully then the ramifications of living in a state like Texas, for instance, where involuntarily hospitalizations continued to happen if family members just said, “Take this person.” Marine-Street: Right. Before we move on to med school, could you just tell me what Keith Brodie was like? Gartrell: [00:35:39] He was an incredibly supportive, beautifully articulate man, psychiatrist, researcher. I was so thrilled to have had him as my mentor because throughout my early years and subsequently all the way through my career, [he was supportive of my work]. When I wrote a book in 2008 called My Answer is No...If That’s Okay with You about the complexities of saying no when you care about the relationship--something that I had spent my whole clinical practice helping women and men who were concerned about setting limits in relationships learn how to do--even that, which was really not related directly to his work, he called me up with great enthusiasm about. I know he did that for all of the mentees he had over the years. [He] would write such lovely, supportive letters--handwritten letters. He could have, in the computer era, just sent me an email saying “great job,” but he didn’t. He would take the time to actually write out a letter saying, “You know, I’m so proud of you. You’ve just done such great work, and I always knew you could do these things, but you continue to impress me. You never fail to impress me.” Or whatever. Anyway, he couldn’t have been nicer and 59 more supportive. He was very supportive of my early efforts with the APA when I came in and pretty rapidly assumed some leadership positions in the national APA. He was very supportive of all my political positions even though they put me in immediate conflict with so many people. Nevertheless, he never wavered in his support. He was on his way to becoming president of the American Psychiatric Association and then first chancellor and then president of Duke University. He wasn’t a career politician in medicine or psychiatry in the sense that he chose to suppress difference or a divergence of opinion from the majority. He supported everything that I [pursued] in my career path--at least [when speaking] to me. If he had a difference of opinion, he didn’t share it with me, and he never tried to stop me from speaking out. That is an incredible thing. I mean here was a man who had the potential to use--he came from a very privileged background--his patriarchal power in a way that would be all about conformity, and he never was. [00:39:17] For him to choose to endorse and support a person who started out just as a lesbian and became a radical lesbian feminist with all that that entails, who took on the APA around sexual abuse of patients with all that that entails, and so many other things, is really an incredible statement about who he was. Marine-Street: Well said. Let’s talk about med school. Why did you decide on UC Davis? Gartrell: [00:39:58] Let’s see--multiple reasons. It seemed as though there were some interesting opportunities in psychiatry. It was a rural area, and I’d had an experience of being in an urban area and it seemed as though there was an 60 opportunity to see a less privileged population, a more rural population, and a more economically diverse population. Those were factors that contributed to my decision. Marine-Street: Do you have any memorable coursework or training moments as you think back to med school at UC Davis? Anything really stick in your mind? Gartrell: [00:40:56] No. [laughter] There’s nothing about medical school that I actually liked. It was just--it was hard work. It was very painful to see how patients were treated by physicians. I didn’t feel that there was much empathy, much willingness to really take time with patients. I tried to stay open in my career choice to see if there might be something different from psychiatry that I would have an interest in. The three areas that I was considering were psychiatry, pediatrics--because pediatricians had to be nice to kids, otherwise kids wouldn’t cooperate--and OB/GYN because I love delivering babies and that was a wonderful experience for me. All the other fields, I felt patients were disrespected. They weren’t treated like valuable human beings. That was not inspiring to me. What was inspiring [while I was in medical school] was a sidetrack, which was my connecting to a lesbian community. There was no lesbian community, no gay community [within medicine]. I didn’t know anybody else at the Medical School who was lesbian or gay. I suspected that one woman faculty was a lesbian but never had it confirmed. The Law School had admitted, in a couple of years, a group of feminist law students. As law students, they expected to be fighting throughout their careers. I went to a film where I met one of those law students and then got introduced to more 61 of them and got connected to their community. That was fabulous because that is what began my connection to what eventually became a radical lesbian feminist community. Again, there was no internet. There were no national [lesbian] newspapers. How did I find out about--from [a small town] in California--the fact that there was a radical lesbian feminist, separatist community in DC? Because one woman in this Law School group had been involved with one of the women in the radical lesbian feminist community in DC. That was one thing. But also it was the beginning of our computer network, which was the women’s music cultural movement. These were not computers. These were humans. These were piano playing, guitar playing lesbians who sang songs and went from little town to little town where these music concerts were held. Through word of mouth, people found out about them, and then we began to hear about the other communities that were developing around the country. [00:44:37] Dee Mosbacher [Diane Mosbacher], my spouse of fortythree years who’s also a psychiatrist and an Academy Award-nominated documentary filmmaker, made a film about that historical movement called Radical Harmonies. [It depicted] the story of the women’s music cultural movement. It was life- transforming for me in the sense that I saw this incredibly wonderful burgeoning community. We had a way of starting to communicate from community to community. [Lesbian] newspapers [were created] in these little communities--[sometimes] fliers or whatever, stapled 62 together--[various ways] of putting out news. The performers would tell us about things that were going on in different communities. Some of the women in these communities would travel to other communities or follow these musicians, and the network just started to grow. And also their songs were songs of pride and empowerment as women, as lesbians. They also created this whole industry around the music that was independent of the male music industry. Because they couldn’t get record contracts because they were lesbians. Men in Hollywood and various other places wouldn’t produce them because they were lesbians. They just started doing it all themselves. They built the infrastructure from the ground up. They learned how to do the sound recording. They learned how to make the records. They learned how to distribute the records. It just went from there. It was so inspiring to see what they were able to do. So when I think back about role modeling, in terms of becoming stronger and more confident in myself, I give tremendous credit to Keith Brodie for enabling me to start on this path of research that I had already determined was going to be my life’s work. And I give an incredible amount of credit to this women’s music cultural movement and the many lesbian communities with which I was affiliated for showing me that lesbians could be strong and powerful. And then we had, of course, more self-defense classes and so on. [Teaching us how to] fight back if we needed to. That fortified me in just phenomenal ways as I was going forward and even before I met Dee who has become my second backbone and my ally in absolutely everything that I’ve done. 63 Marine-Street: That’s really interesting. Let me just ask you a couple follow-up questions about that and then we’ll call it quits for today. Where did these concerts happen? Gartrell: [00:48:01] They happened in universities, in music halls, often in churches, often in churches. They would rent the basement of a church and somebody would figure out how to rent a sound system and, I mean, people learned to become producers and then they became producers for many years. They were in community centers and churches and wherever they could get a space and mics and sound systems and chairs and get the word out through fliers and so on. Marine-Street: Do you remember any specific places at UC Davis or any specific performers that you went to see? Gartrell: [00:48:42] Oh, for sure. The performance at Davis was at one of the college buildings, so somehow they got access to one of the college buildings. The performers included Meg Christian, Holly Near, Margie Adam, later Sweet Honey and the Rock. Oh, there are just so many. This Radical Harmonies film features many, many of them. But they also led to these lesbian gatherings where some of the writers and thinkers of the movement were coming together and would give speeches. I remember somewhere in the Sacramento area, there was a gathering and people like Rita Mae Brown who was a member of the original Furies Collective in Washington spoke, and like many people, I was just mesmerized. “Oh my gosh, she can just get up and say all these powerful things and talk about what we can do, and how we can control our lives, and 64 how we can do it all, and we don’t have to be dependent on men. We can just do it as women and there’s nothing to stop us.” Marine-Street: That’s a great place to end for today. [End of Part 2 of 5 - Interview with Nanette Gartrell - August 29, 2018] 65 66 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PIONEERING WOMEN ALUMNAE ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: NANETTE GARTRELL INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 31, 2018 PART: 3 OF 5 Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program. Today is August 31, 2018, and we are resuming our oral history interview with Dr. Nanette Gartrell. You had mentioned that you had remembered something else about the computer question I asked you last time. Shall we start there? Gartrell: [00:00:22] Yes, please. I was so surprised when you asked if I had access to a computer in 1970 doing research. After we concluded the first part of our interview, I sort of thought back to that particular study and I had a very clear image of sitting on my dorm floor--I was an RA that year--sitting on my dorm floor and in the first round, stuffing all the envelopes that were going out to the psychiatrists in the Northern California Psychiatric Association. Putting the stamps on and labels and all that sort of stuff. The second was the tabulation because all of my research for the first couple of decades was conducted through paper and pencil questionnaires, aside from the blood draws. We mailed out these questionnaires. We got 67 them back and then I, with a couple of volunteers who were on my corridor who were willing to participate, hand-tabulated. So we had all these stacks of answers that we then double-checked each other. I took those numbers over and gave them to the statistician who then crunched the data. From my conversations with a statistician who worked under her, I’m guessing that they did it with sort of calculators and things like that rather than the mainframe computer at Stanford. I kind of doubt that but I have no idea. Marine-Street: I know. They might have had punch cards. There were some kind of punch cards and it could run the job.. Gartrell: [00:02:09] They were definitely hand tabulated. [laughter] Marine-Street: I’m glad you remembered that. I always love to hear how people did their research in the days before it was so easy to just load up your Excel spreadsheet or your Math Lab or whatever. When we left off last time, we were talking about the music scene at UC Davis and the Law School group of feminists that you had found there. I wondered, were you aware of the women’s movement at that time when you were in medical school? Gartrell: [00:02:49] Definitely. I mean, Ms. magazine was already out, and I was very excited about that. The women’s movement was influencing the lesbian community as well. The lesbians whom I admired who were part of this women’s music cultural movement were strong feminists and lesbian identified. They were taking that message from community to community to community, small town to big town to small town, all over the country and it was wonderful. 68 Marine-Street: Did you have a word that you used to describe your politics or your identity at that time? Gartrell: [00:03:31] We didn’t combine the words lesbian and feminist. We just said we were lesbians, and that was a very radical statement unto itself. Marine-Street: What about feminist? Was that a term that you would have used to describe yourself then? Gartrell: [00:03:46] Yes, happily, but it’s just that in the ordinary sentence structure, it was far more radical to say lesbian than lesbian feminist. Also the feminist movement--there was a great resistance on the part of some women who identified as feminists to having lesbians in the women’s movement. We were considered the “lavender menace,” and there were great efforts to exclude lesbians and any visible lesbian presence because they were afraid that the entire women’s movement would be tarnished with the paintbrush of lesbianism which, in their minds, equaled “women who hated men.” They couldn’t conceptualize the fact that lesbians were lesbians because we loved women and that it wasn’t a reaction to men. It was a reaction for women. Marine-Street: Did you ever experience that kind of tension? Do you have any examples that you can give me that happened in your own experience of feeling like the feminist movement wanted to exclude lesbians? Gartrell: [00:05:25] I had experiences in the American Psychiatric Association later when I was in a leadership position with the Women’s Committee. Straight feminists made bizarre assumptions about me as a lesbian or my associations with colleagues whenever I would find another ally with whom I could work on a particular project that was either groundbreaking or problem-creating 69 within the American Psychiatric Association because of its values. I had people make comments to me along the lines of, “Oh, are you two lovers?” when it was 1), never the case and 2), completely irrelevant to the project. But the assumption was made that somehow if someone joined my “camp” that person must be a lesbian, or I must be involved with that person. Marine-Street: Yes, it was just something you wouldn’t necessarily assume if a woman had joined a male colleague on a project. Why did they say “lavender menace?” What was that about? Gartrell: [00:06:45] Because very rapidly lesbianism became associated with the color lavender. Our t-shirts became lavender. It just became a very popular color, and I actually don’t know the origin of the connection of that color to lesbianism but I’ve always loved the color lavender, I love the plant lavender, and we painted our house various shades of lavender. I’m pretty happy with the color. [laughter] Marine-Street: Okay. You had started to tell me a little bit about this externship when you were a senior medical student and it’s an important time in your life. Do you want to just tell me that story of how you got to DC and what happened when you got there? Gartrell: [00:07:34] Yes. Keith Brodie and I had had many conversations about my senior year in medical school--Keith Brodie, my mentor. I said I was really interested in--he’d been at NIH--perhaps going to NIH. I didn’t know if they had externships, which is doing an elective for a period of time for medical students. He said, “Oh yes, they do.” I said I probably should do some work in neurology because that would be helpful since I was already going into 70 psychiatry. I should drop back and tell a story about my psychiatry interviews, but I’ll continue with this one first. He made a recommendation of a particular program, and I applied and I was accepted. I moved to DC in the summer of 1975 and through the lesbian law group in Davis was connected with an opportunity to move into a house of other lesbians where they had an empty room. I moved into this house where it turned out the person who’s become the love of my life and my partner and now spouse of forty-three years, Dee Mosbacher, was already living. We jokingly say that we’re the only couple we know who moved in together before we’d even met. [laughter] I got to know Dee and fell in love with her and the rest is history there. Working at NIH, I was doing neurology and also had the opportunity to do a follow-up study on hormone measurements because all the stereotypes don’t go away overnight regardless of how much research you do. I was able to replicate the study we had done on men and measure testosterone levels in lesbians and compare them to our straight cohort who were Mormon women who were hoping to become pregnant. We had a comparison group of DC, relatively radical lesbians [versus the] relatively conservative Mormon women who were en route to pregnancy. We found that all the testosterone levels were essentially in the normal range for both groups. That was an interesting study that happened during that time. One of the other things that happened while I was there--it was a very exciting time for me to be in this dynamic, really progressive, leftist in terms of their politics, anti-war, pro women, pro-choice, pro lesbian 71 community--really a group that was creating a lesbian identity. It was the beginning of that era. It was very vibrant for me. It was also immediately after J. Edgar Hoover had died. I mean, he died in 1972 and that’s when he left the FBI--when he died. His presence didn’t leave the FBI, of course, and the FBI had already an extensive program of surveilling any progressive groups. Anyone they deemed to be a threat in any way, despite the fact that it’s known that he, himself [Hoover], was a closeted gay person. They were surveilling the lesbian community in DC in a big way. This was news to me when I moved there. I had no idea that this kind of surveillance was happening. [00:11:49] I was present at some social gatherings where the conversation stopped and someone started talking about, “What you do if the FBI shows up at the door?” They talked about the fact that the lesbian community was infiltrated by FBI informants and that they were certain of that, they just didn’t know who they were. [They knew] because there were often people who were asking questions about, “Who do you know?” or “Do you know this person?” or “What can you tell me about that person?” And so, although they didn’t have evidence, they felt very strongly suspicious about those kinds of inquiries. Dee, herself, was working in the pro-choice movement, and she suspected that she was being surveilled, despite the fact that her family were very prominent Republicans. She grew up with the Bush’s, and knew them well. Dee’s uncle was Nixon’s protocol chief during that time. She still suspected that she was being surveilled. At one meeting, we were told that if 72 the FBI ever showed up at the door, [we should] not answer any questions. [We were advised to] say “I cannot answer any questions unless an attorney is present.” I just thought, oh my gosh, here I am--I’ve come from small town Santa Barbara, went to Stanford, I know we had the anti-war movement and so on, but here I am in a community where the simple act of loving another woman was cause for surveillance. The simple act of women organizing for ourselves and not being about men was cause for surveillance. That was deeply threatening to the power structure at the time. That was a phenomenal [piece of advice] that I stored away. It didn’t happen to us then. Fast forward to 1988. Here in our home in San Francisco! We had not lived here very long when at seven o’clock in the morning, the doorbell rang. I answered the intercom and somebody said-a man’s voice--said, “This is the FBI. We want to speak to Diane Mosbacher.” I started laughing. I happened to be up. I’m a morning person and Dee’s not a morning person. She was up, but not fully caffeinated. She wasn’t near the intercom. I said, “Okay, who is it? This is a joke. Tell me who you are.” The person said, “This is no joke, ma’am. This is the FBI, and I need you to come to the door, and I want to speak to Diane Mosbacher.” She goes by Dee. I still couldn’t believe that this was actually happening so I called to her, and I said, “There’s somebody who says that he’s the FBI, and he’s at the door, and they want to talk to you.” 73 I don’t remember what year--I guess at whatever point the Freedom of Information Act allowed us to get Dee’s and my FBI records--we actually did apply for them. Much to my disappointment, I had no record. [laughter] [00:15:25] Dee has a [thick] FBI file that [was] heavily redacted. Not only was she pro-choice and working on pro-choice activism, but she had also joined the Socialist Worker’s Party--[a long distance from] her Republican roots. Both of those [activities], at that time, triggered a great interest in what she must be up to. We went down to the door and unbelievably, there was a man and a woman standing at the door in trench coats--I mean, this was like from a 1950s movie--holding up badges that said FBI on them. The man said, “We’d like to talk to you, Diane Mosbacher.” We stood there and he said, “I have a few questions I’d like to ask since your father has just been nominated to be Secretary of Commerce.” She said, “I suspect that you want to know if I’m a lesbian. Yes, I’m a lesbian.” He said, “Does your father know that you are a lesbian?” She said, “Yes, he does.” He said, “Thank you very much” and they turned and walked away. They got on a plane, flew to Houston, showed up at his door the next morning--at seven o’clock in the morning or something like that and said, “Do you know that your daughter is a lesbian?” He said, “Yes, I do,” and then they walked away. 74 That FBI training from [our early years] actually [had some relevance later] in our lives. I mean, Dee could see where it was going, but if it had happened back then, it would have been an entirely different scenario. Marine-Street: Did that go anywhere--his nomination as Secretary of Commerce? Gartrell: [00:17:32] He became Secretary of Commerce. Marine-Street: Was it an issue? Gartrell: [00:17:35] Under H. W. [Bush]. Around the [time of the] 1988 election Karl Rove came up with the idea of using homophobia as a fundraising tool for the Republican Party. It generated a tremendous amount of concern about “if we let the Democrats win, they’re going to let lesbian and gay people get married and have civil rights and all these things.” In the course of the H. W. [Bush] administration, the [Republicans] put out films [containing this message]. Gay Rights, Special Rights was one of the names of these films, [focused on] the “gay menace, the lesbian menace, we’re coming after you. We’re going to take away your rights, and we’re going to get all the rights that we don’t yet have and deserve.” Dee made the decision to come out publicly on a national platform to speak [about these issues]. She was the first lesbian or gay person who had a parent who was a very high-ranking person in the administration to speak out against the Republican Party’s homophobia--its gay and lesbian baiting for the purposes of fundraising and discrimination against us. She got a tremendous amount of publicity around all of that. That actually led into her decision to make films for the purpose of educating about homophobia because she felt she could reach a wider audience. Dee was on national 75 television and did a tremendous amount of public speaking during that time. It catapulted her into taking on the Republican Party. Marine-Street: Very interesting story. The FBI finally showing up at the door. Gartrell: [00:19:50] In trench coats. [laughter] I mean, really, 1988, in trench coats. Marine-Street: I want to go back to something that you said that really intrigued me, and I hadn’t thought about this before. It’s the mid-1970s. You’re living in a house of lesbians in Washington, DC and you’re saying you’re kind of trying to figure out what does this mean? What is this identity that we’re kind of creating? I wondered if you could relate any of the decisions that you made about what this identity was? Was there a political component to it? Were there places that you went, kinds of food that you ate? I mean, what was this? Gartrell: [00:20:30] The sort of catch phrase that began back then that was so characteristic of my life was that “the personal is political” and the personal was political. In 1974 when I interviewed for residencies, I interviewed at Harvard, Columbia, and Duke. Keith was at Duke and wanted me to go to Duke and did so many wonderful things to try to convince me to go to Duke. [For example], he thought that one of the women in his Department of Psychiatry was likely a lesbian. I think she was a social worker. He went up to her and said, “I hope you don’t mind my asking this question and there will be no negative consequences to this, but it could be really helpful if you would be honest. Do you happen to be a lesbian?” She was completely shocked. In North Carolina, it was very conservative back then. She said, “Well, yes I am.” He said, “That’s fantastic because I have somebody I’m 76 trying to convince to come here to residency. I wonder if when she comes for her interview, would you mind--do you have a community? Do you know other lesbians? Is there any chance that you would be willing to introduce her to other lesbians in this community?” They did [have a community there]. This [particular woman] had a farm and all these lesbians came over. It was fabulous. It was just an amazing experience. That’s how hard he tried to get me to go to Duke. I had already published papers. None of my peers [applying to residency] had published papers. Again, now it’s really different. Back then, [having publications already was] really unusual. I did my interview at Harvard, and it was clear they wanted me. I went to Columbia. I met with the department chair. He told me I was a shoein. They wanted me. “What could they do to convince me to be in the program?” [he asked.] My last interview was with Robert Spitzer. He was the architect of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. He was the opponent of taking homosexuality out. He was the person who insisted on retaining various versions of pathology associated with homosexuality, egodystonic homosexuality, various other things. He carried that kind of [mission] forward for decades. He met with me for my interview. I sat down in his office, and he said, “You’re clearly a lesbian so are you the butch or are you the femme?” I said, “I’m neither.” He said, “Well, what do you do?” His whole interview was about my behavior as a lesbian. It was disgusting, horrifying, inappropriate. [I didn’t know what a person like me 77 could do in such a circumstance]. I left the interview knowing what the department chair had already told me. I was [supposedly] a shoe-in. [00:23:49] I walked to the cafeteria. My first lover met me in the cafeteria. I sat down, and I told her the story of what had gone on and that probably took twenty minutes. I said, “Let’s just get out of here. This completely freaks me out that this man has done this to me.” I [had] refused to answer many of the questions because they were so invasive and so inappropriate. I turned to walk out of the cafeteria, and he was hanging in the doorway watching us. He’d followed me to the cafeteria, and he was standing there watching us. A few weeks later, I got a letter saying they were terribly sorry that they couldn’t accommodate me at Columbia. Keith, who was a Columbia graduate, called the department chair and said, “So what’s going on here? She was told by you that you were admitting her now you say you’re not.” He was told by the department chair, “Well, we’re not admitting her because she has a problem with her lesbianism.” The problem was I didn’t think my lesbianism was a problem. Marine-Street: Did you think it was because you didn’t want to talk about it? Was he expecting you to be more forthcoming? Gartrell: [00:25:11] No, I refused to consider it a problem. I was affirming of it. In a homophobic, psychoanalytic, psychodynamic program such as what Columbia was at that time, that didn’t fit with the protocol. Marine-Street: But it had already been removed from the DSM by that point? 78 Gartrell: [00:25:35] But he was the opponent. That was a year later. One year later. He was very unhappy that it was out of the DSM. Marine-Street: Were you disappointed by that decision? Gartrell: [00:25:48] I had already been accepted at Harvard. Despite Keith’s wonderful offering of a great lesbian community at Duke [laughter], I’d had a taste of living in a city, in DC for six months, and I wanted to have another urban experience. I wanted to try out living on the East Coast. I chose Harvard. Marine-Street: That’s a great story about Keith Brodie going out and finding the lesbians at Duke for you. Gartrell: [00:26:18] Thankfully that woman--it was just such a sweet thing to do--but thankfully that woman ended up feeling really good about having said yes as opposed to being terrified. Marine-Street: That’s really funny. I want to get back and ask you a lot of questions about Harvard and what that was like. But at the same time that this is happening, you’re getting involved at the APA. I wondered if you could talk about some of the different task forces that you worked on and some of the activist work that you’re doing in that setting. Gartrell: [00:26:53] So I went to Harvard for my residency, and, as a resident, I was chosen to do an honorary fellowship with the American Psychiatric Association, APA. That APA. One of them was to be on the task force of the psychology of women and men and the other was to be on a lesbian and gay task force. I ran into a lot of challenges immediately with both. The gay/lesbian task force, I was the only woman. We would have meetings that 79 were part work-oriented and part--I don’t know--hitting-on-each-other oriented. Marine-Street: The men? Gartrell: [00:27:54] The men. They were talking about their sexual exploits. It was just so inappropriate. Just an example of one of those--they decided we would have one of our meetings on Fire Island. We had meetings at the APA in Washington and then we would have other meetings. They proposed one on Fire Island. I had never been to Fire Island. Again, coming from not having means, this was the first time I was actually earning an income. Oh good, [I thought], Fire Island. I’d heard about it and thought, you know, how nice to go see this place. One of the people on the task force had a house on Fire Island, and so we met in the house. I showed up in business attire. They were all wearing short shorts or bathing suits. We met for a few hours again with a little bit of work and a lot of sort of banter about sexual stuff and then broke at 11:00 or 12:00 for a so-called lunch break. I sat there while they went out and met men. I mean, that was the lunch break. I was just mortified. It was just horrifying to me. The Task Force on the Curriculum of the Psychology of Women and Men--we were assigned the responsibility of creating a curriculum on the psychology of women and men. Everybody volunteered for various sections. I volunteered for a couple. It was a small number of us--but that included really prominent psychiatrists such as Jean Baker Miller. 80 I volunteered for the sexuality chapter. I wrote the sexuality chapter. In the sexuality chapter and this was--I forget what year it was--1979 or something like that. Or 1980. I wrote a single sentence that seemed to cause tremendous difficulty once our group approved it all and submitted it to the APA to be endorsed and adopted by the APA, and then used for curricula all over the country--residency curricula and in medical schools. “Homosexuality is a normal [form of] sexual expression.” Or “Homosexuality is a normal expression of sexual affection.” Something like that. That single sentence made the hierarchy of the APA go ballistic. 1973 and however many years later this is--1979-1980, somewhere around there-the APA hierarchy was unwilling to endorse a single sentence of this curriculum. They said it had to be removed. [00:31:15] There were a couple women who were moving up the ranks of the APA and happened to be in my department at Harvard. They took it upon themselves--without telling me--to rewrite my section of the curriculum, including taking that sentence out. Then I was informed that that had happened. I said, “That’s absolutely not acceptable.” [It was rewritten under my name]. I said, “It is not acceptable.” I don’t know how I became this assertive that rapidly, but I knew that you do not rewrite anyone’s material and keep that person’s name on it without that person’s permission, with the intention of publishing it and publicizing it. It’s not okay. It’s not ethical. I said, “That’s absolutely not going to happen and there is no justification when homosexuality has been removed from the DSM not to have this totally vanilla sentence in this curriculum.” 81 Then they tried to talk me into it. “Oh well, you know, for the sake getting the whole curriculum out, this is really important. What you’re doing is you’re slowing this down. We need this curriculum out.” I said, “I stand by my principles on this and the APA should stand by the removal of homosexuality from the DSM.” That wasn’t going to happen. It wasn’t going to happen. What I did was I said, “Okay, well then in that case, I’m pulling my chapter, and I’m resigning from this task force.” Others who had contributed chapters who were allies also did the same thing. They included Jean Baker Miller and Joe Pleck [Joseph Pleck] who had written a lot on men and masculinity--he actually has a book called Men and Masculinity-who was a great ally. And the most progressive women who’d contributed to this curriculum pulled their chapters, and it was killed and it never came out. [00:33:57] So I was rapidly making myself an enemy of people in power by being this assertive as a very, very junior person in the organization. I said to you previously that Keith Brodie, as my mentor, even though he was on the rise--I forget when he became president of the American Psychiatric Association but it was somewhere close to that period of time--he could have been another person who tried to suppress me, especially because everyone knew that I knew him very well. He could have said, “Oh, you’re causing so much trouble, you know, things don’t move that quickly. Just take it easy. Do one thing at a time. It takes ten years to move from this point to that point.” He never did that. If anything, I think 82 privately he was somewhat amused that I was willing to have that much hutzpah. Marine-Street: Wow. So I just want to make sure I understand. On the committee, there was a divide about what you should do in terms of this sentence? There were some allies that said we agree with you and others that said no, you should change it? Gartrell: [00:35:10] No, the committee itself completely supported it. But once it went up to be approved in the hierarchy of the APA, then people who were on the rise and people who were in positions of power all piled on--and then this maneuver of rewriting my section. Marine-Street: That was by people on the committee? Gartrell: [00:35:33] Who were outside the committee. Who were already in the APA hierarchy and on the rise in the APA hierarchy. Nobody within the task force itself tried to rewrite my sentence. Marine-Street: Did the task force just disband then or what happened? Gartrell: [00:35:50] The curriculum was killed because the most prominent contributors to it pulled their sections. I was not the most prominent contributor, but I was the person who pulled my section and I wrote to everybody else who was a task force member and also the prominent contributors. And I said I’m resigning and I’m pulling my section and this is not acceptable and they just followed suit. Marine-Street: I want to just follow up on the lesbian and gay task force. Did you continue to participate on that task force after the Fire Island, uhh, meeting? 83 Gartrell: [00:36:26] I don’t remember how much longer I was on the task force, but it became clear to me that I worked much better in groups of women than in groups of straight men when I was the only woman or gay men when I was the only woman. I veered to the APA Women’s Committee. I was appointed to join that committee, and they very rapidly figured out that it’s a good idea to assign [projects to] people who get things done. Very rapidly after residency, I found myself Chair of the National Committee of Women at the American Psychiatric Association. Marine-Street: What were some of your goals then? Before we get to that, I want to ask about that but I think a little bit before that, you were very active in ERA type activism. I wonder if you could just talk a little bit about that. Gartrell: [00:37:30] Nationally, women were trying to get the Equal Rights Amendment ratified, and we were all in support of that. Because of the obstacles, one of the strategies that was proposed through some prominent feminist--and I don’t remember who but it could have been Gloria Steinem-was that large organizations that were intending to hold conventions in states that had not yet ratified the ERA should pull their conventions and meet only in states that had ratified the ERA. [The idea was] to have an economic impact on states that had not ratified. The American Psychiatric Association had 30,000 or so members. We had big conventions. We were booked ahead in states that hadn’t ratified. [When I was] a senior resident, the APA’s convention [was held] in Chicago. [In our Boston] apartment, Dee [and I] tore up thousands of black arm bands--with plumes of cotton [filling] the air--who knew that tearing up black 84 arm bands would lead to inhalation of all kinds of cotton dust?--to take to the APA meeting as a symbol of supporting holding conventions only in states that were ratified. The following year was in San Francisco in 1980. I made a bunch of signs and organized a picket outside the convention. I was an APA member so I could go inside, but we also got Gloria Steinem to come and give a speech. She was going to be speaking officially within the convention. We hadn’t notified her that we were doing the demonstration outside. I just believed in visibility because I’d been in enough demonstrations by then, both lesbian and gay and women’s, that I knew that visibility and signs and protests and pickets and so on were just really important. We had signs that said, “Anti-ERA psychiatrists are bad for your mental health.” [We wore] the arm bands again, and we encouraged everybody to wear white coats because we thought that would be a good thing for visibility. I organized this picketing outside the Convention Center here in San Francisco. [00:40:43] Meanwhile, I was [living in] Boston, but this was here. We got people to come from around the country and got as many medical students as we could from here to join us because we needed bulk. We had our picket going and then Gloria came early to give her talk, and she saw that we were demonstrating, and so she grabbed a sign and picketed with us. It got a fair amount of attention that we were doing this. They didn’t change the [locations of the] next meetings, [so] we boycotted those meetings. Didn’t attend them. 85 Marine-Street: Let me just ask a follow-up question to that because you said that you had done previous demonstrations. I know you talked a little bit about being involved in some anti-war but were there lesbian demonstrations or gay rights demonstrations? Gartrell: [00:41:38] Stonewall, the fighting back against the police harassment and abuse of lesbian and gay people, had happened in 1969. Then the evolution of Pride began to happen. Then we had positive demonstrations as well as demonstrations against injustice. I was involved in organizing lesbian physicians in Boston as a resident. Our group in Boston was called Dyke Docs. I got people to [demonstrate]. I was always the sign maker, the arm band tearer--I like making signs. I enjoy it if I have time. I don’t always have time. I’m not an artist but I really enjoy putting nice, pretty letters on signs and making signs. I’m an organizer at heart and I really like getting people to follow through on commitments. I’ve been an organizer since way back then. I’d make the signs and tell people, you know, to put out the word. “I’ll make the signs. You just need to show up because I can’t carry forty signs.” So we marched in the small and growing Boston Pride Parade. Again, many fewer women than men, but I was just really working on increasing our visibility in that way as well. Marine-Street: That’s great. What else did the Dyke Docs group do other than march sometimes in demonstrations? Gartrell: [00:43:28] We would meet for potlucks. Most of the medical students were closeted. I was the first out fulltime [lesbian physician] faculty member at Harvard Medical School. I was trying to [help other] people feel comfortable 86 [enough] to come out because I’d already created a path where I found that it was safe for me to be out. I knew that if I spent all my time making signs and I didn’t attend to my patients or, you know, show up at the hospital or do very good work or publish the requisite number of papers to put me on the track for promotion, I’d be out of there in a nanosecond. I had to be very good or probably better than my peers if I were going to be doing this visible activism. There’s just no question about that. Fortunately, I was aware of that, and I did my work well. I did my research very well because I cared very much about it. I cared very much about my clinical work--trying to help people be less self-hating about being lesbian and gay. That mattered tremendously to me. I did this political work at the same time. I just lost track of what the question was. Marine-Street: I was just wondering what else the Dyke Docs did as an organization? Gartrell: [00:45:10] We’d have potlucks and then my personal mission was to get more people to come out and to figure out ways to feel safe in coming out. Professionally, [that is], because they were out personally. Because there was the importance of strength in numbers--I didn’t want to be the only one. There needed to be more of us. How were we going to change things if I was the only one? So that was the mission. Also I worked on trying to recruit medical students who were on the cusp of coming out or feeling safer with the prospect of coming out to come when I was teaching about homophobia in medicine to medical students or to residents--I was giving lectures. [I invited] them come [describe] their experiences of homophobia in medical school. 87 I began to be very successful at finding a student each year who was willing and brave enough to [tell her or his story]. The stories were just heartbreaking about being assumed to be heterosexual and the kinds of things that they listened to on a daily basis that were homophobic and harsh and cruel and critical of lesbian and gay people because [these students] were assumed to be members of the majority. Marine-Street: I have a question that I want to ask you that might sound a little bit strange. Professionally at work, you said you were the first out lesbian. How did you kind of manifest that? How did you let people know? Or was it because of your work and then if somebody asked you, you would just say yes? What was the difference between--in a professional context--being closeted and being out? Gartrell: [00:47:08] First of all, when you were unique in that particular way back then, you tell one or two people, and then there’s gossip that just spreads like wildfire through the medical school and through the departments and so on. It was, “Did you know that Nanette’s a [lesbian]?” I didn’t need to carry a sign or put a label on my door, “Nanette Gartrell, MD, the lesbian psychiatrist” or anything like that because everyone just seemed to know very rapidly after I told a few people. And then a fair amount of the work that I did and the groups I was involved with in Boston also brought media attention. Sometimes there would be a Boston Globe reporter interviewing a group of very prominent women psychiatrists, and I was lucky enough to be a member of that particular group. I would talk about my perspective, [i.e., that of a lesbian psychiatrist]. 88 One thing that was characteristic of me and my appearance was that in looking at me--you know, I talked about back when I was an undergraduate at Stanford, changing my attire from miniskirts to overalls and turtleneck t-shirts and [wearing more] comfort clothes. We often talk about the lesbian attire that evolved from those days, which was all about comfortable clothes. If there was a lesbian uniform, it involved flannel shirts and things like overalls and loose-fitting pants and Birkenstocks. It [wasn’t] a stereotype. It was kind of the uniform. In some very rigid communities, if you dressed like you were a member of the majority culture, there was criticism for trying to “pass.” When I entered residency, there were three women residents in my program and all the rest were men. I already mentioned there were no women on the faculty. Harvard had five psychiatric programs, and I was in one of them. I was the only woman who wore pants throughout my residency. The other women wore skirts. I dressed appropriately and nicely, but [my clothing style] was radical for 1976 to 1979--to wear pants rather than a skirt. [The pants were] the remnant of the lesbian uniform [laughter] that I brought into my residency. When I joined the faculty, I had moved into a [mindset in which] I decided I was just going to wear whatever I wanted to wear. It was very, very hot in Boston in the summer and so I started wearing skirts again some of the time. Just, you know, whatever felt comfortable. [00:51:15] Looking at me back then, you wouldn’t necessarily immediately know that I was a lesbian based on what became the stereotype89 -and that was [then] accurate--of lesbian dress. Anybody who had not heard the rumor the moment that it went out--when I started telling people about being a lesbian--[wouldn’t necessarily know based on my appearance]. I very often would have people come up to me--new faculty, new residents, whatever--and ask me if I was married. Now back then, married meant to a man. My response was always, “Oh no, I can’t get married because I’m a lesbian, but I do have a partner.” Person after person had sort of the immediate jaw-dropping response, had to reel it back up, and hemming and hawing and sometimes blushing, [saying] “Oh my gosh, I didn’t know.” I dealt with that kind of thing on a--well, there were new staff every year--so that was kind of a routine. Marine-Street: Did you face any kind of hostility or resistance on the Harvard faculty? Gartrell: [00:52:27] Again, as long as I did what I was supposed to do, there wasn’t an opportunity to get rid of me. My department chair at Beth Israel despised every project that I was working on and really wanted to silence me. He was incredibly resistant. He told me that I wasn’t going to get promoted doing the work I was doing. He told me at one point I should not be using my Beth Israel or my Harvard affiliation on any of my publications or when speaking to the press because Beth Israel was a private hospital and it wasn’t appropriate for me to identify myself as a member of the faculty. I can tell the story of how I worked my way around that ultimately now if you would like that. Marine-Street: Yes, definitely. 90 Gartrell: [00:53:34] The president of our hospital at that time was Mitch Rabkin [Mitchell T. Rabkin]. He’s an emeritus professor at Harvard now with whom I have been in contact fairly recently. I decided that if I was going to continually be told by my department chair--who had, by the way, refused to put me up for promotion when I had twice the number of publications required and more than my peers who had been promoted who were male; and I had to push for that in order to be promoted--if I was going to continually run up against his brick walls and comments that I shouldn’t identify myself as working there, that I was going to go to the president of the hospital and just ask, “Is this really the case?” Because if it is the case, then so be it. I’m still going to do the work I’m going to do. Everything I worked on was controversial at the time that I started it so it was still going to garner publicity. So I might as well just find out and then I’ll go about my business. I wanted to find out from someone who wasn’t [more concerned about] protecting himself than thinking about maybe the institution as a whole. And also it would be a sad statement about the institution as a whole if that were the case. I made an appointment to meet with the president of the hospital. I hadn’t met him before. I guess I just sent my CV and walked into his office and introduced myself. I’d been there for some number of years at the time I did this. I said that I didn’t know if he’d had an opportunity to review my work, and he said yes, he had. I said that I was there because I had been told that the nature of my work, the topics I studied and the focus of both my clinical work, the kind of 91 teaching that I was doing, and my research was not in keeping with the image that Beth Israel and Harvard Medical School wanted to convey, and that I was advised not to use my Harvard and Beth Israel affiliations on my publications or when speaking to the press. He said, “That is absolutely not the case. Your work is outstanding. It’s a contribution to our institution-both our institutions--to have you on the faculty and you absolutely should feel free to [specify your affiliation with] Beth Israel and Harvard Medical School in going forward.” Essentially, [meaning], “It’s not an issue that you’re a lesbian doing the work that you’re doing.” I was ecstatic. I couldn’t believe that he had just endorsed every part of who I was, and I promptly went out to all the closeted physicians that I knew who were working in our hospital and elsewhere in the Harvard system and contacted them and said, “You can come out now. It is safe for you to be out. Mitch Rabkin just said it’s okay for me to be a lesbian doing this work. You’re not even doing the kind of work [I am, meaning research on and clinical work related to LGBT people], but you can come out. It’s okay.” Slowly, one after another after another came out. Marine-Street: Did the department chair--was there any blowback from him when you went over his head? Gartrell: [00:57:31] I didn’t go back to him and say, “Oh, by the way, Mitch Rabkin says--.” Marine-Street: You just went ahead and did what you were going to do and eventually you gained promotion? 92 Gartrell: [00:57:46] Yes, because I fought for it. I did know that there already was a long history of women who were trying to get tenure everywhere in the country having to fight for tenure typically. So I knew about that already. It was just no different there for the Medical School faculty, in terms of promotions. Marine-Street: Let’s take a break. [End of Part 3 of 5 - Interview with Nanette Gartrell - August 31, 2018] 93 94 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PIONEERING WOMEN ALUMNAE ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: NANETTE GARTRELL INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 31, 2018 PART: 4 OF 5 Marine-Street: I’d like to hear a little bit more about Dyke Docs, and I know you’d like to talk a little bit about the terminology and how that evolved. Gartrell: [00:00:11] Just a few words about terminology. When I was growing up, the words “homosexual” were used clinically and also the words “queer” or “homos” were used derogatorily. As I came out, I identified as a lesbian and there was an early separation in the identification of women as lesbians and men as gay--and particularly by women who were really proud to be out identifying as lesbian. Those who were hesitant about being out chose the word “gay” as a self-reference because I think they thought it seemed maybe happier or something. [laughter] As the community and time evolved, a lot of words that were used in derogatory ways and homophobic ways in the past were reclaimed by our community and acceptable to be used within our community but not by outsiders. In calling ourselves “the Dyke Docs” in Boston, that was reclaiming of a derogatory term, “dyke”, which I hadn’t heard as a child but 95 had certainly heard it subsequently. We organized in Boston as this group of Dyke Docs and, as I mentioned, I was also trying to get people to come out and also trying to get young medical students--actually senior medical students--to speak in classes I was teaching, [to talk] about their experiences of homophobia within medicine when they were assumed to be heterosexual. In 1984, I received a letter from two physicians in California, Patty Robertson [Patricia Robertson] who was at UCSF, a very prominent professor of neonatology now and Lesley Anderson [Lesley J. Anderson], who is an orthopedic surgeon, inviting me to what they called the first National Lesbian Physician Conference to be held in Asilomar, California, and to be the keynote speaker--speaking on the importance of being out. I thought, “Wow, what an opportunity.” So, of course, I went and did my keynote speech to a very small conference. That conference has been alive ever since. It’s an international conference. Sometimes we have as many as three hundred attendees from various places, mostly in the United States but also internationally. Dee and I organized the second such conference. I have spoken at many of them on many of the different areas of research that I’ve been involved in. Dee has both spoken and had leadership positions and also shown her documentary films at various of the conferences. It’s an all-volunteer organization. We do get continuing medical education credit, but it’s members of our lesbian physician community who actually take hundreds of hours every year out of their time to make these conferences happen. It’s kind of an amazing experience that it still exists all these years later. 96 [00:03:44] We give scholarships now to medical students. Those of us who are older contribute money for scholarships. We have these young medical students who have no [lesbian physician] role models whatsoever [at their schools] who come to our conferences, and they’re just in awe and feel so empowered and thrilled. Just as an example, our most recent conference was a few weeks ago in Napa. We had two young lesbian medical students from West Virginia--the first time that I know of we’ve ever had any attendees from West Virginia--who came. It was like a life-saving experience for them. It’s just wonderful to see the kinds of opportunities that we were able to provide [in mentoring, networking, and peer support]. We also give scholarships for research and for career development to both medical students and residents and junior faculty. We have become a very supportive organization for those who are up and coming as lesbian physicians and medical students and trainees. Marine-Street: I was curious about the name of that group. Gartrell: [00:05:10] Women in Medicine. It’s a euphemism for lesbian physicians, which I say is a euphemism for Dyke Docs. [laughter] Women in Medicine was chosen because there was a great fear that those who were closeted wouldn’t come to a conference called Lesbian Physicians--and they certainly wouldn’t come to a conference called Dyke Docs--so it stuck. I think maybe at some point it might change although we now have the archives of our conference from all the way back to the beginning. They have been acquired by Drexel University Medical School. There may be an interest in maintaining the name because of the historical connection to the beginning. 97 Marine-Street: Are there any particularly memorable moments from any of your annual meetings or conferences? Gartrell: [00:06:05] Since, once again, I tend to be the person who’s talking about the radical topics even in my group of peers, I’m, once again, bringing up the topics that people don’t generally enjoy hearing about. That seems to be my mission in life. There are two topics--we’ll get to my thirty-two year and counting National Longitudinal Lesbian Family Study. They’re thrilled with that study. So many of them are moms, and they’re just so happy that I’m doing the study. My work related to sex abuse by physicians led to my decision to give a talk in I believe it was 1992 or 1993 at Women in Medicine on ethics and boundaries for lesbian physicians because we already knew from data that had been gathered that female-female cases were the second highest percentage of reported abuse cases. The majority were male physician/male therapist-female patient. Going way, way, way, way down in the percentages but the next highest category--thirteen percent of cases--were female-female. I knew of cases. They had come to my attention. They were just as abusive and just as damaging to the patient as any other case of abuse. I stood up in front of this group, and I talked about why we needed ethics codes and why we needed to be just as vigilant in our own community as we expect our male colleagues to be in the community of physicians. Then I gave case example after case example which were, I think, really eyeopening and horrifying to members of the audience. I was asked to repeat that [presentation] or do an updated version of that presentation this year. I was asked actually before the #MeToo movement started. The #MeToo 98 movement became the backdrop of the talk that I just presented a few weeks ago. When the Q&A happened at this talk, lesbian physician after lesbian physician stood up who had been there in the first talk and said, “I remember when you gave your first talk. It was eye-opening for me. It changed the way I practiced. It changed the way I understood the dynamics of power abuse. One of the messages that you’ve said very clearly is that we, as women, very often think we don’t have the power to abuse but, in fact, we do. I learned that from you then, and I hope you young people here learn that again or learn that for the first time from her today.” That was one example of a very radical presentation in my own group that was already a radical group. [00:09:54] Another was in 2002. My dear, dear friend, one of my best friends on the planet [is a] brilliant professor, Dr. Esther Rothblum. I asked her if she would be willing to speak with me at our conference. She’s been a professor of psychology and LGBTQ+ studies and feminist studies and everything associated, [and she is at] San Diego. She really created the academic community around fat [studies, studying fat] phobia and fat oppression. When I was at UCSF--I was on the faculty at UCSF for twentythree years--one of the things that I taught about was fat phobia in medicine. I happen to be a thin person, and she happens to be a fat person and [justifiably proud of her body]. [I have given] lectures [about] fat shaming by physicians and the uselessness of advocating diets to people who already are contending with their struggles around weight. The shaming of people for being fat--it 99 happens routinely in medicine--is so appalling. It occurred to me that it was really not so different from what homophobia used to be like. I decided that I would speak to our Women in Medicine conference in a plenary session about that concept. I invited Esther to do it with me. I as a thin, she as a fat woman and expert in the field. The reaction was intensely negative. In the Q&A, [we focused on] discrimination. [We also talked about the fact that we don’t] have a way of predicting whether, if you’ve been fat your entire life, [and have no health problems, whether there are any specific healthassociated risks for you as an individual. Researchers don’t study healthy fat people longitudinally]. Nobody [has done] it cleanly--[separating healthy fat people from fat people with medical problems], but there is a multibillion dollar diet industry that’s based on having people get onto diets and lose weight and then gain back more weight. There’s so much that’s been documented about that. [Healthcare professionals’] discrimination [against fat people] was not helping patients at all. All it was doing was pushing people away from decent healthcare, which is perhaps what [some] physicians want to do--[discourage fat patients from making appointments to see them]. [Some physicians don’t like] taking care of fat people [because of their own prejudice]. [Back to our conference--the audience] reaction was [intense]--people were ready to pounce. And our colleagues--[many from prominent] medical schools--[said], “But being fat causes diabetes” and [the like]. We knew that was coming. I said in the Q&A, “First of all, we’re happy to have comments from any of you but you must, before a question or statement is made, state what 100 your feeling is based on hearing what we’ve had to say.” Hands shot up. They went right into, “I feel that you don’t understand that being fat is going to cause diabetes.” I would just stop [them] and say, “I’m sorry. I’m a psychiatrist. I’m really going to be the police person here. That’s not a feeling. A feeling is, ‘I feel anxious. I feel stressed. I feel upset.’ And why?” They would then try again, put the word “feel” in, and come [back] with a statement. I just wouldn’t let them ask the questions or make the statements until they actually said, “I feel really uncomfortable” or whatever or “It’s stressful to associate the way we’ve been treated as lesbian and gay people and the way fat people are being treated.” Anyway, it was a very powerful and very painful presentation and very radical for this group. I haven’t been invited to do it again. At this point, half the country’s fat. Even though discrimination continues, half the country is fat so [a lecture like that might result in] a bit of a different scenario, in terms of the kinds of comments, perhaps, that might be made. Marine-Street: Could you remind me about when that was? Gartrell: [00:15:09] 2002. Marine-Street: 2002. What an interesting story. One more question about the Women in Medicine group before we move on. Are there any sort of traditions at the meetings or the conferences that you have observed? Gartrell: [00:15:20] Oh, there’s so many traditions. [laughter] I mean, traditions involve graduations and honors. We honor those who are graduating. We honor those who’ve won awards, like [when] they [receive] endowed chairs or professorships. We have our opening night where we go around and 101 everyone introduces themselves and says something about themselves. We have an opportunity to see where people are from and meet people as a group. T-shirts are made for each conference based on the location. There are sporting activities like kayak rides and--depending on where we are--hikes and, when we were in Napa, winetasting. So there are wonderful socializing activities. There is also a lot of thoughtfulness put into the mentor-mentee relationship. Every medical student is assigned a mentor. This is [an] allvolunteer [effort]. Marine-Street: That’s amazing. We had started talking about the APA and your work on the Committee on Women. I know that that led into an important research focus for you. Can we talk a little bit about that now? Gartrell: [00:16:41] Yes, when I became chair of the Committee on Women, my understanding of the responsibility was--this was 1982--to advocate for women’s mental health on a national basis. So that if there was a problem related to women’s mental health, it was the responsibility of the Committee on Women to figure it out and do something about it. Very soon after I assumed the position, I heard that the number of malpractice claims filed against psychiatrists through the American Psychiatric Association’s insurance carrier --they had an insurance carrier at that time--based on allegations of sexual abuse of the patient, were skyrocketing. At that time, we were coming off the 1960s and 1970s, the free love era, [aka] anything goes. There were no ethics codes. There were no licensing board regulations. There were no laws about this. For me and for those on 102 my committee, it was a no-brainer. Your patients are not there for you to have sex with. Your patients come to you because they have psychological difficulties for which they need help. We started looking into this, and we were getting more and more information about this as a potential problem but by then, I was already quite wise to the fact that the APA was [laughter] an institution in which there was a tremendous amount of resistance to change and that it seemed unlikely that we could do anything about the problem that we were hearing about until we had evidence documenting it. I proposed that we put together a questionnaire, and get the APA to agree to send it out to all the psychiatrists in the country and do it in a neutral fashion because, again, there were no ethics codes, there were no laws, there were no licensing board regulations. With nothing in place saying it’s not a bad thing, you could just ask the questions in a neutral way and maybe people would answer the questions. Have you been sexually involved with a patient? If you have, how long did the relationship last? Is it still ongoing? Questions like that and then we got a little further into it. Have you been involved with more than one patient? How many patients have you been with and can you tell us how many patients you’ve been involved with? We put together this questionnaire. We submitted it through the channels, and we were stonewalled by committee after committee after committee that was responsible for approving projects like this. [We were] starting to get accusations like, “What [are you] trying to do? [You are] going to destroy the credibility of the psychiatric profession.” We were going to destroy the credibility of the 103 psychiatric profession? To us, it seemed as though psychiatrists who were sexually abusing their patients were destroying the credibility of the psychiatric profession. We continued to push forward and said we didn’t agree and we wanted to do this survey and we wanted the APA to sponsor it. At a certain point, it became clear that it was re-cycling back through the same committees that had already rejected it. I had brought onto the Committee on Women, Judith Herman, who’s my really good friend and colleague, and Silvia Olarte, another psychiatrist. There were other members of the committee who were very much in support of this project. [00:20:54] We decided we would give the APA a deadline. If they didn’t approve the project by this deadline, we would do the study ourselves independently. They actually didn’t imagine that I could get the mailing labels in order to send out the questionnaire to psychiatrists in the country because this was--again--before everyone had computers in their homes, and they owned the mailing labels for the Psychiatric Association. I don’t know how they printed them out when they needed them--I don’t remember whether they printed envelopes or labels or what they had. They just figured they’d let the deadline pass and that it was a false statement on my part that I could actually do it independently. But what they didn’t know is while we were waiting for the deadline, first of all, I’d contacted two individuals at the Harvard School of Public Health about doing the statistics. And that continuing medical education was beginning to be a booming and profitable industry. So we were starting to get mailings about continuing medical 104 education courses. They were coming through the AMA. I was never a member of the AMA because--talk about organizations that were never progressive enough for me--that was certainly one of them! The AMA was located in Chicago. I contacted the Harvard Continuing Medical Education Office, and I said, “When you’re sending out CME courses, how do you get your mailing labels? Do you have your own?” They said, “No, no, we get them through a clearinghouse through the AMA in Chicago.” And they gave me the number. I already had plans to conduct a course on ethics in medicine and in psychiatry and so I had already been kind of thinking along these lines. I contacted this clearinghouse, and I said, “I’m a Harvard faculty member and I’m planning to do this course and how would I obtain mailing labels?” I [also asked], “How many do you have for psychiatrists?” I think they had 25,000 or something. I said, “And how much would that cost?” It was very expensive. Every study that I’ve done, I’ve essentially funded myself out of my own earnings. I said, “Well, could you randomly select every fifth psychiatrist in the country, and how much would that cost?” And they said, “Oh yes, it’s not a problem.” That was several thousand dollars, but I was willing to pay for it. They said, “We’ll give them to you zip code sequenced, which, as it turned out, is a very big deal because when you’re taking things in bulk to the post office, which I did not know previously, you have to put them in bags [that are] zip code sequenced. I got all those arrangements made. The deadline came and passed. I contacted the clearinghouse. I got the labels 105 shipped to me; again, sitting on the floor--always I was seemingly [sitting] on hardwood floors stuffing envelopes after printing out questionnaires. [00:24:16] We had thankfully moved away from mimeograph into being able to have Xerox copies back then. [I spent days] stuffing these envelopes, putting stamps on them, getting them to the post office. We sent them out to every fifth psychiatrist in the country. Officials at the APA went ballistic when some of them received this questionnaire. They thought I had broken into the APA and stolen the labels, gotten into the office and stolen the labels! They had no idea that I could possibly do this without breaking in. I assured them that I had a plan to conduct a course based on the results of the study. They were just apoplectic about this. We got the questionnaires back. We also got some that said things like, “We believe you have secretly coded these questionnaires, and there is no circumstance in which I would fill it out because I believe you can identify us.” We received back a lot of obscenities and very hostile comments. Leaving aside the obscenities and the blank questionnaires that they sent back that we had to pay the postage on, of course, because they often stuffed them with heavy things so we had to pay more postage, we tabulated our results. Seven percent of psychiatrists acknowledged being sexually involved with their patients and a number of those had been involved with more than one patient. All our publications are available to be read so I’m not going to go into details of numbers. They can be downloaded also--many of them--on our study websites. We then had the issue of publishing the article. The preeminent journal of psychiatry is the American Psychiatric 106 Association’s journal, the American Journal of Psychiatry. The editor of that journal was none other than my department chair who wanted me not to use my hospital affiliation and my Harvard affiliation on any of my publications. They did not have anonymous review, of course. One of the things I’d worked on for years was to get medical journals to have anonymous review because all the data that we had showed that if even a single woman was a co-author, the chance of an article being accepted was reduced. We wrote up the first paper and submitted it to the American Journal of Psychiatry. It’s standard to send out a manuscript to two reviewers, sometimes three reviewers. He sent it out to seven simultaneous reviewers. We got seven pages-long criticisms of us--not of the study--nothing about the analysis or anything about the legitimacy of the actual research itself. We sat down and typed up [our responses], dutifully responding to every criticism. The one that was most entertaining to us--“These data could not possibly be accurate. There’s no way that they could be accurate.” To that one, we responded, “We completely agree with you. These data are not accurate. They can’t even begin to be accurate because they inevitably underrepresent the prevalence of this abuse.” They weren’t prepared for that [laughter]. My final statement in our very long, many-page response to these criticisms [that was sent] back to the editor of the journal who happened to be my department chair was, “We understand if the reviewers and you make a decision that you do not want to publish it, but it’s important to let you know that the American Psychological Association’s journal has expressed an interest in publishing this article.” Which [would] essentially [be] letting the 107 competitor put out the information about psychiatry. I mean, I didn’t say that but that was obvious. Very reluctantly it was published [in the American Journal of Psychiatry]. [00:28:57] We then did a number of follow-up studies including studying senior residents--all senior residents--in terms of their sexual involvement with patients and already there were some who were sexually involved with patients. I heard endlessly from psychiatrists, “Why don’t you survey the other specialties? OB/GYNs, surgeons, family practitioners, internists? Surely they’re sexually involved with patients too,” as if that justified anything. When I [joined the UCSF faculty], I gathered colleagues in other fields and, in fact, we did that study too. And, in fact, found [that], yes, indeed, [physicians in other specialties were abusing patients too]. Also from their own assessment of the impact on patients who had been sexually involved with non-psychiatric physicians whom they knew of, that the consequences were always damaging to the patients. We knew from data we had been gathering over the [prior] decade that most patients who were abused by psychiatrists [or other mental health professionals] ended up severely depressed when the relationships terminated, which they did inevitably. Ten percent were psychiatrically hospitalized and one percent committed suicide. We even had people write in things on their questionnaires like, “You know, I’m not really sure that this involvement is worth the effort. This patient was terribly dysfunctional to begin with and things just got worse after the sexual involvement so I’m not really sure that this is something that I’m going to continue.” This is what we 108 were dealing with. The point of all of this was we had a mission, a mission to establish ethics codes, to have licensing board regulations that made it very clear that sexual involvement with any patient was unacceptable. Our mission [encompassed] any current or former patient. We don’t have that in all the regulations, but it has also become a felony in many states. And there are reporting regulations in some states that if you, as a medical professional, hear of another colleague who is involved with a patient, however you hear about it, you’re required to report it to the licensing board. We have had a great impact in terms of change. It was a hard-fought battle and a really important one from my perspective, in thinking about the vast number of patients who were severely damaged--[creating] what we call an iatrogenic problem--caused by a medical intervention, which [in this case] was an abuse. Marine-Street: That’s just incredible to me that it wasn’t part of the code of ethics. When did it finally get into the code of ethics? Do you know? Gartrell: [00:32:00] There were a lot of different changes to the ethics codes, and it’s now in the AMA Codes of Ethics. It wasn’t part of academic codes of ethics-faculty/students--either. This is all the result of the work that we did in this area [first in] psychiatry and then [in] medicine that it became something that was then [considered] in academia [concerning] faculty and students. I mean, you know, the whole concept of “they’re both adults, it’s freedom of choice, it’s a consensual relationship”--in medicine, we know what informed consent means and I have said this very clearly since I began this work. Informed consent means you explain the risks and benefits of any [proposed treatment 109 or intervention]. I can assure you there’s never been an abusing physician who has explained that “you have a fifty percent chance of a severe depression, ten percent chance of psychiatric hospitalization, one percent chance of committing suicide as a result of this--your imminent sexual involvement with me. [So] let’s go meet at the Holiday Inn.” I mean, does that sound likely? No. Faculty/student involvement, I mean, [it’s important to think about] who [holds the power]. We’ve talked about the all-male or predominately male academic institutions in which I grew up. Many of those individuals themselves likely were either aware of or themselves participating in the abuse of power that we [now] know was rampant. Marine-Street: Just the fact that someone would actually be truthful on the questionnaire and return it to you would seem to indicate that there was some degree of acceptance. Gartrell: [00:34:07] Acceptance because we were just coming off the free love movement when it was [considered] okay. In fact, when I was at Stanford, for classmates who got involved with faculty members, that was a badge of honor for them because what did they get out of it? They had a ticket to opportunity, for a time. Marine-Street: Was that frequent when you were at Stanford? Gartrell: [00:34:35] I know of circumstances. Frequency--I would not be surprised if it were frequent, but my mission was to get us out of the DSM back then. Marine-Street: Right. I was just curious. Are there any examples that you encountered that you would be able to share regarding this physician abuse? 110 Gartrell: [00:36:25] Yes. When I was a senior resident at Harvard, I spent half of my time at Harvard Student Health Services. I’d only seen very, very, very mentally ill patients [in my residency education at the state hospital]. I was interested in working with healthy lesbian and gay people and helping them with their [internalized] homophobia. Having a lot of expertise in how to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder and so on really wasn’t going to be helpful to me in terms of dealing with healthier people with run-of-the-mill problems. I wanted to work with healthier people. I applied for and was accepted for doing part of my senior residency at Harvard Student Health Services. My supervisor there was Paul Walters. It became clear to me that he was doing something that wasn’t okay while I was there. This was 1979. He was an analyst. He had a sofa in his office. It was a dark blue sofa. It had stains all over it. For supervision I met in there. I sat in the chair and when all the residents met in there, we sat all around. I always was trying to get the chair rather than the sofa. [I noticed that when he saw] patients, they seemed to stay for a very long period of time. It just felt creepy. Those were my observations. I started doing the research on sex abuse by psychiatrists. We had two people from Harvard School of Public Health whom we were working with, and through other people at the Harvard School of Public Health and my networking around Harvard, I met some people who worked at the Harvard Risk Management Foundation. I don’t know if that’s a concept that is familiar to people, in general, so I’ll just say something about it. Basically, they managed the malpractice claims that came 111 in against Harvard doctors, which meant they shoved them under the rug as much as possible or did payoffs that were private or confidential because nobody wanted bad publicity against Harvard doctors. [00:39:23] I heard from somebody I really trusted, who was a really straight arrow person who worked with the Risk Management Foundation, that a claim had come in against Paul Walters for sexually abusing a Harvard student, having her pay him thirty-five dollars a session, I think it was, for oral sex three times a week as therapy, [and it had somehow been “taken care of” by the Risk Management Foundation]. I was already working on sex abuse. That individual said to me, “If this comes to your attention in any other way”--because this was a breaking of a confidence as a person working with the Risk Management Foundation--“you need to pursue it.” Before I left Harvard, I still had some friends who were on the staff at [Harvard Student] Mental Health Services where he still was. I said to them, “If you hear anything about Paul Walters behaving sexually inappropriately with students, you need to let me know.” Before I left Harvard to move to California in 1987, he called me. Paul Walters, out of the blue. I had had no contact with him since 1979. Oh, [actually] I had. [Colleagues and I] had done a presentation at the American Psychiatric Association on sexual abuse of patients after we had published the first paper. He was there sitting in the front row. There were a whole collection of people [in that row]. I recognized him, but there were others that none of us recognized sitting in the first row of this huge auditorium. He called me after that and he said he wanted to let me know that he was leaving 112 his position at Harvard, and he was moving to California. Where? To Stanford to become the director of Cowell Student Health Services. I said, “Oh, well, why are you telling me?” He said, “Well, when I was out there, I mentioned that I knew you and that you were one of my supervisees and that you went to Stanford.” Now my work had already been publicized in a big way. I mean, front page stories in the Boston Globe, the sex abuse stuff--the results of the findings. It was clear he had used me in some kind of deceitful way to help get a position at Cowell Student Health Services. I left Harvard. Moved out here. The first year I was here, I got a call from one of the social workers who was still on the faculty at Harvard [Student Health] saying they got an anonymous letter from a woman who made the same claims--$35 an hour, da da da da da. I said, “Thank you very much. I’m filing a complaint with the Massachusetts Licensing Board and the California Licensing Board. I’m going to inform them.” So I did. Both began a major investigation. The story became front page news out here and in Massachusetts. He left his position at Cowell Student Health Services. He claimed that he had a substance abuse problem, and he tried to get into a diversion program which, if you get in a diversion program, they drop all charges against you--it’s a nifty, sneaky loophole for perpetrators. Somehow there was enough publicity around it that they didn’t allow him into it. He went underground and was never found again. Every few years I got a call from a San Jose Mercury news reporter who was trying to find him; [the reporter] was pretty convinced that [Walters, who] was from North 113 Carolina, had gone back [there] and changed his name and was working [there]. I actually was very fearful that my name would come out as the person who reported him to the licensing board. All I had done [was to say], “This has come to my attention. Please investigate and please contact the Harvard Risk Management Foundation and make sure you start your investigation there.” [00:44:40] When they did, the risk management people I guess were obligated to contact Patient A who then said, “I’m willing to be named,” which was amazing. So I was never publicly [named] on any of the press about it, which I was very grateful about because I was afraid he was going to come [after me and] kill me--literally. I was afraid because we already knew that psychiatrists who took care of patients who’d been abused--women psychiatrists who took care of patients who had been abused--these were colleagues and friends of mine--had their offices broken into, their offices vandalized, and their records stolen because they were encouraging and supporting these women in filing complaints. The perpetrators were trying to stop the complaints from happening by attacking the subsequent treating women psychiatrists. These were scary times. I was afraid that this guy whose misdeeds I had reported, [resulting in a huge] impact on his career, was going to come after me. Fortunately, I was not [named] by the media but the Patient A contacted me and said, “I don’t know how you found out but it’s [been] life-changing for me that you did--in a positive way--and I want to thank you so much for [having done] this.” When it was publicized in Boston, [she was] Patient A, [and subsequently] 114 Patient B, [and] Patient C [and] I don’t know how many [others] came forward and were willing to be named on the complaint. That’s one horror story. Another is the psychiatrist that my mother saw from the time she was psychiatrically hospitalized and for the next twenty-some years. He was a really creepy guy in Santa Barbara. He too became very prominent in psychiatry. He was president of the [World Association of Social Psychiatry]. His name was John Carleton. I sat outside the waiting room when she had appointments sometimes. As a teenager when I met him, he took my hand. He wanted to show me around the offices, and he kind of fondled my hand in a way that felt totally, totally creepy. I was a teenager who was already afraid of inappropriate behavior by men. I wanted to get my hand away, and he was fondling my hand so I was completely creeped out by this guy. I ran into him at some APA meetings, one of which when I was a resident. He got into an elevator and I was standing there with my residency training director at Harvard, and [Carleton] turned to me and he said, “Well, hi, Nanette. How nice to see you. Your mother told me to say hello.” My mother was his patient. That is the most inappropriate thing in the world to say. That is a total breach of confidentiality. I walk out of the elevator, and my residency training director said, “Who is he?” I said, “My mother’s psychiatrist.” I mean, totally embarrassing to me that that had happened. I’d been doing [sex abuse] research. I was already out here. My mother called me a few years after I [moved to San Francisco]. It actually was in the early 1990s. I was working on a big fundraiser for our lesbian health services here 115 in San Francisco, and I had created an idea of a fundraiser that was really successful. I was driving back across the Golden Gate Bridge. It was a time when we had a car phone, and she called me. I said, “I really can’t talk right now. I’m on the bridge.” She said, “I have something I have to tell you. I know you’ve been doing all this work all this time [meaning, on sexual abuse] and I know that you never liked Dr. Carleton.” She wanted to tell me--she felt like she had to tell me--that she had been sexually involved with him and when she told him that the relationship needed to stop, he had raped her. She also said, “He also encouraged me to kill your father.” I was just horrified at all this. “He encouraged me when we went out sailing to push him overboard. That was before he raped me, before I told him I can’t keep seeing him.” [00:49:42] I contacted the California Licensing Board. He had meanwhile married a patient. I don’t know how many patients he--I think there were stories of multiple patients--I don’t know how many he married, but he married at least one. The only thing I could think of to do was to contact, again, the California Licensing Board, and I sent them this complaint. I asked my mother if she’d be willing to be named on the complaint. I don’t remember the circumstances exactly. She had gone through this complicated decision-making process but I said to them, “You’ve got to open a file on him. If you get any other complaints, you really need to do something about it.” 116 The third story led to my resignation publicly from the American Psychiatric Association in 1989, during the time that all these women psychiatrists and mental health professionals were providing reparative, supportive therapy to victims of abuse by male typically psychiatrists and other physicians. The APA’s malpractice carrier was beginning to realize that they were going to be losing tons of money on these claims. This is before we started our work in this area. They were paying claims based on sexual abuse. Now you can’t get any kind of insurance--malpractice coverage--that would cover your sexually abusing a patient. Then they were paying. One of the things that was really a problem for them is that subsequent treating psychiatrists were helping these patients file complaints, which means that the claims were continuing to rise and they were continuing to lose money. They started going after these subsequent treating psychiatrists with character assassination. One of those cases involved this phenomenally strong woman psychiatrist in Colorado whose name is Martha Gay. She was treating a patient who had been sexually abused by a psychiatrist. The establishment came after Martha Gay to character assassinate her and further character assassinate the patient who had filed a claim against her abusing [male] psychiatrist. It was an appalling situation. I went all in in support of Dr. Gay, and I publicly resigned from the APA over the [attempt to malign her character]. That story ended up being a FRONTLINE documentary. I talked about that resignation in the FRONTLINE documentary. Those are just some examples, [and that episode illustrated how one] moved 117 into very dangerous territory [when] working with individuals who were seeking restitution from abuse. Marine-Street: What was the response to the FRONTLINE documentary? Gartrell: [00:53:28] Personally, for my part, I got a lot of positive feedback from people who said how brave I was to take on the APA and to speak out against the APA. The APA accepted my resignation like that [snaps fingers]. Things are different now, but these were very bad times then. Marine-Street: Let’s take a real quick break. [End of Part 4 of 5 - Interview with Nanette Gartrell - August 31, 2018] 118 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PIONEERING WOMEN ALUMNAE ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: NANETTE GARTRELL INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 31, 2018 PART: 5 OF 5 Marine-Street: Around 1986, you begin a new line of research. I wonder if you could tell us the origin of the idea for the National Lesbian Family Study. Gartrell: [00:00:15] Yes. Well, I had continued to do research and writing and teaching and curriculum development related to lesbian and gay patients and nonhomophobic treatment of lesbian and gay people. In 1982 I also had a clinical practice where I saw mostly closeted lesbians and some gay men. What I heard a lot about in my practice from younger lesbians--up until their forties, really--was a great desire to have children, but not having really the means or the resources to do that. Some were thinking creatively about getting pregnant using the sperm of a brother-in-law if the brother-in-law was willing--meaning their lover’s brother. But that wasn’t always an easy path. There was a lot of conversation about that. In 1982, a sperm bank in the Bay Area opened its doors to single heterosexual women and lesbians who [wanted] to become pregnant. Suddenly, frozen sperm was being shipped all over the country to lesbians 119 who were desperate for the opportunity to give birth to biological children and who had the means to pay for the sperm and the frozen vials and the postage. I was starting to hear about this in my practice and in the community, and there were meetings that were happening, planning parenting meetings in the community. This was a new form of organizing and information sharing, learning about parenting, happening in the Boston community. I was in DC with a colleague, Jean Hamilton, having coffee near Dupont Circle at Kramer’s bookstore, and we were talking about this new social phenomenon that was happening in real time. And the conversation led to, “We have to study it. We have to get going.” Indeed, we decided that we would make it a national study. We could start in Boston where I was, DC where she was, and I knew I was eventually going to be moving to the Bay Area so also we would pick up a cohort in San Francisco. We started putting out announcements--fliers. Again, this was when computers were just starting but [we did not have] an internet. We were not [living in the] internet age. How did we [spread the word]? The same way we always did. We put up fliers. We handed out fliers. And we put them up in women’s bookstores. We put them up at women’s concerts--the same concerts that started in the 1970s were still happening. New generations of musicians and much more diversity in the musicians, both in terms of the kinds of music they performed and racially, ethnically and so on, which was wonderful. [00:03:32] We were handing out fliers and going to the parenting support or planning groups and handing out fliers, inviting anybody who 120 [might be willing to commit to participating in a] twenty-year longitudinal study of planned lesbian families. They needed to identify as lesbian, there was no funding involved--never was [substantial] funding--but [we told them] that we were interested in understanding [more] about the development of these families and the psychological adjustment of children and the kinds of experiences the families had around homophobia and stigmatization and just pretty much anything. Those were the core issues that we presented to them. Anybody who was interested [was encouraged to] call me or call her and [sign up]. Then we recruited a small group of people as research collaborators who were also mental health professionals, and we got started-printed the questionnaires, put the clipboards together. Our residential requirement was that they had to live within 200 miles of wherever the researchers lived because we had to put gas in the car, drive to their homes, conduct the interviews, use a tape recorder, pencil, paper and record the interviews and get home in one day--so thus the 200-mile limit. We began gathering families. The moms needed to be inseminating or pregnant. We began in 1986. I moved out here in 1987, and began recruiting again in 1988 out here, and we continued recruiting until 1992 when we closed the study to new participants. Our index offspring cover a five-year age span because not everybody got pregnant at the same moment, and we were also still recruiting until 1992. The study is now in its thirty-second year, and we have a 92 percent retention rate, which is unheard of for studies of this length. Our most recent sixth wave of data gathering took place when the index offspring were 121 twenty-five years old. We gathered data when the moms were inseminating or pregnant, when their kids were a year and a half or two years old, when they were five, ten, seventeen, and twenty-five. The study’s ongoing. We had no idea whether, as adults, these offspring would have an interest in this study because some of the ages we chose because we thought maybe a little parental influence might help in getting the surveys completed--as in before they went to college as opposed to when they were in college. [00:06:42] We thought by the time they’re adults, they might think, “Oh my God--[I’m done with that].” We gathered data from them from the time that they were ten years old and surveyed them--the offspring and the mothers--all along, but we thought they might think, “I’m done with that. That was a thing that my parents wanted me to do.” To our great surprise, they [continue to] have great enthusiasm for the study. Last summer after we had nearly completed our twenty-five-year-old data gathering, I sent out an email to every single participant and said, “Okay, we’re now in our thirtysecond or thirty-first year, and some of you may be ready to retire from the study.” I said I’m sixty-eight years old. We’re thinking about the possibility of doing another one in maybe five years or so, all of you at the same time, not trying to age match it at that point. If you’d like to retire, if you feel that you’re really [finished with completing surveys], we would like to know because we don’t want you to feel obligated if that’s part of the feeling that contributes to our wonderful response rate. We got back this overwhelming enthusiasm. “Please keep going. We’ll go as long as you can. This is so 122 important. This is really, really valuable.” I suspect that the political climate of what had already happened in the last election may have had some impact on some of the enthusiasm. I think other parts of the enthusiasm are just what they are. I mean what they said is they’re really incredibly proud to be part of this effort that I have had such a commitment to following through on, and they’re really proud to be part of that. Marine-Street: As you think back over those thirty-two years, what were the biggest obstacles or biggest worries that you had about the study? Gartrell: [00:09:06] The biggest worry was losing contact with people because the last thing they’re thinking of when they’re moving from here to there--and they have moved from here to there--is, “Oh, send Nanette a postcard saying here’s our change of address.” At the very beginning we asked them to give us the names and addresses of people who would always know where they were. But, of course, those people moved too. It took us some time to figure out how frequently we needed to contact them to make sure we had their updated contact information. It’s better since we’ve entered the internet era because we can reach people more easily and more rapidly. However, we’ve learned [from] the last two interviews of the offspring [that at first] they were more tuned in to email, but now it’s all about texts. I don’t know of a way to send out a mass text that’s confidential. There are seventy-eight of them, and I have to literally send out a personalized, individualized text to seventy-eight offspring each time I need to communicate with them about an upcoming survey. What was easier to do in a bcc kind of way, I can’t do anymore. Maybe, at some point, we’ll have 123 some way that I can do that more efficiently. Anyway, things like that-maintaining contact and also [having participants who] are dying [or have died]. We’ve had a number of parental deaths, and we also lost one of our offspring to a very tragic death. That’s sad. I don’t have children myself, but I feel like this is my baby in a way. I mean, I’m the principal who’s carried it forward all these years and have a fabulous, fabulous, fabulous collaborator, Dr. Henny Bos [Henny M. W. Bos], who’s at the University of Amsterdam, an endowed chair and professor there and a collaborator on this wave and hopefully all future waves. Dr. Audrey Koh [Audrey S. Koh], who’s an OB/GYN here in San Francisco who’s also a lesbian--both are lesbians and she’s also a parent of two emerging adult sons so she brings the fresh perspective of actual parenting experiences to our research, which is always very valuable. [laughter] Marine-Street: When you think back, as you were collecting the data and analyzing, can you think of any sort of ah-ha moments when you saw something kind of coming together? Gartrell: [00:12:13] Interviewing the children at the age of ten about their experiences with homophobia was a tremendous ah-ha moment for us because of what we heard and the way they used language and the responses to our questions. It’s common when you’re a member of a non-majority group for your parents to prepare you for the kind of stigmatization that comes with being a member of that group. But I don’t have any way of knowing--I haven’t done research--on whether non-majority group members’ parents generally teach 124 them about discrimination against all non-majority groups. I suspect that that’s not the case because we certainly know people who are members of non-majority groups who have very homophobic parents who passed their homophobia onto them. What we heard from these children at ten was that they were likening their experience of homophobic stigmatization to the kinds of experiences that their classmates who were of a different race or ethnicity were experiencing around discrimination based on their non-majority status. They had this very sophisticated understanding of those concepts that they were sharing with us in these interviews at the age of ten. That was so both enlightening and exciting to us because so much of the conflict that we experience in this world is based on a fear of difference. Not only did we already know that the mothers were participating in the development of the anti-bullying programs and the appreciation of difference programs in the schools, but in this education of their children and preparing their children for the prospect of stigmatization, they were not only teaching them about their group. They were teaching them about discrimination based on looks and size and race and ethnicity and gender. I mean, just across the board. If all parents could do that, what a different world we would live in. I would say the other ah-ha moment came when I was surveying the seventeen-year-olds. We asked them if they considered their parents role models and, if so, to describe why they did. 93 percent of them said yes, they considered their mothers excellent role models. I’ve been a teenager and I know many teenagers, and that was quite shocking to me. And then what 125 they said about their mothers. They wrote three or four sentences. [00:15:29] They could write as much as they wanted but most wrote about three or four sentences. “My mothers are beautiful, powerful, loving women who have taught me respect and appreciation of all people. I would do anything to become like them some day. I hope I’m like them some day.” Comment after comment like that. It gives me goose bumps to repeat them now. It did at that time. I was in tears reading them. They’re just phenomenal. The relationships that these parents have with their children-these are first generation kids conceived through donor insemination in the United States so they represent the first generation. And these are first generation moms. The level of involvement that these parents had in the education and growth and development of their children and the closeness of their relationships and managing, out of all of that, for their seventeen-yearolds to consider them role models when most seventeen-year-olds don’t consider anybody over the age of maybe nineteen a role model was really amazing. Marine-Street: I’m so glad you did that study. We’re getting towards the end of our interview, but I wanted to give you a chance to talk about any other more recent books or publications. I know you have quite a few things that you’ve been involved with. Is there anything in particular you’d like to be a part of this oral history? Gartrell: [00:17:07] I’ll just conclude with our most recent effort. Immediately after the last what we thought was a presidential election, Dee--my spouse--and our friend and colleague, Judith Herman, and I wrote a letter to President Obama 126 expressing our concern about the mental instability of the person who was going to be occupying the White House [and stating that he needed a thorough neuropsychiatric examination]. The letter went nowhere, but eventually through an inquiry from somebody who we know who writes for a prominent mainstream newspaper, the letter was given to somebody at the Huffington Post who published it and it went viral. All of a sudden, this whole concept of his mental instability was being written about in front page stories all over the world. Our neighbors happened to be in a major city in India, and it was a front page story there. I mean, it was everywhere. Subsequently, Gloria Steinem and Robin Morgan saw the Huffington Post article and became involved in having conversations with us about where to go from there. Robin Morgan reminded us--for those who don’t maybe know who Robin Morgan is, she’s one of my sheroes, along with Gloria Steinem. She runs Women’s Media Center Live with Robin Morgan. She also is a former editor of Ms. She’s [been] a feminist [forever, and also poet, writer, radio and media host]. She wrote Sisterhood is Global, and Sisterhood is Powerful. We carried dogeared copies of her book whenever we traveled internationally in the 1980s. She’s just amazing. She reminded us of the time during the Nixon Administration when he was about to be escorted out of office that there was a great fear that he would start a nuclear war and Schlesinger [James R. Schlesinger] and Kissinger [Henry Kissinger] made an agreement that they would do whatever they could to prevent that--in conjunction with conversations with the Pentagon. 127 [Robin and Gloria] said to us, “We need to do something to communicate with people at the Pentagon”--[laughter] what a concept--at Stanford, the Pentagon was the “military industrial complex” when I was an undergraduate--“to inform them of our expert opinion that he needs a neuropsychiatric evaluation.” We never have diagnosed. We have said he needs a neuropsychiatric evaluation and gave all these reasons. As it turned out, Dee and I knew somebody who was a high ranking military official and that person was able to take our letter, a letter addressed to the Chair of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, and get it to [him]. We actually had the [letter] communicated directly to General Dunford [Joseph Francis Dunford Jr.]. [00:21:12] Also through another just amazing coincidence, I met somebody who had just come from a stint at working at Langley and I said, “Langley, I mean, as in the CIA?” She said, “Yes.” I said, “Any chance you’d be willing to [convey] a letter? Do you have allies there who are concerned about the same things we’re concerned with?” “Yes, yes, yes, I do,” she says. So she conveyed our letter to allies at Langley--her allies. Subsequently, other people were starting to raise the same concern. One of them was Dr. Bandy Lee at Yale who’s an expert on violence. She put together a conference on this topic. That led to a book to which we became contributors. She’s the editor, and she’s become the spokesperson for our movement urging a neuropsychiatric evaluation for him. The book is called, The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 27 Psychiatrists and Others Assess a President. Dee and I have the final chapter in the book; [we discuss using] the 25th Amendment [to] empanel a group of physician 128 experts, appointed in a non-partisan way by the National Academy of Medicine, to evaluate the president. Our chapter precedes Noam Chomsky’s epilogue, which [focuses on] the end of the species and the doomsday clock. So that’s our most recent major political effort. Marine-Street: Do you think anything will come of it? Gartrell: [00:23:06] I think a lot has come of it. The book became an instant best seller, both on Amazon and the New York Times best seller list. It’s been talked about endlessly, and routinely references are made to his mental instability by people across the board throughout the media. I think that the [movement we started] has educated those who are able to be educated about this topic. Marine-Street: Alright. Do you have any final parting thoughts as we conclude this interview today? Gartrell: [00:23:53] I guess I would say that my entire career has been one in which the personal is the political. Even most recently, the great fear that a person who demonstrates signs of mental instability has access to the nuclear codes made it very clear that there was great urgency to try to protect the planet. But long before that, my goals were to make this world a better and safer place and provide civil rights for LGBT people. That has been a mission throughout my career and will continue to be. [My sex abuse work became a parallel track]--also more than a decade’s worth of work--because I just happened to fall into some knowledge about [physician] abuse of patients and power abuse. That [line of work] became a very big theme in my life. And it recurs now as we’re in the #MeToo movement. [All around us] we see the 129 incredibly positive changes that are occurring as women are speaking out about abuse. My interview began with your questions about my experiences of abuse as a child. At one point you asked how did I get through those experiences and manage to keep on going. I have to say that I don’t think anybody who has gone through abuse could probably answer the question of why we made it to the next step other than at first, we’re [just] trying to survive. And then [of course it’s incredibly fortunate] if we can garner resources, [perhaps] have the privilege and the good fortune of having something like a Stanford education with access to really smart and talented people, and [then take a] look around at movement activists who have the strength and [talent to] create communities to make changes and work for social justice. I’ve had the privilege of knowing amazing community activists who have created phenomenal change and [forged] paths to so much social justice in our world. I have simply been trying to do my part in the dimensions that are within my area of expertise. Marine-Street: Thank you for sharing this story with us, and thank you for your courage. Gartrell: [00:26:47] Thank you...