 WHEELOCK: Okay. So this is Sarah Wheelock, and I am interviewing Else PetersTracy, class of 1957. TRACY: 1957. WHEELOCK: And today is October 11th, and this is part of the Alumni Stories for the class of ’57. So is there any question on this particular—the sheet that you were interested in? TRACY: Well, my major. WHEELOCK: Okay, let’s start with that. TRACY: I can start; I was definitely focused on pre-med, so I was a biology major and chemistry minor. WHEELOCK: Oh, wow. TRACY: And, what I liked about Stanford, the best was the liberal education. WHEELOCK: Were there a lot of other women in the biology and chemistry classes? Or—do you remember? STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: You know, there were a lot of women in the biology, but not so many in the chemistry; and, of course, not many in medical school in those days. But it didn’t matter. I didn’t care. WHEELOCK: Good for you. So where did you live when you were here? TRACY: For the first year I had to live at home, which was because I—my family’s from Palo Alto and I—that I didn’t like because I missed out on campus life. And the second year, I lived in one of the dormitories, and I think it was Lagunita. And then, the last several years, in the new dormitory, which at that time was new, was—I think it’s Florence Moore. I’m not sure I can remember which particular house of that complex. WHEELOCK: Didn’t make that much of an impression, I guess. TRACY: Yeah. No, they were all sort of vanilla. WHEELOCK: Yeah. TRACY: …but otherwise, comfortable and fine. What I liked really about—and I hope it has continued -- Stanford had a kind of a philosophy of egalitarianism. And so it didn’t matter how much money you had, or what your connections were, you all got into the lottery, and things were chosen by chance, and it gave one the opportunity to forget about the material kind of trappings that I think other schools focus on. And at the time, there were no sororities, I take it there are no—I don’t know if there are sororities now. But there were no sororities. There were fraternities, but not many. And so it was a very different kind of campus compared to other universities in the United States. WHEELOCK: Did that make a difference to you when you decided to come here? I mean as a freshman, was Stanford the place you wanted to go? 2 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: Actually, no, my first choice was the University of Chicago -- why, I don’t know -- because that sounded glamorous, I think, the big city. And my parents said no, if I could get into Stanford they could help me, or the University of California at Berkeley. And there was no choice. There was obviously Stanford. So it was necessity that kind of forced me here and for a while I thought I had been deprived. Later I learned how lucky I was. WHEELOCK: That’s cool. So when you were coming over here and you were talking to Susan about, I think she asked you what kind of a student you were, or something. TRACY: What was life like. WHEELOCK: Yes. TRACY: And I said the funny things. And I remember studying very hard. I said I became a book and a desk. And then, the other good thing was that I had the opportunity to work, also to pay expenses, and I worked as, what was called a hasher. I don’t know if they still have them. And right before actually, the day after I graduated from high school, and we had spent the night up, I got a phone call from the guidance counselor who said they were interviewing for someone to work in the Engineering Library, if I could get there in two hours. They were going to interview at eleven o’clock, and this was like eight o’clock. I had just gotten home. And I can remember saying. “I’ll be there” -- of course, I had no way to get there. And I took a shower, and found a bike, and rode and made the interview, and got the job. And it was probably the best job I have ever had in my whole entire life. WHEELOCK: Really? TRACY: Yes, because I learned the entire library system before I graduated, knew where everything was, could study some, make money, and meet people, academic people. And it was wonderful. 3 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: That’s very helpful as a student, I mean, to be able to have those connections, and to be able to, have somebody to talk to who knows the system already, especially coming in to r—you know… TRACY: Oh, and to learn with the library system was marvelous. WHEELOCK: Yeah. TRACY: Yeah. WHEELOCK: I hope that’s the only job you had to ride your bicycle to get. TRACY: Well, no. The hash… WHEELOCK: Oh, the hasher, you probably did as well. TRACY: The hasher, you had to. Well, but riding a bike was a good thing. WHEELOCK: That’s true. That’s true. TRACY: Yes. Yes. WHEELOCK: And where were you a hasher here? Which house or dorm? Do you remember? TRACY: One of the big women’s old dormitories and they were very elegant in the way they served meals. I don’t know if they still are, but you were waited on. WHEELOCK: Okay, we’re recording again, and you were telling me where you had worked. 4 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: I was—yeah, I was a hasher at Lagunita. And I don’t know if they still serve meals this elegantly, but I think there were flowers on the table, and the director of the dining room really planned very good meals, even though she was not the nicest lady in the world to work for. The residents sat down at tables of eight. And the women tended to be placed as drink hashers, and that was a lot of running. And it was kind of honor to be able to be a plate hasher. And so I was determined I was going to be a plate hasher. So I ended up becoming one of those and developed very strong right arm. WHEELOCK: I bet. TRACY: Yes. And so that was good. But basically, like I said, I don’t know if there’s as elegant in serving as, probably can’t afford it, and it’s probably cafeteria line now, but… WHEELOCK: Probably so, yeah, I can’t imagine that the students would know what to do with flowers on the table anyway, or, you know, people getting them drinks. So … TRACY: Yes. And hot chocolate, and co… WHEELOCK: Oh, wow. TRACY: Yes, oh, it was very, you know… WHEELOCK: Very, very nice. TRACY: And the old times, yes. WHEELOCK: So how long did you work at that job? 5 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: Oh, I did that the entire four years. Or three years, actually, once I got on campus. That’s how I paid for my own board. WHEELOCK: Oh. Nice. So—did you get food? Did they feed you as well, or … Okay. TRACY: Yeah, if you worked, you got the meal. WHEELOCK: Okay. Hey, you know… TRACY: Yeah. WHEELOCK: There’s worse jobs. TRACY: Oh, it was an excellent job. WHEELOCK: Yeah, huh? TRACY: Oh, I thought it was wonderful because it didn’t take time out of studying, and it was… WHEELOCK: You got to eat. TRACY: You got to eat, and the other things that that Stanford did, compared to other schools at that time, the football players I don’t think got really big perks, but they got to be hashers. WHEELOCK: Hmm. Okay. TRACY: So they didn’t have to pay their board either, but they had to work for their meals. But they, so I got to eat and know all the football players. 6 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: Oh. That’s a perk. TRACY: We got to eat with the football players, yes. So—well, it is a perk if you like football. WHEELOCK: I guess that’s true. TRACY: I got fired from football. WHEELOCK: They kicked you off the team. TRACY: I was told once at one of the games—I thought you went to games to socialize, and talk to people, and I was told that that—I didn’t have the right attitude, that you were supposed to stay—sit there and watch football. And so I decided I didn’t have the right attitude. So that was the last football game I ever went to. And … WHEELOCK: So… TRACY: …that’s how I got fired from football. WHEELOCK: So I’m thinking that you’re not going to the one on Saturday either. TRACY: No, no, that sort of ended, obviously it didn’t take much to end my footballgoing career, but that ended it. WHEELOCK: Well, you’re better than me, because I don’t think I ever had a footballgoing career. I just never really bothered to pay attention. But, hey, you know. TRACY: Yeah. Well… 7 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: I prefer to talk, and I think everyone else is pretty much—I don’t know what they’re doing, but they seem to be watching the game. So, okay, good for them. Well, anything else on that sheet that now you’ve had time peek at it a little bit interesting? TRACY: The fellow students were all, I thought very nice. They were all very hard working, too. I don’t remember particular professors’ names, and I’m ashamed to say that. But there were many that were wonderful and truly lived up to Stanford’s motto of Let the winds of freedom blow, because there wasn’t anything or any ideas that we could not talk about, or explore. And that type of intellectual freedom, I don’t think one would find anywhere often. And you have to remember that this was during the Joe McCarthy era. And so these professors I think, were very, very brave indeed. People—I’m not sure how many of the students truly appreciated that, but I certainly did because I thought that they were taking their lives and careers, and kind of putting them out there, out to teach the classes that they did. And at that time, to teach a class on Communism, and the Russian literature, when they could have maybe lost—and then maybe in other situations, and many situations, been fired from their jobs was an act of great bravery. And I appreciated that, the courage you know. WHEELOCK: At that time that you… TRACY: Well, it served as an example for being a courageous person later on in life, too. WHEELOCK: Which you clearly have had no problem with, you know, going—or you were a bio major, chemistry minor, and then straight into medical school at a time when there weren’t that many… TRACY: There were a couple of us. WHEELOCK: Yeah. 8 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: Yeah, yeah. WHEELOCK: So, and primarily, you said, nah, you know. So—I didn’t—yeah, they weren’t there, but… TRACY: Well, I had one professor that clearly didn’t like girls in doctor school. And the way he showed it was, and this was before the days when sexual harassment was a word, and he used to do it by telling the girls very, very dirty jokes. And of course, we were, like I said, both the girls in medical school, we had become desks and books, you know, we had no life experience much at all. And so all we could do was blush and had absolutely no idea what, if anything, we could or should do. We were speechless. And the other thing that he would do is he would find some area of weakness, and you know, we all have them, and he would find it and stick with it as a dog with a bone. And one day he started doing that on my lab partner who was another—was the other woman in the class, and found something she didn’t know. And rather than say, “I don’t know, but I’ll know it next week, ask me again,” she ran off in tears, which is exactly what he wanted. And I looked up at him, and he was six-five, and I’m rather short. And I said “I don’t think that was very professional; I don’t think that has any place in education.” I don’t know where it came from; I just blurted it out because I did not like the injustice of it. And he didn’t give me an oral exam that day. But, I walked into the finals—and all our exams were oral, and of course, you can’t fake those. And he was my examiner, and I thought, “Oh, heavens, my goose is cooked.” And he did something that to this day I don’t know what he meant. I didn’t have the presence of mind to ask: he offered me a cigar. And of course, that’s not something that we did, women didn’t smoke, and certainly not cigars. And I don’t know if he meant you’re one of the boys, or what, but I said I didn’t know that, if he was trying to make a joke and put me at my ease, but that I—nothing was going to work except to have this examination behind me, so please, let’s begin. And he did—I have to say, he was very honorable, he 9 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY gave me a rather good grade. Well, he didn’t have to, you know, he could have given me anything he wanted. So, when the chips were down, he was a true man. And the only funny thing was that my mother thought it was very socially upper class if I would take golf. WHEELOCK: Here at Stanford? TRACY: Here at Stanford, because they have the wonderful golf course, and they taught golf in P.E. And I thought, “Okay, it’ll please my mother, and now I’ll become one of the, you know, that class of people who plays golf.” And I was terrible at it and built wrong, and I discovered—you have to have no butt, no chest, and I had too much—way too much chest, because you can’t get those arms close. But anyway, so it’s a class I discovered that in order to pass and not get killed by the other golfers, I had to cheat. It’s the only class I’ve ever had to cheat in to pass. So … WHEELOCK: Now the obvious question is, how do you cheat at golf? I mean, it seems almost… TRACY: Well, you had to play the holes, you know, and so you just—when you lose all the balls you just put them near the hole and then hit it in, and say that you had hit it three times, or whatever. And I had to cheat. WHEELOCK: Clearly, they must not have cared that much or they would have been, you know, watching to see if you were cheating, so… TRACY: No, no, clearly, they didn’t care. Well, Stanford had the honor system. WHEELOCK: That’s right. TRACY: And you’re not supposed to cheat. 10 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: Even at golf. TRACY: But I’m confessing now that I had to cheat to pass at golf, then and I had to, to even finish playing the class. I probably would still be playing today. I was that bad. I was really bad. WHEELOCK: Well, if you had still—you had to keep taking that class, I mean you would probably be really good. I mean fifty years later after—you know, who knows? Or at least you would have been really good at cheating. So, you know—well, clearly, you were really good at cheating at golf, or you wouldn’t have passed. TRACY: No, I’m not—I was not good at cheating at anything, so—but that was … WHEELOCK: That’s funny. So football, golf -- not really. Not so much, huh? Yeah? TRACY: No. WHEELOCK: Well, let’s see. What are we at here? Do you remember anything in particular about your job with the Engineering Library? Was just kind of an interesting… TRACY: The head of the Science and Engineering Library Department had come fairly recently from the Air Force Academy, and was an absolutely one of the kindest, nicest human beings that one could ever meet. And he very patiently taught me, you know, about the—gave me all of his—as much of his knowledge as he possibly could about libraries. And he obviously loved books and libraries and so he taught me how to, where to find any—everything, and I guess I’ve always been rather bookish, so it was just the right place for me. 11 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: Did the fact that it was the Engineering Library and sort of science related; did that help you out in your studies at all? I know chemistry was your minor. I know biology may not have fit into engineering at that time, but… TRACY: Well, yes, it helped me on my studies because I worked at night. And throughout the entire school year, and I and man—I was responsible for the desk so that in between customers I could read my—oh, you know, whatever book I was reading, or, do problems or whatever. And so it gave me the opportunity to work and study some, and make a little salary, and kept me out of mischief, and, libraries are very quiet places. The Science and Engineering Libraries were in—they were very quiet. And, you know, good places. WHEELOCK: Perfect place to study. TRACY: Perfect place to study. WHEELOCK: And be working. TRACY: And to be working at the same time, couldn’t have been better. You know, I was so thankful that I went and it was the—I was the only student to make that interview and get the job—and I got the job. WHEELOCK: Do you remember his name? TRACY: I’m thinking Anderson. [CAMPBELL, GILBERT LEWIS, Chief Science and Engineering Librarian, Library. B.S., Purdue, 1937; B.S. , Illinois, 1938. At Stanford since 1952.] WHEELOCK: I was just curious. TRACY: I think so. 12 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: Yeah, yeah, but easy enough to find out. TRACY: Yeah. But he was wonderful. WHEELOCK: Oh, that’s great. TRACY: Yeah. And then some of the great scientists Nobel Prize winners all co—you know, they’d use the library, and I’m—got to meet them and talk to them, and that was really quite a nice thing. WHEELOCK: They were mostly the Nobel in … well, it was the Engineering Libraries, right? So they were pa… TRACY: Science and Engineering. WHEELOCK: Science and Engineering, okay. TRACY: So, one year I would do the Mathematics Library. And that’s how I discovered that mathematicians’ brains are different than other people’s brains, they really are. WHEELOCK: Just from working the desk at the Math Library? TRACY: And talking to them, and—they’re just different. And it’s neurological. WHEELOCK: And that must have helped you sort of later on in your career as a psychiatrist, kind of understanding that that was the case. WHEELOCK: I think that’s one of those things that people have kind of started to talk about now and they understand about … 13 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: People really are different, but, you know… TRACY: Yeah, we have different brains. WHEELOCK: Yeah, just wired differently. TRACY: Yes, yes, yes. We were, yes. And … WHEELOCK: So, have you come back to campus a lot? TRACY: I have not, no. My life has taken me far afield, and so traveling back has been difficult because, and in a way that’s good, and in a way, it’s bad, like everything. I probably would have been very content to never leave Stanford, if truth be known. I could have become a permanent desk and would have been permanently happy. But, at a young age, I had other interests, and I got married, and that—and life took me— life and children and family took me far afield. And I’m not much—I’m really not a very sentimental person. It’s just not in my nature. So I’ve not been the kind of person who— because I thought it would be destructive just to look back. So my view has always been either the present or the future. And, it wasn’t convenient to be looking back and coming. But I do have relatives in the area and we’re all getting older, and I thought I need to go back and see them. WHEELOCK: So Palo Alto is basically—I mean Palo Alto is your hometown. And you must have gone to Paly [Palo Alto High School] TRACY: I did. WHEELOCK: Okay. 14 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: Yes. WHEELOCK: Why, I actually went to the rival—what’s now the rival high school— Gunn. So I’m from here as well, so… TRACY: Where is the rival high school? It’s new. WHEELOCK: I know, it’s very new. TRACY: Is it? WHEELOCK: Yeah. It’s—well… TRACY: Where did they build it? WHEELOCK: I think it was built in the ‘70s, and it was… TRACY: Oh, that’s terribly new. WHEELOCK: Yeah, it is terribly new. Gosh, and now I’m embarrassing myself on this recording. I can’t remember my where my high school is located. It’s on Arastradero [Road]. It’s—you know where… TRACY: I know where that is. Yes. WHEELOCK: There’s the cemetery Alta Mesa. If you go towards 280 on Arastradero where it crosses Junipero Serra, It’s basically right there. Right next to the… TRACY: About… WHEELOCK: …VA hospital kind of. 15 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: On the other side. TRACY: …Where is it from El Camino? WHEELOCK: Quite a distance away. It’s sort of… TRACY: Is it to the east, or is it to the west? WHEELOCK: It is to the west. TRACY: Okay. So toward the foothills. WHEELOCK: Yes. TRACY: Okay. WHEELOCK: Basically, at this point, it seems like all the Stanford professors’ kids go to that high school. TRACY: Oh, they do? WHEELOCK: Yeah. TRACY: Okay. They all went to Paly High when I was… WHEELOCK: Right. That must have been really interesting to come from here and then, you could have gone to University of Chicago, and—but there’s the… 16 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY TRACY: Yeah. But you know familiarity breeds contempt. So, you grow up all your life, or around Stanford, and remember, it did not have the reputation then that it has achieved today. And you have stars in your eyes, and—but as a kid, we would play being astronauts, and so I said maybe, at that time, the University of Chicago’s medical school was considered really, really good. And, you know, I thought that would be very good academic place, and… WHEELOCK: And it wasn’t in Palo Alto, too. So … TRACY: And it wasn’t Palo Alto. And you know, when I—oh, the other thing, when I went to Stanford at the social gatherings where they tried to get people to meet each there, people would ask each other where they came from. And if you said Palo Alto, the next thing you would hear was, oh. WHEELOCK: Really? Why is that? TRACY: Well, it wasn’t exotic. It was ordinary. You know, it was much more exciting if you came from you know, Los Angeles or some other wonderful place, because California was considered sort of low class compared to New York, and Palo Alto was sort of a no place compared to Los Angeles or Hollywood or—at that time. And it was the social kiss of death to say you were from Palo Alto. How things have changed. WHEELOCK: That’s for sure, huh? TRACY: You know? And when I was away from Palo Alto, and, you know, Silicon Valley. WHEELOCK: That’s right. TRACY: But it wasn’t Silicon Valley then. 17 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: That’s right. Yeah. TRACY: It didn’t exist. And so one night I thought, oh, I’m going to try something. So the next young man that asked me my name and where I was from, I said I was from Afghanistan. And I’ve read National Geographic, and I knew a little bit about Kabul, and so I made up this story about how I had grown up there, and my father was in the Foreign Service, a total fabrication. And I could not believe that this young man swallowed it hook, line, and sinker. WHEELOCK: He was probably from Palo Alto. TRACY: No, he was from—I don’t know—Los Angeles, because that was—someplace. WHEELOCK: Someplace out in exotic land. TRACY: And I realized—suddenly I’ve become a very interesting personage. And I realized, I mean it was the same me that was from Palo Alto as this person who was lying about being from Afghanistan. And I couldn’t continue, so before the evening was over I said, “Look, I have to tell you, I’m not from Afghanistan, I was doing a little experiment to see if people would treat me differently, but I’m really from Palo Alto.” And, the reaction of this young man was—he hated being betrayed. He felt terribly betrayed, and you know, then I’m suddenly an ordinary person again. And, so I realized that if I—that’s the first and only time I’ve ever done anything like that. But it was a good experiment. WHEELOCK: That is a good experiment. And now where do you live? TRACY: I live on the Gulf Coast of Mississippi. 18 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: That’s neat. I’m going to start telling people I’m from Afghanistan and see what happens. TRACY: Yeah. Well, now you can say you’re from Coastal Mississippi, and people will also then react one way, you know—either look to see if you have shoes, and do you really have indoor toilets, or some such thing like that. WHEELOCK: Oh, that’s exciting. Yeah. TRACY: You know? WHEELOCK: My family’s from Texas, so I understand. TRACY: You understand. Yes. WHEELOCK: Completely. TRACY: Yes, yes. WHEELOCK: Well, is there anything Else that you want… TRACY: There is—no, no, that’s… WHEELOCK: Those are some good stories. I liked that. TRACY: You liked that? WHEELOCK: Yes. Actually, you did a fabulous job having nothing to talk about. I… TRACY: I didn’t realize—I had a few little things. 19 STANFORD UNIVERSITY/ALUMNI STORIES 2007/ELSE TRACY WHEELOCK: Yes. Yes. I’m sure you have a few little things more. But anyway—so thank you for coming. TRACY: Oh, you’re very welcome. It’s been a real pleasure. WHEELOCK: Nice to meet you. TRACY: Okay. Do you want me to sign that thing …..