 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Today is November 19, 2007. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with the Oklahoma State University Library, and we re conducting an oral history project called Women of the Oklahoma Legislature, and today I m in Tulsa, Oklahoma at the OSU campus to talk with Judy Eason McIntyre who was in the House from 2002 to 2004, and then switched to the Senate Yes. 2004 to the present. So thank you for joining us today. Well, thank you for having me. Let s start by having you tell us a little bit about your childhood and then we ll work forward. Well, I ll start out by saying I had a wonderful childhood. I did not really realize that until I got older. I m one of four. I m the oldest of four three girls, one boy. My father is from Oklahoma City, my mother from Sapulpa. They met at Langston, and my mother doesn t like for me to tell this story, but anyway I was conceived somewhere on Langston s campus and my mother dropped out of school her junior year. It was during the Second World War right after Pearl Harbor, and my father was then inducted into the Army and did not have to fight but because of his education taught basic English, math, to black soldiers who were in the Army. Then he went to France, worked for the General, came back and finished at Kansas State University. I started elementary school here in Tulsa at Ralph J. Bunche Elementary School in 1950. My dad worked and did not want my mom to work 5 wanted her to be involved in the school, so she was the PTA president, the chaperone, et cetera. I attended Tulsa public schools, graduated from Booker T. Washington High School in 1963. At the end of I think it was August I was also involved in the church, of course, and my minister was trying to fill the bus to go to the March on Washington. I had never been past Oklahoma City, so I begged my parents to let me go. They did, and I never understood initially why they were concerned and having grown up in a segregated Tulsa, I d had very little opportunity to interact with white children. I was on the inner-city student council, the inner-city orchestra, but we only met a couple times a year. When we had football games or athletic events, the white students sat on one side, we sat on the other. We never mixed. So when I got to Washington and I saw (Laughs) all of these people, I was just taken aback. Now, could I tell you what the purpose of being there was? No. (Laughs) I can remember Martin Luther King talking about I have a dream and he kept repeating it, but I was just so in awe about all of these different people I remember saying, I wonder why he keeps repeating himself? It wasn t until I started school at OU University of Oklahoma that I began to realize what the movement was all about because in 1963 unfortunately, the University of Oklahoma had a long way to go. And most of the girls in the dorm, once their parents discovered that I was black, wanted me to move out. Yes. I almost forgot my name because I was called the N word yes, in the classroom, in the dorm. And the girls would talk with me and we like most girls, you know, that you interact with in the dorm as long as we were in the dorm, I was their friend. When we got out on campus, I guess the norm was that you don t have a black friend. So I made a huge transition from an age of innocence because my parents sheltered me. I never realized that when we went downtown and we had to stay in the car that we acted good we could get an ice cream cone. It was because my mom couldn t try on clothes, we couldn t use the bathroom you know, on and on and on. But I never realized that people didn t like you just because of the color of your skin until I got there. And then during the 60 s, remember, was the beginning of a national kind of civil rights movement. So I went from the age of innocence to anger and rage, and I became involved in everything (Laughs) that I could. But at the same time, my parents had told us all that we were going to college. When the ice cream man came and we said, Daddy, we want some ice cream, he says, You can get a job and pay for your own because you re going to college. And when I entered OU, my father by then was working two jobs at the post office and cleaning up at Hillcrest Hospital because eventually there were three of us at OU and my dad was the only one paying no loans, nothing and, you know, I 6 chuckle now as I talk to folks because we all understood what we had to do. You had four years to finish. He was not gonna pay for you to repeat a course. (Laughs) If you fell in love and wanted to get married, you could do it, but your husband would pay because he said he had worked two jobs and Eason was gonna be on those diplomas. (Laughs) And I think back now, and we did. All four of us eventually graduated. He died at forty-six when the youngest was finishing Boston University. Oh, let me back up a minute. He said we could go to school anywhere in the state of Oklahoma. The youngest one started out at Phillips. She was the only one that did not go to OU initially. She met someone who lived in Boston and spent part of the summer there and just fell in love with the East Coast and decided she was gonna leave Oklahoma and go there and daddy made a believer out of her because she had to work cleaning-up. She was a waitress and my mother, who was not working, sneaked her the household money for little things. But the bottom line is I know he s looking down from the heavens because we all then went on to get post-graduate degrees. I was determined as an undergraduate that in addition to all of the social things that were going on, I was gonna get on the honor roll at OU and I did. It took me to my senior year, but I finished in social work in 1967 four years like my dad said. I went on in 79 to get my master s in social work from the University of Oklahoma. My sister got her Ph.D. in organizational psychology in California. My brother finished with the FBI under Hoover. He wanted to be a postal inspector, but in the early 60 s they needed young undercover agents for drugs in D.C., and he made some kind of a decision anyway, he ended up getting his master s in criminology from the University of Maryland. And then my baby sister, who defied our parents, went on and got her MBA from Harvard yes, so education was stressed. We knew from the very beginning we were gonna go to school; didn t really realize early on what college and what it meant. I thought everybody s parents, they met in college and that everybody was going to college. My mother was an avid reader. She read to us all the time. We certainly got the little dolls and cook things, but I can remember always fussing because we got I can remember younger the how and why books that goes back a long way (Laughs) Great Books of the Western World and everybody I mean, other people are getting dolls and stuff and we re getting this. We could not get a TV until I was in high school. (Laughs) My mother belonged to Reader s Digest Club and so she read to us all the time, and all four of us have a love for reading. I did, in retrospect, have a wonderful childhood did not realize it because I didn t think that I was. The other kids were getting a whole 7 bunch of a different focus and things, and ours were academic but in the end, it was the best thing that happened. Also, the love that the segregated community gave me which enabled you to grow within the church and other kinds of institutions that you would ordinarily get in a larger society prepared me. It took awhile to understand what was going on at OU. It took awhile once I got infected with the fight of anger. I, as soon as my parents told me, started doing the very same thing that I was accusing others of doing, painting a broad brush against all whites because some were not being very kind to me for no reason. I mean, I know people may not like them, but give me a chance. (Laughs) And that chance wasn t given. But I think a combination of certainly my parents and their focus and determination that, You re gonna finish school I used to call home and tell daddy, I don t want to stay here. These people are mean. I do not want to be here. And he let me call for about a month or two collect, and after that he said, Write me your concerns and that I was not going anywhere. (Laughs) And so I did, as I told you earlier, had to regardless of how much I wanted to get involved in this issue, social issues, my primary purpose for being there was to get an education. As my dad said, Then you can get involved in anything else you want to do. So I soon learned how to tread that, and I am so glad that in the end, that I persevered. It took me, however, graduation from undergraduate school, getting a job in 1967 with DHS Department of Human Services , and actually asking and as I think back now, they should have fired me on the spot I said, I will not work with any white families. And guess what? They gave me all black families 1967 and that probably lasted a couple of years. I refused to eat or socialize with any of the workers in there. I isolated myself because the hurt, I think, from not understanding how could we be friends we laid out in the sun, I put Noxzema on them which I never understood why they d want to get that red. Of course, I had long sleeves on, but I was laying out there. (Laughs) I could never understand, well, how can we be friends in one place and then not the other. But because of my parents who kept telling me, You re doing the same thing, and now I can understand the statement that Martin Luther King said it took me awhile and I began to understand. You don t judge people by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. So it was a slow process back from anger and rage because you ve got to remember, during this time there were killings and all kinds of things going on. And then when Martin Luther King was killed and the more militant crowd came in, of course I jumped on that bandwagon. I was part of the 8 Finchum McIntyre Finchum Tulsa Black Panthers here. We had no agenda, just a lot of rage. We met, and I think the thing that turned me around well, in fact, I know it because my parents were very concerned, and they kept telling me, You cannot fight from the outside. Fight from the inside, and I was standing on the outside talking about what we re gonna do. Well, we could have been annihilated within a second but to show you what lack of agenda that we had, earlier on, the prostitutes used to stand on the corner of Greenwood and Archer, so we were gonna go down or we did go down to protect the prostitutes from harassment of the police. This was the first time they introduced guns, and when the police came the guys handed the guns to the girls. And I looked down and I saw this gun which I ve always been afraid of guns even though my uncles shot rabbits and quail and I kind of looked around and I thought, You know what? I don t see anybody in here that s finished college, and suddenly it made sense to me. When the police left and they didn t even come over to any of us, the women who had the guns, and when they left, I gave them the gun back and it was like, Adios. I understand now. And I came and I told my parents what had happened and they were like, I don t believe it. But I ve been on that path of rebuilding and I can say at sixty-two I am there. I got there much earlier though. It was a long trail back because the times were just so terrible, and you had the Vietnam War and I had people accuse me of being a protester well, I think I am. I m a warrior woman warrior and I have fought for causes. Any cause that came up, whether it was housing for the poor or those who were families of the incarcerated, whatever I am known as a bleeding heart. (Laughs) But I think a lot of that giving back came from a wonderful childhood that I had. Sounds like it. And when do you remember when you had your first family then a white family at DHS then? Oh, yes. It probably lasted I might have worked about a year or two, yeah, sure did. And I don t know by that time I had kind of began because I had one friend who was just determined Meredith Ancue is her name. She was just determined to just brush off, you know, my insistence that, I m not gonna have anything to do with you. And as I look back now, it was the fear of being hurt because I didn t understand you know, these girls in the dorm, we were just like sisters and then when I see you on campus and I say, Hi, Tanya , you don t even know me. So I was afraid of losing again, as I look back, and so it was easier to build this barrier so I wouldn t get hurt. But you can t go anywhere in life without getting along with people. Well, during high school, were you interested in politics or the political 9 McIntyre arena or government or anything? Not really. I listened, because there was so much reading going on in our home, to national events that were going on, in between the school dances and everything else. Actually my interest in politics probably started when I got to OU to kind of understand that level of it. But real interest in politics came when I met this guy and I married him in 1971, I think it was after my father died in 1970 at the age of 46. And my ex-husband was interested in politics, and my minister who took me to Washington, D.C. was a state house member, and so my ex-husband I was dating him then, and he was interested in politics, so my minister said, If you re interested, I ll take your hand, and there s a lot of learning, a lot of discipline that goes on here. It s not fun and games. So my ex-husband became the ears and eyes and we didn t have any children so we got to spend almost every day, when we weren t working, with my minister who was a state representative. He died, and my ex-husband, at the age of 26, won the House seat. We stayed married for 11 years. We got a divorce, I think, around 1980, and he went on to the Senate and served there for fifteen years, but unfortunately unfortunately lost his way and ended up as I d like to say, Oklahoma s Marion Barry lost everything lost everything the drugs just destroyed him. I had been divorced six years when that happened, but I was still carrying the McIntyre name. In 1981, a year after our divorce, I was approached by him because I think he thought I was gonna run against him and some others in the community to run for the school board. And during that time, we didn t have districts, designated districts, so we had to run city-wide. People knew Judy McIntyre because of him, he hadn t gotten into any kind of trouble then, and so that s when I combined my name, Judy Eason McIntyre, and I ran city-wide and won. Once I got a divorce it was eleven years of being involved as a legislative wife. At that time, we didn t have the privilege of having an African American council member or the different kinds of different elected positions where black people held them. So we became the resource for federal, state and local kind of issues. It was a great combination until, I think, probably about seven years into it and I could begin to see a change in him. He was in the legislature and I m not gonna blame it on anything because in the end you have to take personal responsibility there were no ethics. It was the wild, wild west, and I just won t even begin to go into some of the things, and as a young man he was very impressed by that. Some of these politicians are even at eighty facing some of the, what is it they say? The roosters have come back, and these were his idols and he got caught up 10 into that and destroyed his life. I had been divorced six years when that happened, but I was still carrying the name because my friends at the Tribune and the World had said, Keep that name. So in the process of being married to a legislator for eleven years and not having any children, I actually was working two jobs social worker with child abuse and neglect and in 1979 I became a supervisor 24- hour call. While he was there, we didn t have just ninety days like we have now. So I wrote speeches. I gave speeches because of my social work involvement. And the district that you represent, I was a resource so I basically did everything but take a vote on the House floor. So it gave me an opportunity to discover something that I loved because it fit right into what my parents had said, Work on the inside. So I was devastated when he no longer wanted to be married, but of course you can t keep anybody in a marriage that doesn t want to be there. I had been so involved in democrat politics, politics of the state and district. That s why, I think he was afraid that I was gonna run against him when we got a divorce, and he was one of the persons coming to me asking me to run for the school board. Of course, I said, No, just because he asked me. The superintendent and my mother and some other friends came and asked me, and I thought, Well, you know what? I ve been so involved to just sit down and do nothing, and plus the kids that we work with that are in DHS custody are dependent on the foster parent and the social workers to help them. They ve got lots of problems, not that other kids who are not in DHS custody didn t, but this was another way of helping. And so for that reason, I decided, I m gonna run for that because I can no longer be involved in democrat politics. When there s a new Mrs. on the you re sitting in the audience watching. But now, I ll tell you what, it wasn t a smooth transition. I went to therapy because I wanted to find out what was within me that I selected this person. Now let me back up I dated this when I was at OU from 63 to 67, I dated a basketball player named Howard Johnson for three and a half years, almost the whole time. And of course as I had said earlier, I couldn t get married because he wasn t gonna pay for me to go to college. So it was 67 when we graduated, I came home and asked daddy if we could get married, and he didn t want me to. He said, Go get your master s. But I told him I was in love and that I had done what he asked me to do get a degree. So he shook hands with both of us and he said, Good luck, even though he did not want me to. Had an elaborate wedding and I, and this was 67 when I got married, got my dress at Miss Jackson s. I mean I was queen of the ball. Stayed married eight months. (Laughs) I called my daddy one evening and I 11 said, I m getting a divorce. Well, he used an expletive-deleted word that begins with an H I have not finished paying for the wedding. I said, Daddy, I m on my way home. (Laughs) So I came home and, as my therapist told me, I went from one nest to the other. First my dad s, then my brief eight-months with my first husband, and then I managed. Then the next nest was my ex-husband, Bernard McIntyre. You know, just went from one nest to the other and never had experienced living on my own and living out of the shadow of somebody else. I stayed married eleven years to Bernard and loved if I got anything out of that marriage, it was a real love for politics. I loved it. I fell in love with it almost immediately. In fact, I met him through a friend who said I had come home from my first divorce, and she said, I ve got a friend that s running for democrat county chair. You ought to help him get elected. You re not doing anything. So I like to tell the story that he lost the race, but he won my heart. So we hop into this nest, and I mean, he loved politics. As I look back now he loved politics (Laughs) more than he loved anything, and that was what s so tragic about having lost his way on this process. But anyway, I loved it because I saw a way of being able to have an even stronger voice on some of the issues and hopefully making things happen, just like with the school board. Kept a lot of kids from long suspensions that were in DHS custody, who were already struggling, who were already out there by themselves, you know, that s where the bleeding heart came in. And so it was like, Whoa. Hey. Yeah. This is going to work, and I stayed on the school board for about sixteen years. I think the second year, I was selected president. And I look back, not because of anything that I had done, but it was part of a grand scheme. They were gonna close eleven schools, most of them in the district in Northside, even though I didn t have any districts at that time. And of course as president of the board, I m gonna follow the recommendation. I had to have police protection for a month, and I was divorced by this time, because someone threatened to burn my house down. There was a group of people who brought the media to my house and they stood out there protesting and I m on the telephone talking to the superintendent who lives south, and he said, Oh, it s gonna be okay. Yeah, right. (Laughs) They re not in front of your house. I made a decision after that that I would always do my own homework always do my own homework. As I reviewed that and I tell people in the community now, I would do it again you had less than 100 kids going to those schools. Nothing was happening in there. Now there should have been some corrective efforts prior to that, but I also made a determination that I am not gonna leave Tulsa. This is my home, and I m gonna stay here, but I ve got to rebuild the trust. So that s when I began 12 to move into doing my homework and not being afraid to ask the hard questions, to take a different stand, to mobilize the people to try to get some things done. And I fought my way back to my community and, hey, when I got ready to leave the school board, my community didn t want me to, but sixteen years was enough. I had done all that I needed, and it was time for somebody else to come in and do some things differently. I retired first from DHS after thirty-one years. The last three years, I supervised the Tulsa staff except for intake. And so, let s see, about 96 I retired from DHS and maybe 97 or 98 I left the school board, and for the first year, I did nothing I did nothing much. But I got bored because I was so used to being involved in different entities because along the way I ve been on almost every board, so many I can t even say. I wanted to initially volunteer at the school system, but I knew having been such a fighter and providing oversight that it would probably create more problems than it was worth. And the irony is that the senator and the house member who took my ex-husband s seat came to me and asked me to run. I think we had about six different meetings and I said, No, because I remembered the eleven years and, as I told them, when he had to step down that s when everybody thought I was gonna take his position and it was like, Oh, no. I don t want to go over there. That s a mad-house. I wanted nothing to do with it. It was really, again, my mother who said, You re just so active. You want to try to change the world. I was just a child of the 60 s. This is a great opportunity. But I think she had a personal agenda because she always said, Well, you were the one who had done most of the work anyway. You deserve that position, and as it turned out, I ran for the House in 2002 and there were five or six people running. Everybody thought I was gonna have a run-off, but I got sixty percent of the vote, but I worked hard. But between sixteen years on the school board, thirty-one years of working in families within not only this district but throughout the city, throughout the state, and having worked myself back to the trust of the people in my community, they knew that I would fight, that I m gonna do my homework. I m not just gonna get up there trying to be a bully and a militant and just talking and getting nothing done. So I ran for that. Oh, I think I ve gotten sidetracked now I was talking so much. But anyway, to make a long story short, I learned so very much from the eleven years. I learned so much from the school board that when I ran for the House, it was just a breeze. Now, I worked extremely hard in fact, I worked so hard and had volunteers calling, that we had called about four or five times to all of the precincts that people were saying, Judy, if you call here one more time, you ll lose a vote. (Laughs) And 13 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre so the primary was the place where I won because the make-up, the demographics in terms of republicans and democrat, you still had to do some things for the general, but, you know, nothing. And along the way, the same former senator and representative had brought a young man to me, Jabar Shumate, who was interested in running for the House. When I met with them and agreed to run, Don Ross said he was not going to serve his last two terms and that Maxine Horner was going to term-limit out. So now I m gonna run for the House. But when I ran for the House, I told them this was just a stepping-stone to run for the Senate. The Senate, okay. And when I look back now I m horrified because that is not what you do. And yet, when I ran for the Senate, I got eighty-seven percent of the vote eighty-seven percent of the vote. Now in the meantime, the former senator and former house member supported somebody else. After asking you to run? After asking me, that s the irony of it all. And the young man that they introduced to me when I was in the House, he worked as a press secretary for David Boren. President Boren knew that he was interested and kind of worked with him and so this young man, like my ex-husband and I, but my ex-husband more so than me, spent almost every day when they were in session. When I was in session he was over there with me. So he began to understand could see the process in addition to reading about it, could meet the people that he needed to know, the lobbyists, the leadership and all of that, and worked in my campaign. On Saturdays, he would bring a truckload of and I used to call them the U.N. because they were students from Chile and everywhere and they would get to Tulsa on Saturday about 9:00. Now these are college folks who on Friday night, it s no telling (Laughs) what s going on and they would work, walk in the sun with me in the heat on Saturdays until about 2:00 or 3:00. Of course we fed them. Then they got right back on that truck and went back to Norman. I had made this young man youth coordinator, and I said, If you re interested, then you re gonna learn to work, and so after I served those two years, of course he filed and he won and then I won mine. So to me the cycle of life, it s moving. It s almost made the complete circle because now I see my role as my ex-minister who was also the state representative. At sixty-two, I believe that my role is to provide information about the history and to help prevent a lot of the mistakes I made along the way, and at the same time gather information. Gather information about the future and to become that baton for the next 14 generation because that s where, I believe, that s what I m supposed to be doing. Now, last year became even stronger that that was what I m supposed to do. Last year I was diagnosed with breast cancer. I was blessed I had a double mastectomy I was blessed in that it had not gone to the lymph nodes. I didn t have to have chemo or radiation. I did have a double mastectomy. I figure God left me here for a purpose, not only to be able to testify about the goodness of the good Lord that I put my total faith in after the first two weeks, because I had planned my funeral the first two weeks (Laughs) until my best friend reminded me I had survived my ex-husband and I was like, Oh, yes. I ve got to live Lord. (Laughs) And that s a true story. Then I put my faith in the good Lord. And I m a big believer in the philosophy of Maslow s hierarchy of needs and I believe I m at that self-actualization. I can remember reading about it and studying it, and I believe that s where I am. And I see my position at this point in my life in terms of politics to be that mentor and to pass that baton to the next generation because the tactics, the approaches that were used during the 60 s and 70 s and my generation have come and gone. One of the things that I never realized that was such an asset to me currently as a member of the legislature two things my difficult journey from innocence to a real stark reality and working back to working with people and understanding that you look at each person individually, and my social work interpersonal that was my focus when I got my master s was interpersonal skills. I am not the smartest person over there, but what I am good at, and I ll say it, are my interpersonal skills. If you have some likeability, if you re willing to listen to others, if you re willing to share, and most of all to be honest with each other, forgiving of each other because over there, I mean, it s not personal. It s business. And this is not fluff ball this is hard-core blood sport (Laughs) There s a balance, but you always have to remember people. It s people that you re working with and people that you re fighting for. You never get anything done standing on the outside like I was as a Black Panther. That only comes when two people sit down together, respect each other, keep each other s dignity intact, whether you re right-wing or left-wing as they call me at times. (Laughs) This is another human being with ideas and if you re willing to sit down and listen, you can learn some things and then build on that. I truly believe that this journey into the 21st century is gonna require that we co-exist and you can t do that unless you re able to interact. That s why I said I think I ve made the full circle. 15 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre But you ve got eight more years, right? I have six more years. Do they count the two in the House toward the twelve? Oh, yes. So I plan to run for re-election this year file this year. Hopefully we ll win. I m gonna out-work all of my opponents ,if I have any, because the one thing that I have discovered is that people want to run but they re lazy you ve got to work. I cannot assume that just because I was on the school board, have been on almost every board, that I ve served in the House and the Senate, that this time around that I m just gonna throw my name out there and say, Vote for me. No, you have to go back, you have to let people know that I need you. Tell me if I ve done a good job, then I m asking for you to send me back. If I haven t, tell me and maybe I can correct that if you don t feel so strong that you can t ever vote for me, and if you don t vote for me, vote. That s the thing I want you to do because the one thing about it it is not arrogance I am going to out-work anybody because I m gonna be out there with the people because people want to know. They haven t elected you and you ve gone off and ridden into the sunset and you don t come back until election time. I m a purist on that. I believe we are there the position doesn t belong to me. I am only occupying this until the next person that the baton is passed to, but while I am there, I have a responsibility to keep the promises that I made when I was running. And I don t have a special project I think my predecessors certainly had one. And in politics, the reality is that you use a whole bunch of political favors and capital on getting that special project. Now there are fundings, monies, that were set up that you don t have to fight to try to keep, but my focus is a lot different than those who came before me in that when I ran, I said that I represented all people. So there are Native Americans in my district that I represent that I have to attend to their needs. There are Hispanics in my district. There are poor whites. There are whites. There are African Americans, and if I don t have the likeability, I can t help anybody. And I have to understand what those issues are, not by reading the newspaper but by being there with those groups, and it sometimes gets difficult because when you re learning about different ethnic groups I ll give you an example, the Hispanics. I was meeting with this group and another group was saying no, their focus is different and so you have to walk a tight rope to try to understand all and then hopefully try to incorporate those issues and bring about some commonality on those issues that are important. For me it is important, as I told them in orientation when we were asked, 16 What do you want to accomplish? I mean, What role do you plan to play? and I said, Be your conscience. When we stand up here and we spout these pretty words and when we stand on the campaign corners and we re shaking hands in the barber shops and beauty shops and we promise to take care of the children, the senior citizens, to fund those entities that provide for a better quality of life, I truly believe that s what we re there for. Now that makes me a little un-liked because it appears that you re being a Polyanna. No. We made these promises. And I may not win all of the battles, but I m gonna be consistently saying, But we promised the people that we were gonna improve healthcare and move away from being 47th in the nation. We promised people education was gonna improve and no longer be at the bottom. Yet the reality is, is that in the end, and particularly election years, very little gets done because each side is trying to preserve the leadership. I get to voice myself on the floor and in caucus and individually to persons but to sit across the table, I don t get a chance to do that. It s not personal, it s not racial. It is the politics of things. If you represent people of influence, you ve got a better chance. If you are able to raise a half million dollars for the party, you ve got a better chance. If leadership made the mistake of supporting your opponent and you win and you threaten to change parties, you re gonna get what you want. So it s a struggle to be heard, but all of life s learning and experiences for me makes it real easy for me to stand and continue to yell and scream not at the top of my voice but to remind them that you have to be a lot more inclusive in this deal. If you just want to be strictly politics, then if you re democrat you adhere to the democrat principles. Because if you re gonna vote with the other party, then the people will select the true party person as opposed to the light, if you get what I mean. I don t want to call party names. So everything that has happened in my life has brought me to this point, and it s the most wonderful point in my life. I have inner peace. I have a real sense of focus about what I m gonna do, without fear, if I get re-election. If I don t get re-elected, then it wasn t meant to be. You know, I look at it like Ecclesiastic if it s your season, I ll get there. If not, then hey, it was a wonderful trip and journey there. And I constantly remind my colleagues, Don t get so full of yourself because guess what? You re just gonna be another picture on that wall, and when visitors come to the Capitol, most of the time they re not gonna even know your name, and then if they do see the name, they don t know what you ve done. (Laughs) So, as the movie said, It s a wonderful life, and it s a wonderful time for me to be alive because you know, I have no fear of fighting for the collective good of the people of Oklahoma. 17 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Well, let s go back a little bit. Why specifically did you switch from the House to the Senate? Was there a four-year versus two-year or some other reason? Oh, yes yes. Now, if we go back, remember the young man who wanted to run for the House, so I was taking a real chance of giving up a safe seat to do this. I wanted it for him because he had proven himself to me, and I kept my word. And if I hadn t won, then, hey, it was a good two years, you know. That was all I was supposed to do. But on a practical sense, yes. Every two years you re doing that thing, but everything you do is politically oriented and within four years, it gives me a long time to be and get not only me, but the other senators. You have a longer time, so what you do is, to me, more pure if you choose to go that route. Now, not everybody does. So that when I m attending something or working with somebody, I m not doing it to get re-elected in six months maybe three years. The way I look at it is, the longer you stay in, the more people you re gonna lose, but you hope that on the other end that you are gaining. But just on a practical level, it is sure better to run every four years as opposed to two. I don t think I would have served my whole twelve years running every two years. That would have not been for me. Well, on swearing-in day, was your mother there? Oh, god, yes. Oh, she was so proud, and she s still so proud. She is still so proud. She is now eighty-three, and she goes to everything that I can invite a guest, my mother is there. In fact, we just came back from the statehood ceremonies, and oh, she had a ball. But it s refreshing to see her face because she was emotionally upset, like I was. Any mother who watches their child upset, as she had, about a situation that didn t have to happen but did, it just fits. I mean, if she doesn t live another day, (Laughs) you know, it s like this belonged to you anyway, you did all the work anyway. You know how mothers are so he s gotten very little credit for anything. (Laughs) That four years, I couldn t call his name around her no no. Do you live there during session or do you commute back and forth? Oh, gosh, no. Now listen, you ve got to be real good to commute back and forth. I stay there. I go on Sunday after church and I stay till Thursday. The last couple of weeks of the session we work on Fridays, so you just plan to stay all that week. Again, I don t have any children, but I do have a dog that I found in the street about nine years ago. He s a little terrier, mixed breed, don t know what the other part is and I named him Harry Give em Hell Truman. He was a slick-haired dog when I found him, and then his hair started growing, and he was like 18 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum hairy and I thought, Oh, Harry Truman. Political, I m thinking, Harry Truman was President, so I m gonna give him some pedigree since I found him in the street. (Laughs) And he s also known as Mr. President, and he stays. He s been going to Oklahoma City with me since I won the House. Oh yes, he stays in the hotel room motel actually it s a motel on Lincoln, and they re pet-friendly. And when we have the tornado alerts, they go and get Mr. President and bring him to the office. (Laughs) I could not make it without him being there. He s just such a companion. And as a female legislator, it s risky. I ll put it like that. Risky to go from how can I say this place to place in the evenings and, you know, men like to go to sport bars. I ll just put it like that and so, you have to be very careful. You have to be very careful. And that s a disadvantage because a lot of business and a lot of deals are cut, but then I m not sure I want to be out till 1:00 and 2:00 in the morning. Do the women group together and do something Oh, yes yes. Some of the female lobbyists each year have where you can get a massage and do your nails and, you know, just women stuff. And then some of the lobbyists take only the women out. The republican and democrat women meet and bring issues jointly because despite the party differences, all women there understand the boys club (Laughs) and there is one. You just have to work it. (Laughs) But you see, I see no party lines when we re talking about other women in the House or the Senate. Since you had some experience in the Senate is it still the same boy club or is it can you tell if it s changed? Oh, it s still the same boys club. Oh sure. It s just very subtle. It s very subtle and there s a balance. It still exists if you re too aggressive, you re not gonna see outward reaction, but you ll feel it when you don t get your money, you don t get the committee. There are silent ways and, Who me? (Laughs) But the good thing about it is I don t know one woman over there who is not assertive, and while there s only one republican woman in the Senate, I think there are four or five women democrats in the Senate, and then I think you have about eleven, maybe, women in the House, most of them were republicans. And all of them certainly have different personalities and stuff, but all of them are very assertive and we work it when we need to. (Laughs) We women over the centuries have learned to do that. (Laughs) Is it safe to ask how you work it? 19 McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Different ways. One way someone may have a closer relationship with say, the chair of a specific committee, and so you ll have that person to talk with that person to see, Please let this bill be heard. You can t guarantee that it ll pass out of there, then you have to use your friends to work the other committee members to that s one example. So do you all get together after hours then as a group? Not most of the time. Well, because there s always, always something going on a reception and so we ll see each other then. It s probably unfair to say this, but I m going to say it anyway. I think women are a lot more serious. I know I read everything. I will go to the 5:30 reception, but I m going to come home and I m going to read every bill. Do I understand them all? No, but I make notes. And I think women tend to read their material and do a lot more homework, and I think they spend that time there as opposed to gallivanting around. (Laughs) Can t say too much I may be (Laughs) So if you re staying on Lincoln then you come down Lincoln Boulevard? Yes, right down there. What are your thoughts when you see the dome? Oh oh, you know what? Every time I get ready to walk in there and I see the dome, it s just like I can t believe I m one of forty-eight people. I can t believe this is where I work. I can t believe this. I have this opportunity of a lifetime that a lot of people don t ever get. I am still awed by being there. I look at that Capitol and think, my thoughts are there. The people that I represent, thoughts are there. I have an opportunity to do what my dad said do, to work on the inside. I realistically know that I m not going to change the world, but I may make a difference. I may make a dent in something, and it s just awesome to be there. I mean, I love it. I love every day of it. I don t like the bickering. I hate the bickering. I think it has been so destructive and, with this being an election year, it s not going to be any better. I have concerns, even though I m a recipient of the term limits, I have a concern about that because staff will probably be the persons in control because it takes a little while to even learn your way to the bathroom, (Laughs) you know. So you don t have time. There s an advantage and disadvantage of building up some real expertise, and so you re going to have this constant turnover. The lobbyists will be working harder because you ve got to keep educating, and as soon as you educate it s time for others to leave. 20 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Now, I know that they were probably looking at, when I say they it s going to be the invisible they that wanted term limits. I don t know who they are, but I don t know if it will be revisited, but I think they need to look at it because if it s somebody you want to get rid of, I mean, that district has to do that. But to lose the history, the expertise I m telling you, the people of Oklahoma s life, liberty and pursuit of happiness are in trouble and that s not to say they re bad people. They re inexperienced like me, initially. It s taken me six years, truly, to feel as comfortable as I feel, to understand the lay of the land or the political realities what needs to be done, how it needs to be done and I ll be gone. If I m lucky enough to win this next term, I probably will not run the last two years. Why? Because I truly believe that this district deserves somebody who at least has two years and if they can t defend themselves for the next ten years, that s on them. And so I will not run the last two years and pass that baton on to someone who would work for it. But you could run in the House one more time then. Oh, yes. I could run in the House, but I m going to tell you what I m not. (Laughs) Don t say never. Well, that s true and that s what people have said, Oh, stop saying that , but that s how I feel now. I m just looking at the larger picture, and I know what it s like. And you won t even bring a crust of bacon, a bit of bacon, home when you re so new. And if the Senate becomes republican and both Houses are republican, democrats are going to be basically just drawing a paycheck in the House because it is so divided politically. There s a fifteen or a seventeen vote difference, and the republicans can do anything they want to do anything and they do. It doesn t make them bad, but that s the politics of things. So what is getting done? Now, if you have it on both sides, right now we have to share so there are co-chairs for everything. I co-chair with Senator Wilcoxson, the only female in the republican Senate, on education. And so nothing can be done unless we both agree on it at this point. If we lose, then I will totally have to depend on likeability of the majority to work with. I don t fear that. I don t want it. I don t fear it because I know what I can get passed and what I can t, and if I don t have my name on it, it doesn t matter, just so we get it passed. It s kind of like what the republicans are doing now, the leadership. Jeannie McDaniel is a female from Tulsa, on Habitat for Humanity it was a tax break or something, I can t really remember what it was. To 21 Finchum McIntyre make a long story short, Speaker Cargill said that the bill would only be heard with a republican s name on it, but Jeannie was big enough because she wanted it, to relinquish and allow a republican to put their name on there, and they passed the bills. And election time, guess who gets the credit? (Laughs) So you ve got a bitter fight of trying to reclaim some things, and that s why I say this year I really hope we can get something done. The people I mean we re just sinking further and further. But anyway, that s the bleeding heart in me. What would be your first two or three items that you would like to get done? Okay, now this is real personal because it didn t get passed last year. It didn t get out of the House committee. I am a breast cancer survivor. I met with the executive directors of Tulsa Project Women, Why Me?, the Susan Komen, and some other resource people. I filed a bill, a shell bill that only said breast cancer. We got together and with the staff, by telephone, and they decided what direction we wanted to go. That direction was lymphoedema to try to get 600,000 to the healthcare authority which would then be matched with federal dollars to 1.9 for treatment and the sleeves that you have to wear. I understand it s real painful. I do have those sleeves. I must have them on and keep them on two hours after I reach my destination when I fly because when lymph nodes have been disrupted like they had to take out a couple of, the ones that were closest to where the cancer was, and so the flow gets interrupted and it s painful, I understand. Insurances and stuff don t like to pay for that. But anyway, to make a long story short, it passed in the Senate and died in the House partly my fault because I did not work the republican House like I should have. I talked with them a couple of times and thinking that was going to be enough and thinking that the House author would do. But this time around that s going to be my first project, to answer your question. I want to also be on board with those bills that deal with putting money into mandates that we already have mandated and that these social agencies cannot fulfill and provide services to. You can give Chesapeake over 400 million tax cut, and Chesapeake and oil, certainly important to this state, but there needs to be a balance on some things. You cannot mandate for schools, health and all of that, and you give no money. And then there s this law that the people have passed that says we can t raise taxes unless basically all of us agree to it and hello, that will never happen. So I want to look at ensuring that mandates get some money. I want to look at that monies go for providing preventive care, child abuse preventive care to parents and children. Health care we re 22 Finchum forty-something with health care. We re at the bottom of the barrel. How can we the next hundred years provide any kind of real future for us when people are sick and can t get help and they have to make decisions about particularly like I ll just say breast cancer women who will get help for their child before they get help for them, and then they die needlessly. I don t have any major bills other than the cancer bill. I m going to co-author a lot of bills that relate to the issues that I just talked about. I think the last of December is the deadline for the bills that we re going to file, and so there will be people coming to me to ask me to file bills on certain things. I have learned the hard way that you only accept authorship on a bill that you can discuss. I killed a lot of bills because I didn t know the subject matter. I m like, What? Oh, you didn t tell me that. (Laughs) So I hope that the focus will be on improving the quality of life, those issues that will improve the quality of life. Because everybody s hurting, except for the well-to-do. I mean, middle class Oklahomans are hurting. Look, we ve expanded the OHLAP Oklahoma Higher Learning Access Program to 50,000, now that says a whole lot in terms of income. And if again, we re serious about Oklahoma being a viable place for people to come, for young people to stay and to build this state, and to provide the leadership from us, we ve got to do those things. I m going to remain hopeful, but I m not sure because on the election year, it is a scrappy fight. Leadership will be pointing fingers at each other s party. The whole focus will be to bring up issues that either put somebody on notice publicly that they ve supported either a good or a bad bill. It s all going to be about manipulating the issues to try to highlight when somebody s made a mistake. But, in the middle of all that chaos, I m going to keep fighting for the things that I believe in. I m going to start with breast cancer first because that s unfinished business and I told them, We re going to finish that business this year. I think Senator Tom Adelson I think it did pass, provided a bill that would allow for more children to get health care. Well, too many children here can t get health care. You and I take it for granted. Your kid gets sick they re going to go to the doctor. So many people can t do that. But I ll tell you what, if the legislature follows its usual path, substantive, be very little. There are going to be lots of issues like immigration and, oh, abortion and tort reform, the I ve gotcha bills that bring out the base, one base or another, to ensure that you continue in leadership or that you stay out. (Laughs) And that s the political reality but I love it. (Laughs) And I m hopeful. And it takes you awhile to learn that sort of thing. 23 McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Takes a long time to learn, and that s why I go back to the term limits, and I did benefit from that. I did. Look how much time it took me? My first year, I was so intimidated and I never had a problem talking. My first bill was a know nothing bill. It added one more member to the Governor s Commission on the Status of Women. When I stood up to talk about that bill, I looked around and I saw people in the gallery and behind me were the press and then you saw all of these legislators who I just assumed were so much smarter than a social worker. Bad assumption. Bad assumption. I couldn t even get one word out. (Laughs) I was like I was terrified because I had seen how they do others. What got you over the hump? Well, Jari Askins came over, (Laughs) a woman, (Laughs) came over and literally held my hand and told me it was going to be okay. And other people were trying to be helpful just so many voices at one time and so she said, basically asked them, Just, you know, We ve got her. She s she s okay, and I was able to babble. (Laughs) People always want to have fun at your expense, so they asked questions and stuff. I just couldn t get away with this one thing because they liked and it s not personal. They have fun at your expense. And it s the first time you have something to say Exactly and then they all vote no for it, but actually then they end up voting yes for it but you don t know that. You re initiated. But that was the beginning of turning myself around and I ll tell you what after committee meetings, after listening to other people get up and talk about issues and stuff, I realized they may be a banker, they may be an attorney, they may be an oilman, but they don t know too much more than I do when it comes to people and resources in this community. I know a lot about social services 31 years worth and I know rural versus urban. They know where they live, but they have no idea about the bigger picture and the reality of a lot of people s lives. I also knew more than I thought I knew about education, and so I thought, Oh, I don t think so. (Laughs) I m going to look at this like I looked at OU. I m going to get on the honor roll. I m going to learn my way around here. These people didn t send me over here, you know, to succumb to my own personal fears. It certainly was different being a wife, but it wasn t. As I looked back, I thought, This is not new. This is really not new. What s new is having some self-confidence and understand that you work on those issues that 24 you know something about. You don t get up there and be talking about oil and tax, gas tax and the percentage. Somebody had me doing that and I m like, What? They started asking questions I said, I can t even spell it. (Laughs) So it was a combination. That turnover of confidence didn t occur immediately. I had some bad votes because I didn t ask questions. I lost some votes. I lost some issues because I didn t lobby. I just assumed okay, this is Judy s bill and they ll vote for it. You have to sell it and I didn t do that. That s the mistake I made with the breast cancer bill. If you believe in it, you ve got to sell it. And you find out that these people have some of the same problems you ve got. Their districts have the same, and that s what I remind them you may have an affluent district, but somebody gets sick. You have help employees who work in these affluent houses who are considered as family, when they get sick you want to help them. So it s not that you don t understand. (Laughs) You understand better than you think you understand, and when you add a likeability, and part of getting that is, for me, being pleasant. I m a hugger. So these people were stiff initially and I d hug them and it was like hugging a board and I m like, Oh, no. You re going to hug me. I have to have this, (Laughs) for me. Now I have republicans and democrats, workers, everybody if they don t get their hug, they come to me and say, I didn t get my hug this morning. So if I haven t done anything, I ve kind of lowered the tension in terms of people feeling it s okay to be human with each other, we re all really in the same boat. We all really have the same kind of problems. You may have more financial resources than I have or the people that I represent. But a class that I took in graduate school was Common Human Needs, and we ve all got that. If we can just take away some of the real politics of this and work for those common needs, we can get there. And it s how you say it. I couldn t get that likeability by being a Black Panther. I couldn t do it. I couldn t get that likeability now by being anti-everything. You have to be a team player sometimes, and I try to be a team player. Now those things that I don t believe in, I m not going to do it. I don t care if the leader asks me to do it, I m not going to do it. I would never have an abortion, but I ve always supported the woman s right to do that, and so if the caucus is going to go one way, I m sorry. I m not going that way. I believe the way I believe. Now you just have to punish me on something else. (Laughs) Or maybe I can support you on something else. But as I told you, we have more common grounds than we don t, and even, as I like to say, my good republican friends Brian Crain Senator Crain from Tulsa is my best republican friend, I ll put it like that. We re honest with each other and he helped me to condense my discussions on my issues because. He said I left myself open for a lot of 25 Finchum McIntyre people to ask a lot of questions say what you got to do and be quiet. If you notice through this thing, have I stopped talking? No. This is detrimental on the floor. But he said, Judy, say what you have to say. Be prepared to answer questions, and you won t get so see, I would anticipate the questions and be so scared. I knew the answer, but I d be like stammer and if you re not sure and if they see blood, hey, they go after it. (Laughs) So I have that kind of relationship. And like with Representative Lucky Lamons, a democrat from the House an ex-policeman, I am not soft on crime, and they discovered that. They just assumed because I believe in a woman s right to abortion, they painted a brush that said I was a flaming liberal. No, I m not going to coddle criminals. And I ve had Lucky to tell me a couple of times, he said, Judy, this bill is something that would make you a champion in your district, although it s not really a good bill. If you go strictly political, those are where you have to decide, do I want some substance or do I not? Am I trying to just do this because I want to get re-elected? That s just not me. In fact, I m just not going to do it in fact. I have no tolerance for rapists. I have no tolerance for people who are violent to women, children, to senior citizens none. (Laughs) So I m real hard core. If it was left up to me, I wouldn t give the Department of Corrections one dime. My first year over there and I got myself in trouble because I was the only one out of the 101 to vote No corrections does not get any money. Well, we re spending what is it? About 6,000 per student in the state, for education? And we re spending 30,000 almost 40,000 per inmate well, I m gonna tell you what. It s a personal thing, may get me elected or may get me defeated, but the bottom line is if I want to have a choice and I have a vote, I m going to vote not to incarcerate. I just don t see spending that money. And what I do have a problem with are these hard sentences for everything you sneeze, it s a felony. Fine, but where s this money going to come from, on whose back? Particularly when you re giving away hundreds of millions of dollars of tax breaks to big companies and we can t replenish that money. And so what we have is just a spot we wouldn t do our own personal incomes like that, and yet that s what we do. (Laughs) A lot to understand, isn t it? It really is. And I think since we didn t have kids and ex-husband always wanted me to be everywhere that we could be, so I was there. (Laughs) And so I did not realize because I never thought I would need them myself, once he had to step down. I never dreamed I d be here, but it s that s why I m saying, life s a journey. You never know, and a lot of it I can look to and say it was painful but it also prepared me for the human 26 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre being that I am today, that I haven t always been. (Laughs) And I want to leave this earth being even better. I don t think there s going to be a problem there. I m trying I m going to try. Have I forgotten to ask anything? I don t know because I ve been talking so much. You re doing good. Oh, thank you. First freshman appointed to the Speaker s Leadership Team. Yes. What was that like? Oh, god. That was at the same time when I told you I was so afraid. (Laughs) I just couldn t believe it. We were there for orientation and they called me out Representative Danny Hilliard, who was Speaker Pro Tempore said that Speaker Adair wanted me to come to his office. So like a school kid, I thought, What did I do wrong? And anyway, I go in there and he says he would like to have me on the leadership team. I said, The leadership team? (Laughs) I couldn t even hardly get I said, But why me? I mean, I did nothing to enhance myself. I was doing everything to say, Why wouldn t you get somebody else? And they said, Well, you bring a lot to the table, which I never saw what they saw, until later and I had not gotten any of the chairmanships. I don t care how afraid I was, I went in asking because I knew being a chairman allows you to have control over the bills that come in and out and all of that, so I can get into that. But I got on the committees as a member, but not as a chair. I can t say what was behind it, but I think also because a lot of them knew my ex-husband, too. I won t, you know, I m not going to say that didn t happen. I don t know that that was a major part of it because by that time I d established my own sixteen years on the board and fighting for every cause and stuff. So I think there were a lot of reasons. I think also the democrats were trying to show a broader base politics, okay let s just say it a bigger tent that included women they got two for one a woman and a black, (Laughs) you know what I mean. And that next year the democrats lost the House. Not because of me, but, you know, I think they were on a 27 Finchum McIntyre path and I think they were all of those things come into consideration. That s the unfortunate thing about it. Certainly the sincerity of an issue is part of the decision-making, but politics, too, so the political aspect I don t know why, but I enjoyed it. I initially just had to do more listening because I didn t understand. Basically, I didn t know some of the people because a lot of the people had left from the 70 s, so I didn t know them. I didn t know history on the issue and what was the next step and you want also to understand where is it that we re trying to go? Why is it that we re doing this and what are you hoping to achieve? Because there s always an agenda. (Laughs) And so initially I had to kind of listen. Then you also want to watch the linkages of people who s connected to whom? because if I say something to you and you re part of the leadership and I say, The Speaker just made me so mad because he didn t do this and that well, you don t know if they will go back and tell on you and then you wonder, Well, what happened to my bill? I thought it was going to be assigned. (Laughs) Because, believe me, there is control. That never stopped me, never stopped me. I have to tell the democratic caucus that I was elected with 87 percent of the vote through the same process that you went through, and just because I don t represent rich folks or influential folks, people in my district black, white, Hispanic, Native American pay taxes like everybody else, and I m going to fight for them and if I m not part of the leadership, it doesn t matter because I m not going to stop saying what my people need and I m not going to just sit back and watch somebody else get it. So I had to tell them that. I was a little bit more forceful, I ll tell you when we re not on tape. I can imagine how that went over. Oh, you d be surprised. (Laughs) But that was really a wonderful experience, but I ll tell you what happened. It was bittersweet. House members who had been there a long time, or longer than me, had done a lot of things with the team, with the Speaker, to try to get into leadership and they asked me. There was a lot mad at me, my own democrats, so I had to work to try to negate that kind of tension that s where the social work, interpersonal skills came in. So what I told the leadership is particularly freshmen, because here I m one of thirteen, baker s dozen as they called us why not meet with them once a month so that they, too, will know what I know as a freshman? The other ones who had worked and tried to get in, there wasn t much I could do about that, that was the Speaker, he d have to resolve that. I would just have to try to work with them, even though I knew they were mad, some of them, but that never bothered me because, again, when you are calling somebody a 28 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre bad parent or you re taking a kid away from a parent, they re not loving you, and so you learn to shut those emotions off and my focus was, I understand they worked hard to try to get. I didn t do anything to get this, you know, it was politics, but you and I are going to work together and I m not going to let you just continue to be mad at me for no reason. And some people are easier to break like a horse and some take a little bit longer, but I worked them all (Laughs) I worked them all because it s not personal it wasn t personal for me. But one of the greatest things that did happen was with my fellow freshmen when the Speaker did take my advice and we met in there because even they well, yes, they were chairmen of some powerful committees, but still leadership is where they decide what s going to happen and who s going to be a part of it, and the decisions could just be strictly friendship and political. Well, the thirteen Baker s dozen, yes. How many were women? Do you remember? Two. Two. (Laughter) Not many then. Two, and one had served before, Rebecca Hamilton. She had served and got married, I think, to a fellow legislator and had a family and stopped, and she came back, so there were only two of us. (Laughs) And I was the only African-American. Where was your office in the Capitol? Where is it still? Oh, now in the House I shared with Rebecca Hamilton. (Laughs) They put us together. Now because I was on leadership, I wasn t about to get a great office. I would have been thrown out by my peers no, you don t get an office oh, no, no. So we shared a room that probably wasn t too much larger than this but, you know what? I didn t care. I was there and I knew I wasn t going to be there but two years anyway, so it didn t matter, but you would have to meet outside in the hall if too many people came (Laughs) or go to the lounge because you just didn t have any room, but there were only two of us. And then in the Senate? Two women let me see, yes Susan Paddack Senator Paddack from 29 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Ada and me. Debbie Leftwich was already there. Mary Easley was already there. Just two of us and we re getting smaller numbers. There are nineteen currently, between the two. Oh, yes. Oh, wait a minute, one other, Connie Johnson. She took Angela Monson s place, because Angela served her two years and Connie came in on those two years, but Connie was not part of my class, my freshman class in the Senate. In the early 70 s when your husband was in, Hannah Atkins was in at that time? Yes yes. There was a black organization you know, in a segregated society there were not many things that we missed or that we didn t have, it was just contained, and there were what they called the Jack and Jill s and I did not realize it until much later, you had to have both parents in order to get in. It was like a sorority. Oh, yes. So Hannah s kids and I were in Jack and Jill together. When I was at OU, the only thing that you could join was a black sorority, and there was only one sister, soror on campus. So I met with OSU, there was a group. So I would go to OSU and Langston for sorority meetings but Hannah was a soror Alpha Kappa Alpha, and Hannah was in the graduate chapter that took me over, so I ve known Hannah forever. See, remember the 70 s? And that s when the legislature was getting more and more African Americans. So I happened to live through that wonderful period, too. Anything particular you want to say about it? The irony of it is that there was such an internal fight between the Oklahoma City legislators. I mean, it was just horrible. They just almost destroyed each other. They only had a hand finger full but that s the thing that I do remember about that. Which do you think is the biggest hurdle, your race, gender, age, political party, or any just character maybe? You know what? I was asked that same question when I was on the school board, and it was the gender. It s the gender. People want to yes, it s very subtle. When I was on the school board and divorced, I was told and I wish I had kept a couple of e-mails that I needed to get a man in my life because I had too much time on my hands because I was always, went from being a board member to B of the board because, yes, I was always asking questions and challenging. There is a talk of inclusiveness with women, but it s when there are layers of a deal, but when it gets to the end, I don t care, when Senator Paddack is on in 30 Finchum McIntyre Finchum leadership, she has complaints. Interesting. I would think that we ve come some distance from the 60 s until now We have we have. It s just not as overt, and you ve got a higher ceiling or a longer road, however you want to say it. (Laughs) It just reminds me of that book, Men are from Mars and Women are from Venus. You have to watch not being emotional because the minute you get emotional it s lost it s lost. And that hasn t changed from Susan B. Anthony s time. There is a fine line between being aggressive, assertive and the B word none ever say it, and so what they do is you just get shut out and, you know that. But you always have to be aware of every interaction that you have, at least I do, so that you cannot get to where you re getting ready to be pushed out, because you can see it coming, I mean, you just know. I haven t had any trouble racially. I ve had, from people, constituents in Oklahoma, not necessarily in my district. I was out front on the Indian mascot bill. (Laughs) I think all of leadership knew it wasn t going anywhere, and I was new. They did not want me to bring it out, but I m barreling straight ahead, and I got lots of e-mails about that, calling you all kind of names and stuff. I ll tell you what, again, DHS prepared me for that when you ve got parents and relatives and stuff so it s not personal. And I m still getting I just got an e-mail the other day calling me a traitor and the B word regarding my vote against the immigration bill 1804. But that s not gender, that s not race. I ve never been called the N word in any of the hostile e-mails, and I wouldn t know who they were. I guess there s a way of checking, but I don t know. No, it centers around gender and, of course, none of the people. And I think, again, the conscience because I am pretty up front about issues. I share things, part of the black culture that we can laugh about and not be so uptight about, because I discovered that near the end of my stay in undergraduate school at OU that the more we talked, a lot of the barriers came down because I understood them. They had grown up, they had never seen black people before. They didn t know (Laughs) and I didn t know people just disliked you just because they saw that you were black but we talked. I think that s what, again, you carry those skills into that and I don t walk around, you know, like, Don t even say the word black or I don t we re human beings. We coexist. We follow the Golden Rule. I m going to do unto you as I would have you do unto me, and vice versa and then you don t have to deal with the race, you deal with the coexistence of another human being on this earth. Besides some of the other things you said earlier, what kind of other 31 McIntyre Finchum McIntyre advice would you give women that were thinking about going into Do it, first of all. (Laughs) Women make better legislators, and I ll tell you why. Okay. The things that the people want, whether it is education, health or whatever, we re more nurturing, and women are better organized. They ve had to be wife, mother, everything, and are more likely to be inclusive in their thinking and decision-making. They re not afraid to have the soft issues where, Let s help this without being seen as a flaming liberal. Now, of course, you have the conservative element of that, but women if you think that you want to do it, then you do it. Now, you can t just say I m going to do it one day and the next day there is a path. If you are, whatever party you re in, you re going to have to be known there. As they like to say, it s, whether male or female, there are dues to be paid. Now with the term limits, there s a shorter span because now people are going out to seek people. If you go that route, you let people know within the existing party that, I m interested in running. And hopefully you will have some kind of record within the community that lets people have some insight on your performance, what they can anticipate in your performance. Are you willing to take on the tougher issues, or are you the one who will sit silent? What other kinds of things have you fought for? And most of all, what is your passion? And that passion has to be out front. And when people see the passion, they may not agree with my passion, but they agree that she s got a passion and so they have to listen. So women, Oklahoma is not going to get any better until more women get in there. (Laughs) I truly believe that. (Laughs) I m hoping that we will soon have a woman governor. When Governor Henry is no longer here, I m hoping that Lieutenant Governor Askins will run for governor and we ll have our first woman. I think that will be a beginning of women again, believing like we did in the 60 s and 70 s that because I was in the NOW National Organization for Women movement, there s not a movement I haven t been in (Laughs). I think there will be a resurgence of women saying, I can do it, and in particular these young women who are so bright, who have so many experiences that I didn t get, not because of segregation and all that, but because a lot of those things were not here, too, that they will be bitten by that bug and stay here. We re losing too many of them. But there s no reason to have a handful of women in the legislature. 32 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre If the needs of the people are truly going to be met, women are much more sensitive and in-tune to what needs to be done. They also can be tough enough to play the game that you have to play. You can t be soft. You ve got to have an armor of protection on yourself because you can t look at it like it s personal, even though it may be. (Laughs) And you can t hold a grudge because in politics, you have to remember that the only permanent things are not it s not friends, it s interests, and if the interests are the same, it doesn t matter a lot of times about gender. If your interests are different, gender, race, everything else may come into it. So you have to have more than the desire. You have to have thick skin, but at the same time you have to keep your woman-ness, your femininity and there are different ways of expressing that. And you have to have good interpersonal skills. You ve got to understand the process. The key to it and I haven t conquered this yet the key to it is understand the rules of the game because it doesn t matter if you re male or female. If you understand the rules, you can make things happen parliamentary. (Laughs) Navigate the road. You can navigate the road. Now, of course, you ve got to garner people s support there, and if you can get that, male or female, you re in the driver s seat. So I to answer your question, I went all around the block women, if you re interested, do it, but be prepared like a Boy Scout said, Be prepared. It is not a bed of roses, and I ve been fortunate in that fortunate or unfortunate, however you look at it because I couldn t have children, although I think I m the mother of Oklahoma I have so many kids, black, white, Native American, I will never be alone (Laughs) I planned it that way. I think you have to also make sure if you are married or have a significant other that they have a true understanding that this will take away a great deal of your time. Women with small children, I m sure you could do it. There s always a cost. Your partner has to be there with you has to be, otherwise it s going to make it much more difficult and when you re trying to get the people s business done and you have a personal fight going on within your family, you can t serve two masters, and we lose a good woman. So make sure that the man that you choose (Laughs) has a strong enough back, has enough self-confidence, (Laughs) and passion and love for you to I don t like the word allow you to stand with you as the wedding vow said, in good times and in bad. (Laughs) If you don t have anything else I have one last question Okay. 33 Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum McIntyre Finchum unless there s something you want to talk about before we get there I don t know. I ve talked so much. You ve done great. I usually end this with asking you when history is written about you, what would you like for it to say? When history is written about me, I want to be called a woman warrior who fought not street fights, but fought within the boundaries of the rules, who did her homework, who was not afraid to take a stand, who was consistent in her passion for children, for senior citizens, who was consistent for healthcare and education, and who was one of Oklahoma s greatest huggers in the legislature. (Laughs) I ll have to get one of those before you leave. You will. (Laughs) And who, most of all, enjoyed every day, every moment of this job that the people entrusted to me because I realize that it s fleeting. It comes and it goes, but I want to be that woman warrior who made a difference, maybe not with the biggest bill but in terms of getting people to work together for the common good. That my interpersonal skills allowed people to sit down to hear each other as opposed to screaming at each other. So a woman warrior who got results got some results, not all the results, because there s always the next generation of women to follow. (Laughs) Well, I think the people of Oklahoma have been blessed to have you. Oh, thank you. It s been a pleasure hearing your story today. Thank you. I m sorry I talked so long. Where was my voice when I needed it the first time my first bill? (Laughs) You did very good. --- ---..