 Finchum Today is March 18, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum, along with Alex Bishop. We re with Oklahoma State University and today we are in Edmond, Oklahoma to speak with Dorothy Messenger. This is part of our Oklahoma One Year Life so thank you for having us today. Messenger You re welcome. Finchum Let s start with having you tell us when and where you were born. Messenger I was born in Dallas, Texas on March 4, 1915. Finchum So you just recently had a birthday. Messenger Yeah, right. Finchum Happy birthday. Messenger Thank you. Finchum I m a March person, too. Messenger Mother always told me it was snowing on March 4, 1915, when I was born which is not usual for Dallas, Texas. Finchum What did your parents do for a living? Messenger My father was, at the time I was born, he was working for Stafford- Lowdon, an office supply store. Finchum Supply store? 5 Messenger Yeah, office stationary. Finchum Okay. Messenger The way he described it. Finchum Did your mother work? Messenger No, not in those days. Finchum How many brothers and sisters did you have? Messenger Three sisters, no brothers. Finchum Older or younger? Messenger I m the oldest. Finchum So you were the bossy one? Messenger Yeah, and the first grandchild. Finchum Spoiled Messenger Spoiled, yeah. Finchum Well, how did you come to be in Oklahoma? Messenger My husband was a minister for the Christian Church Disciples of Christ and he went to school in Chicago and from there we came to Texas first. Then, in 52 we came to Oklahoma. He was called to be the minister of the First Christian Church of Stillwater. Finchum Stillwater, okay. Messenger OSU was very wonderful. I was working on campus for eleven years. Finchum Okay, that would have been in about what time period? Messenger It was 1953 to 64. Finchum So you were there when the name changed from Oklahoma A M to OSU? Messenger Yeah. 6 Finchum Remember much about campus? Messenger I do. I remember we women wore high heels to the union for coffee breaks and hobble along. (Laughter) Finchum Hobble along? Messenger Yeah. Finchum The Union was new at that time, too, wasn t it? Messenger Brand new. In fact, when we went to discuss whether or not to accept the church call that was one of things they wanted us to be sure to see. They were very proud of it. Finchum The library was new at that time, too, wasn t it? Messenger Yeah. Finchum Then let s back up. Where did you go to school, you, yourself? Messenger Stripling High School in Fort Worth. Finchum What was the name? Messenger Stripling High School. Finchum Okay. Messenger Mr. Stripling was a big guy. One of the department stores was Stripling s. Finchum Okay. Messenger Then I went to TCU Texas Christian University for my freshman year, but it was too expensive for my folks. This was the Depression and you could go for a hundred and twenty dollars a semester, but no one had the hundred and twenty dollars. So I went one year, then went back later, after I had worked and saved my money. I worked in the registrar s office for a long time until I was graduated and married my husband beginning of our senior year. Finchum What was your major in college? Messenger Education with a minor in Commercial Subjects. 7 Finchum What would that be? I have no idea. Messenger Anything in business. Finchum Oh, business. Okay. Messenger I actually got my permanent teacher s certificate in Texas, a permanent public license, a lifelong teacher s certificate. Finchum A lifelong one? Messenger Yes. Finchum So you taught typing or Messenger If I had had a job. Finchum If you had a job. You didn t work? Messenger I worked in Chicago, when my husband was there. I worked to put food on the table. It was a good experience. Finchum Sure. You had to work because his salary wasn t that good? Messenger Had to. He was not a salaried person. He was a student. Finchum You worked while he finished school? Messenger Yes, University of Chicago, and even in those days it was a good school. Finchum It did snow a lot up there. Messenger The most snow I had ever seen. It was a good experience. I worked down in the Loop. Finchum Okay. Messenger Took me an hour to get to work at first. We had no idea how really big Chicago was. I took this job. I knew I could do it. It was for Commercial Credit. I had worked for Commercial Credit Company. They furnished loans on Chrysler products. This Chrysler dealer, they had never heard of women harassment. He was terrible. This fellow that owned it, his name was Dewary, D-E-W-A-R-Y. Dewary. I did the work well, except I was the only woman. 8 Finchum The only woman? Messenger Yeah, and oh it was crass. It was not good. It was grimy. My husband said, We just can t have this. So I quit after six weeks. Took me about an hour and half on the L to get there and hour and half after to go home, which is not good. Finchum No, that s not. Messenger So, they called later and asked me to please come back, the auditor did. I explained to him that I couldn t stand it. Anyway, it was terrible. Finchum They used bad language. Messenger Oh, dirty jokes. Finchum Dirty jokes. Messenger And I was the brunt of them, and he was a short fellow who smoked big cigars and thought he was life s joy for women. Finchum So you just walked out and said, I ll see you. Messenger Yeah. Finchum Well, did you find another job after that? Messenger Yes, a good one. Finchum When did you get married? Messenger Beginning of our senior year. Finchum So 1930 Messenger Six. Finchum So right during the Depression? Messenger Right in the middle. Finchum Mhhh Messenger I looked back and I thought about how we got to Chicago. We borrowed two hundred dollars from my Uncle George. He said it belonged to my family if he never got it back but we were determined 9 that we paid him back. With the two hundred dollars we bought suits for each of us so we could apply for jobs and look halfway decent. It paid our train fare. Twenty-four hours we were on a Santa Fe train, from Fort Worth to Chicago. Then we paid our food and lodging for the first month. I don t know how we thought we could get back home because neither of our parents had any money to loan us. It was different. Finchum You just had a positive attitude? Messenger Yeah we had we thought we could do anything. Finchum And it worked. Messenger It worked. Finchum It worked. Messenger Yeah. You said you wanted me to say something about the flu epidemic. Finchum Yes, the flu epidemic. Messenger I was barely three. My earliest memory was of that sickness. All five of us. All four of us. I had one baby sister then. We were so sick. My granddad had to come and take care of us. I remember they hired a woman to help take care of the baby. Mother would swear she thought the woman was not washing my sister s diapers, was hanging them out to dry without washing them. Finding someone to help was not easy. My earliest recollection of anything at all, was my mother standing at the door. She opened wide the door and let the sun shine in. That was when we had all been so sick. She was beginning to come out of it. I remember the young person who was a teenager during that time was so sick that he never recovered. His memory was gone. He was just a non-entity. He sat on the front porch day after day looking out, not able to do a thing. I don t know what happened to him, but it was the flu that did it. Finchum All of you survived? Messenger Yeah. We all survived. That was not a good time. Finchum Like 1918, 1919? Messenger Yeah. 10 Finchum Somewhere in there. Did the doctor come do house calls? Messenger Yeah, I don t know how he survived. In those days nobody ever went to a dentist unless you had a bad toothache. The idea of taking children to the dentist was completely off the record. I never went to a dentist until I was twenty-six. Then I decided I had read that after the first baby, or any baby, you better go have your teeth checked. I did have one filling. Finchum That wasn t too bad. Messenger No, that wasn t too bad. Now I have all my teeth. Finchum That s excellent. Drink a lot of milk in your youth? Messenger No, I never drank milk. I can t ever remember even a glass of chocolate milk. I can t stand it. It s like medicine to me. Finchum Do you have a sweet tooth? Messenger No, not necessarily. Finchum Well, that s two good things. Well milk, not so good. Messenger (Laughs) My calcium is too high. Bishop Did you and your husband ever travel or go on a honeymoon or do any of that? Messenger Didn t go on a honeymoon, but we did lots of traveling. My family, my two sons have lived overseas for quite a while. My older son, I have three children. The daughter s the oldest and the two boys. Mac, the middle child, he has lived all over. He lived in Denmark, Germany, England, and now Switzerland, and for some years he was in Brazil. We spent five weeks with him in Brazil, and we went to Denmark and Norway when he was up in the Scandinavian countries. Now he is in Switzerland. The other boy has lived in Thailand twice, and so we went there twice. I had always wanted to go to China. We had arranged to go with a British tour but G.L. got sick in Hong Kong. We were supposed to meet the British tour group and he said he was very sick, so I had to cancel that trip. We were not in the group when he was so sick. I was there by myself with him and the hotel didn t look kindly on anybody sick. They didn t want anyone to be scared off. Anyway, we had lots of good times overseas. 11 Finchum That was kind of scary to be sick and be in a foreign country. Messenger I know. My son, who lived in Thailand, had remembered one of his high school friends lived in Hong Kong so he called him and asked if he knew of a hospital that would be adequate. He said his wife had her baby at Seventh-day Adventist, and it was wonderful. Finchum Small world. Messenger One of the funny things, I was keeping close tab on the expenses because Blue Cross and Blue Shield would honor the expenses even overseas. When we were checking out at the hospital, I said to the doctor, I don t see a bill for you here. He said, Seventh-day Adventists don t charge other Christians for doctor fees. He said, If it were up to me, I d charge you. I m a Baptist. (Laughs) He didn t charge us. That s in the story of my life. I ve written a book called My Memoirs. Bishop You were a minister s wife? Messenger Yes. Bishop So how important was the church to you? Messenger Very important. Bishop Can you talk a little bit about that? What role did you play as a minister s wife? Messenger It was wonderful. I happened to be one of those people who enjoyed it. Not every minister s wife feels that way. It was good. Most of my growth comes from the opportunities that I had in the church. My husband was always good about taking me along to workshops and that sort of thing. I was very fortunate. Finchum Would you teach Sunday school classes Messenger Oh yes. Finchum or sing in the choir? Messenger Not so much the choir. I sang well enough not to hurt any, (laughter) not to ruin anything, but if they expected a musician, I wasn t it. I worked as an accountant. I kind of managed the money for a foundry and machine shop. They had a hundred and fifty employees at one time. Finchum So you were good with numbers? 12 Messenger Yeah, I loved it. Finchum Could have been a CPA? Messenger I could have. At OSU I could have had free tuition since I worked there, but I didn t take classes . It was a hard row to hoe, and with three little kids and church work I couldn t do it. Finchum Where was the church in Stillwater? Oh, it was on campus. You worked on campus? Messenger Yes. Finchum Your husband s ministry was on campus? Messenger No. It was involved on campus but we had a special campus minister. It was good town. Finchum It s changed a lot, hasn t it? Messenger Yeah. Bishop Did you ever work with young men or young women in your life? Messenger Yes. In fact, when I was eighty-nine, I was forming a group of young women. The pastor asked me if I would do that. We met weekly and studied a book. I ve had wonderful experiences. In fact, the reception that we had here for my one hundredth birthday, two hundred people arrived for the reception. They came from all over. Finchum Two hundred Bishop Did you ever expect to live to a hundred? Messenger No. Never would have guessed it. Finchum Did anyone in your family? Messenger No. Finchum You re the first? Messenger In fact, of the four girls in the family, I m the oldest and the last to die. We ve died in exact reverse of our birth. 13 Finchum The baby went first? Messenger Yes. Finchum Well, how old were your parents? Messenger Sixty-nine each one, when they died. Finchum So what do you think your secret is? Messenger I don t know. Luck, I think. Luck. Finchum And maybe faith. Messenger Maybe, but I think the most deciding factor was the church. All these wonderful experiences that I had. Finchum Did he move around much as the minister? Messenger No. Finchum Switch churches much? Messenger We were twelve years at Stillwater and then we went to Bartlesville. Thirteen years there. Then ended up in Woodward for eight years. In fact, my younger son, started school in Stillwater and graduated the same place. Finchum That worked out nicely. Messenger Yes. Finchum Woodward is quite a different from Bartlesville. Messenger Yes, it was a good place. I remember the first time we went there to talk with the church committee and the motel where we stayed. The next morning, at breakfast, I was the only woman in the whole place and you saw men coming in with their muddy boots in their work clothes . You would have thought they were poor. They farmed, out there you can t tell, maybe several thousand acres and just come over from Russia three weeks before. Looks don t matter. (Laughs) They don t tell you much. Finchum Looks don t tell you much, nope. Well, Woodward, that would have been what time period? 14 Messenger That was 1976. Finchum I m not sure when they had that bad tornado out there. Messenger That was 47. They were pretty tornado shy. Finchum They had a bad one. I remembered that. Messenger Yeah. Finchum So you have three children. Messenger Yeah. Finchum And they gave you a great party. Messenger It was wonderful. Finchum Is there anything left on your bucket list that you want to do? Messenger I can t do much. I can t travel anymore, but I feel satisfied. I ve been far more places than most people. Finchum A lot more than me. Messenger I ve been to all over the states. Finchum Been to every state in the United States? Messenger One or two that I ve not, but so many of our church meetings were all over the nation. Finchum Well, when you were growing up, did your mother make your clothes? Messenger Oh yes, she hated it. (Laughs) Finchum She hated it? Messenger Yes, I took a couple of sewing classes. Every girl had to take sewing and cooking. So I got the sewing job. She said she d do my personal laundry, anything, if I would just do the sewing, so I did. Finchum Was it just mending things or was it making? Messenger Making. 15 Finchum Making dresses and things. Messenger I even made a coat for one of my sisters. I m sure it didn t look pretty but she was the one that suffered. (Laughter) Finchum Well, did she quilt? Your mother? If she didn t like sewing, she probably didn t like quilting. Messenger No, she was a gardener. Finchum Gardener. Messenger That was very relaxing to her. Finchum Flowers or vegetables? Messenger Both. We always had tomatoes and okra and things in season. Finchum Would she can? Messenger Not much of a canner. Green beans, those and tomatoes, and peaches, she would can, but not ever meat. Finchum Did you live in town? Messenger Yeah. Finchum You lived in town. Messenger I was always the city girl. (Laughs) Bishop What was the Depression like for you? I assume you were in the Dallas area. In Chicago? What was the Depression like? Messenger It was pretty grim. We didn t have enough money to buy shoes, and I can remember I still have a hard time buying shoes because my mother sent me down at twelve to pick out shoes for myself, and I made a mistake. The salesperson talked me into buying shoes that were too short, and there was no money to buy another pair. I ve always felt I did such a poor job, and I ve hated buying shoes since then. (Laughs) Finchum You had sore toes for a little while, huh? Messenger Yeah, but life s been good. 16 Finchum Would they order things from Sears and Roebuck, Montgomery Ward, that type of thing? Messenger No, we didn t order. We went downtown. Finchum Oh, you did your shopping downtown? Messenger Yeah. Finchum How would you get there? Messenger Street car. Finchum Street car. Messenger At nine I remember for our special treat, we could take fifteen cents or a quarter and my dad had passes to the theatre. For fifteen cents we could ride the streetcar down and go to Coney Island and have a coke and then go to the movie for free. That was when they had big Vaudeville shows. Three theatres in Fort Worth had big Vaudeville shows. Finchum Vaudeville Bishop Vaudeville. Messenger Yeah. In fact, it was as good as the movie and as long as the movie. I can remember dreaming of what I could do with ten dollars. You could buy a whole outfit, shoes and everything. It was very different. Finchum Very different. Messenger One pair of shoes was a luxury. Finchum Once a year? Messenger If that often. Finchum If that often. Messenger It just was a different day. Finchum Do you remember the first car your dad had? Messenger Oh yes. I think it was in those days, not every man or woman knew how to drive, and Mother told us that when they was first married, Dad 17 went down to buy a car and he bought this car, and the salesman asked him did he need help learning how to drive it. No, he didn t need help. Stripped the gears on the way home. (Laughs) He was too ashamed to admit he didn t know how to drive. Of course there was no windshield wiper, no heater, no anything. In fact I remember between Fort Worth and Dallas, there was a gravel unpaved road. There was one hill called R-O-C-K, Rock Hill, and cars weren t meant to go up hill, and one car got stalled halfway up and it would roll back down and try again. I hated that because Dad was a terrible driver, and going up that hill was scary, big drop-offs on either side. Backing down was scary. Finchum No guard rails in those days. Messenger No. Finchum Well, did your mother learn how to drive? Messenger Eventually. She was driving the day before she had her heart attack, but he was always the driver on the highway. Finchum Well, who taught you how to drive? Messenger He did. Finchum He did? Messenger Half the time I had to push his car to get it started. (Laughs) Oh gosh, he couldn t take care of a car at all. He didn t know beans about it. He was not a handyman. Finchum Well, do you remember your first television? Messenger Yes, I remember the first radio. Finchum Oh, well, we will start there. Messenger It was a little radio, crystal set. In those days, if you got a local station, that was good, but if you got a faraway city like Chicago, I remember the man would run out in the street yelling, I just got Chicago. (Laughs) We never had a party line. We did once, but we never did use it much. Finchum Party lines, everybody picked up when they rang. Messenger Yeah. 18 Finchum Well, if you listened to Chicago on the radio you heard some baseball games? Messenger Not in those early days. Finchum Not in those early days. Messenger You couldn t have understood it. It was so noisy with static. Finchum Static? Messenger Yeah. Finchum Well, being from Texas, you would have listened to Bob Wills, western swing, in those days? Messenger Yeah, and listened to the ones they called the Doughboys. Finchum The Doughboys, the Texas Doughboys. Messenger Yeah. Finchum Would you go dancing? Messenger Well, at Lake Worth there was a big open air dance hall where lots of bands played. That s where my friends and I, we could go out for free. It was fun. I hope my stuttering hasn t been too bad. Finchum No, you re doing fine. Bishop What do you think has contributed to you well, you said luck. Did you ever do anything? Exercise? Messenger I think three good meals a day was part of it and regular sleep. Bishop Regular sleep. Finchum What would you consider a good meal then? Messenger In those days, we had lots of beans and cornbread. Finchum Brown beans? Messenger No, lima beans and navy beans. Finchum Limas. 19 Messenger Most people don t like limas. We had lots of limas and navy beans, lots of macaroni and cheese. Finchum For breakfast? Messenger I had toast and jelly? Finchum Not eggs and bacon? Sausage? Messenger No. Couldn t afford it. Finchum That s true. Well, would she fry things or bake things? Messenger Fry. Fried chicken and gravy. Finchum What was the favorite thing that she made that you liked? Messenger Pies. Finchum What kind of pie? Messenger Chocolate pie. Finchum Hey, I m right there with you. She made her own crust? Messenger Yes. Pretty good. Finchum Did she teach you? Messenger No, she didn t. I became a good cook, but it was not from her. It was mostly following good recipes. Finchum What would you do for exercise? Messenger Skating. Finchum Roller-skating? Messenger Yeah, when we were little, we did lots of skating and jumping rope. Finchum Jumping rope? Messenger Yeah. Finchum Then when you got married? 20 Messenger Played tennis. I got a reasonable amount of exercise. Finchum Well, keeping up with three kids was exercise, wasn t it? Messenger Yes. Finchum Enough sleep was eight hours? Messenger What? Finchum Eight hours was enough sleep? Messenger Yes, if I could get it. Finchum Well, you saw the first refrigerators, too? Messenger Iceboxes. I grew up with those. I never had a washing machine until I had three little children, lots of hand washing. Finchum In a sink or on a rubboard? Messenger A sink. Sometimes with a rubboard, but I got the first washer in Denton, available after the war because we knew the dealer and he figured out I need one. Finchum With three children, a lot of diapers. Messenger We had to boil them. We had a big pot that we boiled them in to get out any germs. Finchum Then hung them outside? Messenger Yeah. Finchum Even in the winter? Messenger In the winter they would freeze. Did you know that a sheet would tear in two in freezing weather? Finchum I didn t know that. Messenger With wind, it will tear a sheet right in two. Finchum Was a happy day when you got an electric washer. 21 Messenger Even a hand washer, it was good. Finchum A wringer washer. Messenger Yeah. Finchum Did any of your sibling no, you had sisters. I was going to ask if any siblings went to World War II but you had sisters so no, they didn t. Messenger Yeah. In fact, you wouldn t believe the washer and dryer I have now is a sixty-two. Finchum They one you have now, you bought it in 62? Messenger Yeah. Finchum And it still works? Messenger And no nicks. It s a Maytag. Finchum That s why then. Messenger The mechanic was never called. I never had it worked on. Finchum It s not been worked on either? Messenger We ve been through renters, and when my daughter was home when her son was a baby we did their clothes in the same machine. Finchum It was made to last. Messenger Yeah, they were. Which is not true anymore. Finchum No, it isn t. Bishop What were holidays like growing up for you? Messenger Christmas was certainly different. Nothing like these days. The wrapping paper was white tissue. That was it. We had stickers, no scotch tape. We had stickers that you licked and put on that white tissue paper. Finchum I hadn t heard that before. Messenger Yeah, it was all that we had. 22 Finchum It would look pretty under the tree. The white tissue would look pretty under the tree. Messenger It was all that we had, that would not do now. Bishop What did you typically get for Christmas? What type of gifts? Messenger Not much. I remember one Christmas I got a watch. That was big too. I never did have a bike. We didn t have the money for me to have a bike. My youngest sister eventually got one. Finchum How many years were between you? Messenger Twelve between me and the youngest one. Finchum So you had a little hand-me-down clothes, but you got them first? Messenger Yeah. Bishop So what was it like to live in a household with sisters? They often talk about the sisterhood? What was that like for you? Messenger The four of us always shared a bedroom. Two double beds, sister next to me and I shared one double bed. The mattresses were about this thick. (Gestures) Far cry and nobody had bedspreads. The sheets were the cover and we had quilts that were so heavy. They were made out of wool. They weren t quilts, they were called comforters. Tacked. Finchum Those are heavy. Messenger Me and Sis would get in and they covered us, and oh gosh they were heavy. Finchum Did your mother make those or someone else? Messenger She did. They required practically no sewing. She didn t mind making those. Finchum And you had to have them, so Messenger Slept with three or four of those over you in the winter. I can remember her putting newspapers between the springs and the mattress to keep the wind from going through. It was a big help. Finchum How was the house heated, with a woodstove? 23 Messenger No, with these little burners about this big (gestures), with top burners. I don t know what they were called. You didn t ever leave a fire going while you left the house. It was open heaters. The front of you got warm but the back was cold. (Laughter) Finchum I think your sense of humor has something to do with you still being here. Messenger Could be, could be. Bishop You have a motto you live by? A philosophy you ve adopted in life? Messenger As I ve gotten older, I think your understanding of how people become who they are is what is meaningful. Don t expect people to be perfect because you know you yourself are not perfect. Finchum Be a little bit more forgiving. Messenger Yes. You have to be. Finchum What do you need? Messenger I m looking around for some pictures you might take. That s my mother. Finchum That s a great picture. Messenger She was five years old, 1898. Bishop Was your grandfather a photographer? Messenger Yes. Finchum In the Fort Worth area? Messenger Dallas. Bishop Did he have a studio? Messenger Yes, two studios. Finchum What was his name? Messenger T.J. Harper. Finchum Harper. 24 Messenger Yes, in fact, I sat by a black woman not too long ago, who remembered my grandfather. She said, I have pictures that he made of my family in those segregated days. I went through some of those. All the white and colored fountains, and he had dressing rooms with black and white. The whites wouldn t think of using a comb that anybody else had used. It was just different. Finchum Well, segregation days in Fort Worth must have been interesting. Messenger They were. Very, very, segregated. Lots of changes in my life. Finchum A lot. What do you think has been the biggest one? Messenger What? Finchum What do you think has been the biggest one? Messenger I think communication. The methods I ve communicated with are so different. Finchum Thanks to the computer and the cell phone. Messenger Yes, and also even the telephone. Finchum It s true. People don t write letters as much as they once did. Messenger I used to try to write letters. I think people are not going to be saving their emails and communication the way we used to. Finchum We are missing a few things that way. Messenger Yeah. Finchum Well, did you do a Christmas list to send out Christmas cards every year? Messenger I ve done that ever since the 1940s. I ve have copies of it. Finchum Of your list? Of who you sent them to? Messenger Not the list way back, but some people I have exchanged Christmas letters with for sixty years. Finchum That s the only time of year that you communicate with them? 25 Messenger What? Finchum Is that the only time of year that you communicate with them? Messenger Some. Finchum Some. Messenger Yeah, but it s been like a diary to me. We started when the children were little. I d put how tall they were, and it s fun to look back and read those letters. I ve made books of them for the kids. Finchum That s special. Messenger Yeah, these last ones have been a little more different, a little more intellectual. I ve tried to put in something special, mainly to help people grow, and I think they ve come to look forward to my Christmas letters. Finchum You can add me to your list. Messenger I think I just sent my last one. (Laughs) Finchum You can dictate one. Messenger I d need help to. Bishop Well, what s the biggest challenge that you face at a hundred? Messenger It s finding life meaningful. Bishop What makes life meaningful for you? Messenger Having some work to do. Something challenging. Finchum You said when we first got here that your son recommended that you do something. Messenger Yeah. Finchum What was it? Messenger Was writing down my experiences with the stroke. Finchum That s a very good idea. 26 Messenger I ve written three things, my memoirs, my faith journey, and my cookbook. The cookbook is kind of different. It s mostly the old recipes that I had. I tell where each recipe came from and how we used it. Most of them needed to be cheap. I ve done three books. Bishop Do you have a favorite recipe? Messenger I think my favorite is cheese grits. Bishop Cheese grits. Finchum That sounds good. Messenger They re very good. Bishop You had a stroke recently? What s that been like? Messenger Very bad. Bishop Bad. Messenger Yeah, it s terrible to feel helpless. See, I can t get in and out of bed. I have to have someone help me. It s very, very bad. You feel so helpless and you are. I m much better than I was. Good therapy works wonders. Finchum Yeah, and a little bit of time. Messenger Yeah, and working hard. Finchum Hard work. Bishop Patience. Messenger Patience. Bishop When history is written, what would you like it to say about you? Messenger I ve been a good mentor, I think. In fact, at my reception, people were asked to write a letter or send a card. I ve got six notebooks full of stuff that they that s all I need. Bishop You said a good mentor? Messenger Yeah. Bishop Did you ever mentor anybody? 27 Messenger Lots of people, they tell me. (Laughter) I think that s been one of the most rewarding things a person can ever do. Finchum Mentor in their faith? Messenger Both faith and attitude. Finchum Attitude. Bishop Who would you mentor to primarily? Messenger Younger women and people that I never even knew that consider me their mentor. I have scads statements in letters to me thanking me for that. Finchum Living by example? Messenger Yeah, that and also these small groups that I work with. In fact, one young man quoted in his letter to me something I had said way back in fifth grade and he now has grown children of his own. That s some of the most rewarding. Finchum Any advice for us? Messenger Keep alive. Keep learning. Finchum Keep learning? Messenger Yeah. Finchum All right. Well, we ll close now. We thank you for talking with us today. Messenger You re very welcome. Finchum You ve been great. ------- -------..