 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh I m Jennifer Paustenbaugh. We re here in the home of Vernor and Barbara Bockelman in Slapout, Oklahoma, and it is Thursday, November 8, 2001 around 8:30 in the evening, and we are gathered here this evening with the Carnegey s. Would you state into the microphone for us your name? I m Marvin Carnagey. I m Laverta Carnagey. We re going to be talking this evening about the dirty thirties in this part of the state. You ve both said your names into the microphone, but could you tell us when you were born and where you were born? I was born in Iowa the eighth month, the third day of 13. I was born in North Missouri in 1914, the 15th day of August. How did your family come to be in Oklahoma? My folks separated when I was six years old, and my father came down to Oklahoma. He had a brother here that had homesteaded, so he came here, and my mother took up with another man, and he didn t want us kids. My father came back and got us kids and brought us out here, but he didn t have anywhere to put us or anything. He was just working by the day, so he scattered us out, one here, one there, one somewhere else. That was in 1921. I see, and how did you wind up in the Shattuck area? Was this where the brother s homestead was? Yeah, he homesteaded north of Shattuck. How about you Mrs. Carnagey? How did your people come to be here? Well, my grandpa and grandma Crail homesteaded south of Arnett. I don t remember the years. Anyway, my mother and dad brought me down here when I was six months old. So you re a near native Well that s great. What did your father do? Did he 5 L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey M. Carnagey L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh farm and ranch? Well, I think they call it ranching more than farming. He came down here with his brother and family. Eventually, they all moved down here from Missouri. Did he have experience in ranching before he came out here? No, I don t think so. Well, he worked in mines some, didn t he? He worked in mines in Missouri. He shucked corn and anything he could do. He kept a diary of his work. Every day he would work, he would write what he had done and how much he made and how much he shucked. Wow, does your family still have that diary? Yes. Oh, what a wonderful treasure. That s great. Now you mentioned that your family had been split up, that your siblings were scattered around. How many were in your family? There were five; mother kept two, and us three came out here. I was seven years old when I came out. And were you the oldest? No, there were two older than me. Okay, so you were the youngest of the three that came out here. And how about you? Did you have a lot of brothers and sisters? I had two brothers younger than me, and then when my youngest brother was twelve years old, we had a sister. What a wonderful surprise, huh laughter ? My family was the same way. I had two boys and when the youngest was twelve, I had a little girl. He graduated out of high school one year, and she started school the next year. Oh my gosh That s the reason she got so much gray hair laughter . I would say she s highly entitled Well, tell me what a typical day was like for you when you were growing up. Did it start with doing chores? What was life like? 6 M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh The first fieldwork I can remember doing was when I was seven years old. I was staying with some people north of Shattuck by the name of Peden, Roy Peden, and he took me to the field with three horses on a one-bottom plow. He took a walking plow with two horses. He d plow ahead with the walking team, and I would ride the one-bottom plow behind him. That was my first experience of working in the field. From then on, it was about all work and no play laughter Did you go to school? I went to school a little. I can remember a couple of years that I only went a couple of months. I d stay out and help with fall work and then go to school about the first of December, and then about the first of March stop. You d go back out in the field again. As soon as the ground thawed out we d start plowing again. Compared to other people your age growing up, did you feel like you had it hard or that was about what you expected? Oh, everybody worked hard then. I did miss having a family. I felt like nobody really cared. People pretty well kept me for what I could do. So you worked hard then. About all I know is hard work. How about you? What was your growing up life like? Well, I didn t ever have to work. I just stayed home and helped with the housework and stuff like that. I never did have to go out and work. My family was all together. So did your day start at sunrise, getting up and helping with chores around them home and then going to school? No, I guess they kind of babied me. Well good for you laughter . No, I didn t really have to work. I helped with the chores and things like that, but I had it easy. I wasn t like him. So were you able to stay in school pretty much the whole school year? Well, I went through the tenth year. Were you able to do that all in one school, or did you go through a first grade through eighth grade and then you went some place else? 7 L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey I went to Catesby, a little country school, through the eighth grade, and then I went to Lavern. At that time, we didn t run buses, and I had to board. I had a place to stay. I went two years, and then I got married. Wow, that must have been hard to be away from your family at such a young age. Yeah, I went there Monday morning, and then I went back home on Friday evening. What was your transportation between where you lived and Lavern? Well, my dad built a truck. Okay, so he would come up and get you. I see. Did any of your siblings go to the same school in Lavern, or were you just there by yourself? No, I was just by myself. You were just by yourself, okay. Let s see, you said you were born in 1913, so what were you doing by the time things started to get bad out here with the dust storms and that kind of thing? You were married. Yes, we moved out north of Shattuck on a farm. No, that was before that. Anyway, we had it hard like everybody. We just milked cows and raised chickens. We mostly had our food. We d go to town on Saturday and take our five gallons of cream and get sugar and the necessities that we didn t raise and buy enough gas to get home and back to town. And that was it, huh? It was hard. When the dust storms came in, were there any things that you did, like if you could see one coming that you did to sort of prepare your home or your livestock or anything like that? Well, with me, I had to wash on a board. I had a time getting my clothes dry. One morning, it was nice, and I thought, well, I ll get my washing done. Of course, I had a baby and was washing diapers. I hung a line full of diapers out. Everything was going all right, and pretty soon the wind came up and started to blow and broke the line. The diapers went like this laughter . I went and saw what happened, and I started to cry. I bet all that hard work down the drain. But my husband was real nice. He helped me and took care of it for me. It wasn t pleasant, but I guess we lived through it. Of course, the baby had dust pneumonia not real bad, but he had it. 8 Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey That must have been a frightening situation as a mother, having to deal with that. When that big dust storm came in, the baby it was my second boy he could set up on the floor, and he had three-day measles. My folks came down to see how he was getting along. It was on Sunday. I saw my dad, and I had a little sister before and after I as married, and she was just about the same age as my oldest boy. They were out playing, and my dad and my husband were out just visiting and walking around the place. We were in the house, my mother and I, and Dwayne was in the floor. All at once, it got dark. It was just pitch dark. I didn t know where the kids were, little kids you know. I ran to the door and started hollering. My husband answered me, and I said, Well where are the kids? They said, Well we ve got them. They happened to be right by us, and we both reached and got them. We ve got them in our arms. It was a frightening thing, until I found out where they were. I bet. It was pitch dark. Yeah, we ve heard people tell us that you could stick your hand out here and you just couldn t see it. Yeah. If those kids wouldn t have been close to them, they couldn t have got them. Now you were about the same age that she was. A little younger. A little younger. A very little bit younger laughter . So what were you doing about the time that things started to get bad around here? Well, I was working on a ranch. I had been on a farm most of my life, different ones. I d stayed in ten different homes growing up. I heard that this ranch needed a hand, so I had a borrowed pony, and I rode over there, and they said they d take me on. I was working there, and this happened on a Sunday evening, and I had a date. There was a neighbor boy that was going to come by and pick me up and take me to my date. This dust storm blew in. I thought that was going to spoil my date, but after about two or three hours it kind of let up enough where you could kind of get around and see, so I got to go and get my date after all laughter . You had your priorities, huh? Now you mentioned that that was a Sunday. Was that Black Sunday? Yeah, I was talking about Black Sunday, on Easter Sunday. The day before had been the prettiest day you d ever seen. Well, Sunday was the nicest day we d had in a long time, and then here came that black cloud in. 9 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh What a surprise, huh? I can t imagine. Tell us about the kinds of things that you did during that time for fun. Were there any fun things that you can remember doing in that period? I just never had any fun laughter . You had to wait til later on in life to have fun, huh? I was pretty busy all my life. What about you Mrs. Carnagey? Were there things that you did for fun? She was quite a dancer. A dancer? So did you go to a lot of dances in the community? Yes, my folks danced, and they sent me when I was a baby. I grew up on the dance floor. My dad taught me how to dance. Are there any dances in particular? Was it like ballroom dancing or just swing dancing? Well, it wasn t like it was now. It was just waltzes. Waltzes, okay. Just the two-steps and waltzes. And square dancing, it wasn t like square dancing that they have now. I really enjoyed it. I was taught to go and dance and not be a running out and prowling around. My dad taught me that. Were the dances in people s homes? A lot of them were. We d meet on Saturday night, and we d eat at people s houses and then dance. You d just start dancing, huh? Would it be people there with live music? I mean somebody would just pick up a fiddle and play? Most generally it was live. And we had parties. The young folk had parties with each other. That was our entertainment. We didn t go to town. When we lived in Catesby, if I went to Shattuck, I thought I was going to Oklahoma City That was the big city, huh laughter . Yes, well it was a big city. Did you have family members that ended up leaving Oklahoma during the dust 10 L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh bowl period? Well, it was after the dust bowl. Well, there were hard times, but my mother and dad went to California. Oh they did? And my brother and his wife were in California. They were all there but me. I stayed with it. Because you were already married by that point. Uh-huh, yes, I was married. So what part of California did they go to? El Monte. Did they end up staying out there permanently or did they ever come back? Yes, they all passed away out there. My sister, I have one sister left, and she lives in California. They had to go out there; they couldn t make it here. Did you see them very often after that? Well, I guess we went out to see my folks once a year. Of course, I was working after I lost my husband. I lost my husband in 56. He was just 48 years old. So I went to work. I usually took my vacations so that I could see my mother and dad. I see, so where did you go to work at? Well, I went to work at first at the drug store at Shattuck. We lived on a farm nine miles north of Shattuck. I went to work at the drug store, and then I worked at the bank. I retired from the bank and then I went to this little old department store. I worked there for several years. That s when I had my hard times, was after I lost my husband. It was pretty hard. Well, let me just ask you about your family. I know that they were scattered. Over time, did you lose touch with your brother and sister that were here in Oklahoma? Oh, I might see them once or twice a year. They were pretty close, yeah. Did they stay here in the state during the dust bowl? They all stayed. They all did. What did you think about the people that were leaving to go some place else? 11 M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey I thought I d like to go with them laughter . So what kept you here at the time? Well, I had a place to stay on the ranch, and I had a bed and something to eat. I thought I was pretty lucky. Right, better to stay with that than an unknown situation. Well, I was wondering what you did on your date laughter . I can t remember laughter Oh, if you had enough money, you d go to the show. If you had a dollar, you could just have a heck of a time. You could go to the show and buy something to drink and just have a big time. I had a good friend that had a car. He d come pick me up. He had a Model-A car. I d buy him some gas, 12 cents a gallon, and get him a couple gallons of gas, and we could go to the show and all that stuff. If we needed some oil and we didn t have money for that, we d go to the filling station and asked for some used oil, and we d put that in laughter . In 1935, you would have been 20, is that right? I was 19 when I got married. No, I was 20 when we got married. Yeah, that s right. So going to the movies, going to the show would have been a good time out for you. That s something you would have done for a good time. Oh yeah, that was a great time. Were there lots of places to go to see a show? You d go to Laverne. That s only about ten or twelve miles. Yeah, we were through there tonight unintentionally So who were your favorite stars to go see? Was there a particular person? Oh, way back then; I didn t go to the show a lot. A lot of times, we just went picnicking. We had a place called Battle Mound over there. A big kind of a mound and places like that. You can drive around and do a little parking laughter . Some things just stay the same, huh laughter . Yeah, kind of like you did for me. Now this isn t about me laughter . So was it different for you if you were to go out on a date with someone or was it about the same? About the same. 12 Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey L. Carnagey So despite your very different upbringings, you had the same kind of fun. Yes, well, I think everybody; they didn t have any place to go. They had to make their own fun; partied and get together and pull taffy and stuff like that. Play cards. Play cards and things like that. That s what we did. And people went to church pretty good then too, because there was nowhere else to go. Maybe out of boredom then made it feel like a necessity. Taffy pulls you mentioned; was there anything else like that? Make fudge or just something to entertain us laughing . Did you have a favorite taffy flavor? Now I ve seen pictures of people just stretching that thing out 20 feet laughing or 10 feet, but how would you add flavor to it? Well, it was mostly vanilla, wasn t it? Yeah. Did you ever pull any taffy? I ve never fixed it up, but I helped pull. It sure would get your hands clean laughter . So what games would you play at your gatherings? Cards and any other kind of game? Today, we ve heard so far Too Deep, Annie Over. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. I m trying to think what that other thing was. Oh, like drop the handkerchief. Yeah, games that were more physically active, I think. And then when we had our parties, we played party games, Skip to My Lou and stuff like that. You would sing. They d have certain songs to sing as you danced around and so on and changed partners, kind of like a square dance. Do you remember any of the songs? No I don t. I don t. 13 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite You re just saying that because you re afraid that we ll make you sing one of them on tape laughter . We ll get you to yodel for us at the end I might say that the last year that I went to school, I didn t want to go to school, because I was getting way up there, too old to go to school, but the people I was staying with insisted on me going. So the teacher, she wanted me to build a fire for her, and so I d get up and milk four or five cows, I don t remember for sure, and separate the milk and do some feeding, and then I d walk to school a mile and a half and build her a fire before she got there so it d be warm. She gave me 25 cents a week. I remember that. That was pretty good money. That was the most money I d ever had Not bad for fire building. So the schools would get really cold in the winter? Oh my, yes, really cold. You might not have been there when they were getting really hot. Even in your homes back then, they weren t very tight. You d have water in the water bucket, and it would be frozen a lot of times in the mornings. That s why quilts were so popular. You d have so many quilts you couldn t hardly turn over in bed. I just can t imagine. The houses weren t insulated and warm like they are now. What was your house like growing up? Did you share bedrooms with a lot of people? I can t remember what you said about your family. Well, we had the two boys, and we had kind of a long bedroom. Their bed was laying this way, and ours was laying this way. We all slept in the same bedroom. Now, every child has to have a bedroom of his own. Well, at least that s what they think, huh? Yeah, that s what they think. We lived in once house that was just; well, you could hear the wind blowing through the cracks, and sometimes when it snowed real hard, it would snow through the cracks. You d be lying in bed getting snowed on? Yeah laughter . My youngest son, we lived in one house, and when the wind would come up, it would whistle through the door. He was scared to death of that. He never did learn to cope with it. He would run and come into our bed, because he was afraid. I ll bet you had some odd living situations in all of your houses. 14 M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Yes, the last place on the ranch was the best place that I d ever stayed at. I did have my own room there. I ve slept in barns. One winter, I slept in the barn til up after Christmas and finally got moved in the house. Wow, it must have been cold. Yeah, well, you didn t think too much about it, because that s just the way it was. Yeah, well, speaking of Christmas, how was Christmas for you guys in those times? What would be a typical Christmas? Well, when I was a little girl and they d ask me what I d want for Christmas, I d say a tablet and pencil. That s the kinds of gifts they had because they couldn t afford anything else. Paper and pencil? Yeah. You know, probably the other kids asked for something else, but I always wanted a pencil and paper. Did you like to draw or write? Well, I guess I liked to write, and penmanship was my specialty. So was Santa Claus nice to you? Yeah, he was always pretty good as far as they could do, because my folks were poor folks. One year, after we were married and we had the two little boys, we didn t know whether we d get the anything for Christmas or not, and the neighbor man gave them both something. So would you have special food for the holidays or something that you thought was really special to have to eat or something that you only got once a year, like my mother s chocolate peanut butter balls laughter ? Oh, not really. It was just average. Did you have a Christmas tree? No, I don t think we ever had a Christmas tree. Were you jealous of people that did? No, I was never jealous of anybody. I always thought that if they could do what they could do that that was all right, that I can do just what I can do and that s all. I never was jealous of anybody. I had neighbors that were jealous of the other neighbors, and they tried to keep up with them, but it didn t make any difference to me. And it still doesn t. 15 Kite L. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Keeping up with the Jones isn t a big deal for you. No, it never was. I m afraid to ask what Christmas was like for you living out in the barn. Oh, I can remember getting a pullover sweater one time for Christmas, and maybe a pair of mittens, something you could use, you know. Something practical. I don t remember ever getting a toy or anything. What about other holidays, the Fourth of July or Easter? Were they typical or did you not do anything at all for those? Not really. Usually we were at harvest if you had any harvest that Fourth of July when you had a header or combine. A header you could cut wheat earlier than with a combine. Right. Maybe you d make ice cream or something special like that and have to go to town to get some ice. The first time I asked people out here about the Fourth of July, I was kind of curious why they never mentioned fireworks ever, and then one lady looked at me and said, You ve never put out a prairie fire, have you? Laughter I said, Good enough, all right. That s right. We didn t have money to spend on fireworks. Anymore, you just spend lots of money. I know in this area that a number of people out here were involved with WPA projects and that kind of thing. Did you ever have a WPA job or know someone that did? I got to work a shift or two on WPA. I could get on the work if I would find a Fresno that s a dirt moving deal behind horses. Well, I found one, and I don t know how I had the money to buy it, but I bought it. I think I gave 10 for it. I had to go clear down to Seiling to get it. I put in two weeks on the road, and I rode down then to meet the paymaster to get my pay a few days later after I d worked my shift. I rode about 12 miles on horseback down there to get my check, and when I got down there, I found out my brother had said he was me and he got my check laughing 16 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Oh my gosh I don t know. I think that was the only WPA work that I got. I lost my check, I lost my horse feed, and I lost 10 on the Fresno. And what did you say to your brother when you next met up with him? I never did say anything to him. You never said anything to him. I think I would have said quite a bit. So you re a far better person than either of us are. I was always too easy. Everybody kind of took advantage of me, I guess. What about you Mrs. Carnagey? Did you know anyone that was working on a WPA project? My husband did. He did? What did he do? I don t know what he did. Do you know? I know several of the men that were around that were working on it. We were down close to it. We lived close to it, and they boarded their horses there and I fed them. I fixed them lunch. I don t know what they did. Was there any kind of attitude expressed about those projects at the time? Were people grateful for them or did they kind of look down their nose at them? I don t know. I think everybody was really grateful to get a job or get a little money. It was just about the only thing there was around. A lot of boys went to these CCC camps, which was a good deal. I wanted to go, but the ranch lady where I was staying, she said, Oh, I m afraid you ll get in such a bad environment going to a place like that, and so on. Of course, they really wanted me to stay there and help them, I guess laughter . So I just stayed there. I felt like I kind of owed them anyway. Do you remember any government clothing being given out or food parcels being given out? Oh yes, there was. We didn t have to accept it, but there was food given out. Did you not accept it because it was charity? Well, we just didn t feel like we couldn t get along without it. We always lived on a farm, and we had our chickens and cows and had our milk and 17 M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite Paustenbaugh Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite butter and stuff like that you know, and eggs, and we didn t have to. I didn t feel hard to them; because I felt like they needed it and that we did not want to accept it if we could keep from it. People had a lot of pride then. They had to be pretty bad off to accept anything. We ve heard some people that have been really bad off that didn t take it. My wife, after we were married, she went to meet the commodity truck one time, and it embarrassed her to go, but she went, and she got a half a dozen grapefruit, and she said that it wasn t worth the embarrassment. I knew a lot of people that would get flour and would even get eggs and all kinds of stuff, and cheese and stuff, but that s all she got when she went. A half a dozen grapefruit? And she had to catch a ride to do that, because we didn t have a car laughing . What can you do with a half a dozen grapefruit? Have a pretty good breakfast laughter . Grapefruit casserole or something like that I finally got a job driving a school bus to a country school. It wasn t very much, but we d save enough out of it to buy a calf once in a while, a heifer calf, and kind of started us a little herd that way. Was it your school bus job do you think that gave you your final lift up that you needed and you really got started that way? Well really, one thing that helped me start, after I married, her folks moved to eastern Oklahoma, and we went with them, and I got a job working in the mines over at Pitcher. I worked there through the winter. I made big money over there. I made about 3 a day, and when I came back here, I had a little money. That must have felt really good. Going down in the ground, I didn t like that. Come Spring, I got to thinking about coming back out here and seeing about little white-faced calves, you know, and I came back. Well, and this is what you knew too. By that time, things had begun to get better. It was starting to rain a little. Do you remember a time when it started to get bad? Was there something that indicated to you that things weren t as good as they used to be? 18 M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite M. Carnagey I was too young for much to register, I guess, but they d had good years in the twenties, and I think I started working up there on the ranch in the fall of 29, I believe. That s about the time the depression really hit, and then started in the dirt storm and the drought, and we couldn t raise anything. If it had just been the depression, we could kind of manage pretty well, but when you couldn t raise anything for your stock and had to sell stock, and then they ended up with the government killing a lot of them. So did that happen at the ranch that you worked on, that they killed the cattle? They killed some there. We didn t kill any of ours, but they brought cattle in there and killed them, yeah. In fact, I have some pictures of the cow killings. It was sad. You see those cattle shot down, and the government paid 10 or 12 a head for them, but they didn t have anything for them to eat much. They were just starving to death anyhow. Yeah, a lot of them were. Of course, we were on a creek, to where they could fair a little better. We had some little willows called button willows. They would eat on them. They would eat sagebrush when they had to and leaves. We kind of got by. Do you want to ask him the question? We heard the most amazing tale this afternoon. It was the first time that we ve heard this. All four of the people that were in this interview confirmed that yes this was a common practice. They said that a lot of times that the cattle would get into the Russian Thistle and that their stomachs would just get really bloated and that they would have to put a knife in the to relieve the gas. Uh-huh, but you d better stand back Well, they just said it whistled; they didn t say that. They said it d whistle as it came out. But that was a common practice at that time? Of course, we never blamed in on the Russian Thistles. We blamed it on the Johnson Grass. Well, they also said that the Johnson Grass could have been the cause of it too, but all of them knew exactly what we were saying. We said, Well where did you put the knife? And they were all trying to demonstrate laughter . They said, Oh, back in here, back in the back triangle part of this, between the tailbone and the short ribs right there. That sounded incredible. The experience I had with Russian Thistles, they went through them too fast 19 Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey That just sounded crazy. Did seeing the cows shot like that change your mind about the government programs? I never thought anything about it. I know it was just hard to see them shot. We had several people tell us that that was the only time that they ever remembered seeing their father cry was when they saw that, that it was just really terrible. Were you a democrat during this time? I wasn t either one then. So when things really crashed and crops weren t coming up and cows were being shot, you had your place at the ranch. They were keeping you on there at the ranch. Yeah, I went to eastern Oklahoma and stayed a year, and then I came back to the ranch. I was on the ranch until I moved on my own place, where I live now. But you didn t like working in the mines at all? No. What was your job in the mines? Taking ore from the shoulders up to the shaft to be taken out. I used a mule. They had little cars, and they set these little barrels about the size of this table on these little flat cars, and the scoopers, they would shovel them full, and then you would take the ore with this mule up to the shaft, and then they d take it up and dump it. Was that around the Pitcher area, that tri-state line area? Yeah. That sounds pretty interesting, even if you didn t like it. Reading about it is interesting. I don t know if working at it would be. There were men down there working that had worked all their life there that were 40 or 45 years old, and they d look like they were 75. It really took a toll on them. They d be a coughing, and they d tell you, Young man, don t stay in here. They had what they called, some of them called, like a chicken have the roup and some called it miners caw, and I don t know what it was, but it was a bad cough. It d get in their lungs, you know. So out you went back over here. Out I went, back to No Man s Land. 20 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Kite M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Well, Steve had asked you if you noticed that there was anything that indicated times were getting bad; was there anything that really indicated that things were improving? I know that you said that when it started to rain out here that that was one thing, but was there anything else? Well, it seemed like when it started raining. Well too, the government began making loans to farmers, and people began to be able to get a little money and buy land. It started raining to where they could raise some crops, and everything kind of started getting together again. Did you notice a drastic change in the way that farming was carried out, the contour plowing and different things like that? Yeah, oh yeah. So people really took that to heart. Yeah. They did contour farming, and then they had a deal that they called puddling that they had a deal fixed, a long pipe that had arms on it with kind of a paddle deal here and there and pull that across the field, and that would make holes in the ground to hold water when it rained instead of running off. It all helped a little. The government did a pretty good job of helping us to get things come back. What would you say, in your opinion, was the main cause of this disaster? Well, of the dust bowl, it was just because everything was plowed up almost here then. Anything that could be plowed was plowed and then put into wheat. Of course, when it got so dry, nothing could grow, and it started blowing away. It was just the drought and the wind. The drier it gets, the more the wind blows, and the more the wind blows the drier it gets. It s a vicious cycle, that s right. Would you agree with that opinion? Well, I think so. It might be that way now if we didn t have grass and stuff, the ground covered. There, the ground was just slick, and it d just blow away. We must have had a little moisture. It was blowing away, but we must have had a little moisture, because I can remember the rancher buying 80 acres of land that joined him, and it was just all farmland. I dug a half a mile of postholes one day, and that night it blew them full of dirt. I had them all to do over again. That was just the way it blew. Up north, there s a field there and it had blown off just slick, just like this table. There came a little rain, maybe a half inch or an inch or so, and the boss said, Why don t you hook onto the drill and go up there and drill some cane? so I did. I didn t plow it or anything. I just went up there; it was wet and the drill would go in the ground and drilled it to cane of some kind. We got enough rain that that made the blamedest crop. It was really good. It just happened that way. 21 Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Kite Paustenbaugh Kite Paustenbaugh Kite L. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey Paustenbaugh Well, is there any enduring memory that you have of this time, I mean one thing that sticks in your head above all other things about the 1930 s in Oklahoma? Oh, no. The only thing is just stuff around the ranch there. I know on a still day after these dirt storms had been blowing you could ride through the sagebrush and you could look back, and there would be dust, like smoke you know, following you and your horse that would be ten feet high. Everything would just be covered with dust. How about for you? Well, the thing that sticks in mind is of a mornings, when you d get up, it d show the print of your head when you laid in bed and when you d eat your meal, when you got through, there was dust around the outside of your plate. It just sifted in everywhere. It was silt; I think they called it silt. We ve had it described almost like a talcum powder. Yeah. It was just so fine. There was a guy in Guymon who s trying to recreate the dust, because he said he s never seen dirt so fine as it was during the dust storm. He s building this machine laughing , because he thinks that the wind would pick up all this dirt that would be kind of heavy grained dirt and then smash it all together and mix it up like a giant blender until it became finer and finer and finer, and then that s how it got into everywhere, so he s building this machine that ll blow this dirt around. To test this theory. To see if it ll make that same, almost like baby powder, dirt. Is this somebody at Panhandle that s doing that? No, it s a guy, Stansbury. J.B., the guy that set up all the interviews and helped us in Guymon, so he s trying to recreate it. Oh, I tell you, it was something. If you weren t in it, you can t really realize what it was like. I think I ll just rely on your stories. I don t want to ever experience that. I hope you don t; I hope you don t. Well, is there anything that you wanted tell us about from this time period that we didn t ask you about? 22 Kite M. Carnagey Kite L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Paustenbaugh B. Bockelman M. Carnagey B. Bockelman Paustenbaugh M. Carnagey I was going to ask you how you think you re changed today because of what you went through then? How did that make you a different person, or did it? Well, I know I ve been awful thankful for what I ve got. I m glad I went through what I did in a way, because you know how bad it can be and you know how good it can be. It s been a good experience in a way. It made you appreciative. I think it makes everybody that went through it appreciate what we ve got now more than somebody that hasn t gone through it. I don t ever want to go through it again laughing I might, if you allow me to do it, I know Barbara has written a poem about the dirty thirties, and I have too. It explains it about as good as anything. I was hoping that we would get you all to read those. He is a very modest man. He has a book of the cowboy poetry, and I was privileged to edit the book for him and put it together for him and put it together right over here on this counter with a copier, and our granddaughter printed it for him. I don t know how many copies of that she put together over here. You also have another book, don t you? You had two. Did you ever get that other one put together? Yes, but he made so many mistakes that I couldn t sell it. Barbara s the cause of this. She started me in on this. I never thought about being a poet, and I lost a good cowboy friend gathering cattle, and I wrote about him, and it was put in the paper, and then she got after me to do so poetry. That s the English teacher coming out in me. You just couldn t help yourself If it hadn t been for her and my wife, I would have never done any of this, but thanks to her, I went a lot of places and did a lot of things. Are you ready? He begins his poem. It was Easter Sunday, sixty-seven years ago. It was in April of 1935, it was so terribly dry. Everyone so poor and broke, dust so bad you could almost choke. Wind and dust blowed almost every day, it was so dry we couldn t even raise hay. Horses and cattle got so thin, it was awful the shape that they were in. Cattle only worth a dime a pound, hogs a nickel if buyer could be found. Jackrabbits about took the land; they ate the bark off of the trees to make their stand. Jacks weren t too bad to eat, but they were tough; you needed good teeth. 23 Paustenbaugh Kite M. Carnagey B. Bockelman M. Carnagey L. Carnagey M. Carnagey Then came Black Sunday, I remember so well; I thought it was the end of the world, and we were all going to Hell. A black cloud rolled up in the northern sky; the birds left their nests and started to fly. The cattle lifted their heads and smelled the air; the horses stuck their ears up, and how their nostrils did flare. Something unusual about to take place, chickens started huddling together near the chicken house place. The dust cloud rolled in about five miles high; darkness covered all the land and the sky. It was as dark as any night; we had to light the old kerosene light. In an hour or so the worst was over; dust covered everything in the floor. The women got so tired of trying to keep house; dust came in every cranny, window and door. Some got dust pneumonia and died; we all prayed for rain to save our hide. The government started giving work called WPA; it wasn t much, but it sure made our day. The government started killing cattle at 12 a head; it was such a shame to see so many cows dead. In May, it started in to rain; the ones that stayed started over again. Many people left to go to some other place; some of us had to stay on this old windswept place. But we that stayed have reaped from the land; we made it with God s helping hand. Sixty-seven years ago was that black day, so thank you God for helping us to stay. That s just about the way it was. Thank you very much for sharing that with us. Do you want to yodel for us? I don t know whether I can or not. I haven t tried today. Do your songs, or one of them with your yodeling. Well, I stayed at a place when I was twelve years old, and they had an old crapaphone they called it, a record player. You wound up a hand, they didn t have electricity then, so you wound up a hand. Did it have those round records? No, these were bigger records, but anyway, they had a record with Jimmie Rodgers. He was the first yodeler I d ever heard, and I got to trying to mock him, so this is really an old song. I learned this in about 1924 or 1925. I can t 24 do it like he did, but I about wore it out I ve sung it so much. It s called Waitin for a Train. Proceeds to sing and yodel ------- -------..