Mary Crawford

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Juliana Nykolaiszyn
August 9, 2014
Vinita, Oklahoma


Nykolaiszyn 	My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University library. Today is August 9, 2014 and we’re in Vinita, Oklahoma, interviewing Attucks School alumni. With me is Mary Crawford. Thank you for joining us today.

Crawford 	You’re welcome.

Nykolaiszyn 	Mary, could you tell me the year you were born and where you were born?

Crawford 	Nineteen thirty-two in Vinita, Oklahoma.

Nykolaiszyn 	Tell me a little bit about your parents.

Crawford 	My father, he was named Carl Kirkendoll. He was a construction worker and then he worked in the laundry here in Vinita. He helped work on the Grand River Dam when they put that in down there. My mother [Pauline], she did housework for about twenty years to some people called Terrells and they ran the hatchery.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay, and how did your parents come to Vinita?

Crawford 	Well, they lived out at Ketchum and migrated into Vinita. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And describe where you lived as a child.  

Crawford 	On 611 East Tahlequah. Born and raised there, and in fact it wasn’t but two black families live on that street and that was my grandmother across the street and our house. I had all playmates on that street. It wasn’t like any segregation to us over there. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay, and describe the house for me. How many rooms, what it was like…

Crawford 	We had a porch and one…two…the front room, bedroom, dining room, kitchen. That was all.

Nykolaiszyn 	And did you have siblings? Brothers and sisters?

Crawford 	I had two brothers at that time.

Nykolaiszyn 	And where did you fall? Were you the oldest, the youngest?

Crawford 	I was the youngest, but later on my mother had another child that was a girl, but I was gone, grown then.

Nykolaiszyn 	And so growing up what did you do for fun? 

Crawford 	Well, we’d go down to Bull Creek and fish and catch crawfish and have picnics. At that time you could take—say like fifteen cents. All the kids in the neighborhood would get together and put their pennies together. We’d go to the store, Charlie Smith’s store, and get five cents worth of bologna and two cents worth of crackers, go down on Bull Creek and play. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And have a good time.

Crawford 	Have a good time all day long. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And, you know, growing up, were you thinking about what you wanted to be when you got older?

Crawford 	Yeah, I always thought I wanted to be a truck driver, but I didn’t. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Why a truck driver?

Crawford 	I don’t know. It was just in my mind that that’s what I wanted to be.

Nykolaiszyn 	(Laughs) Did you work growing up at all?
  
Crawford 	Yes, I started working when I was like fifteen. I worked for the Boatright’s when I was a teenager. Boatright Store. I don’t know, lots of places, restaurants: Scotty’s, cooked there, Clanton’s, cooked at Clanton’s. Then I got married and moved to Michigan, and I worked there. We moved to a lot of places trying to decide where we was going to live. I lived in Los Angeles for eight years. I lived in Denver for fifteen years.

Nykolaiszyn 	And here you are back in Vinita.

Crawford 	Back in Vinita, after my husband died. We had property in Tulsa so I came back, and we weren’t together, and sold the property and decided to come to Vinita. Worst mistake I ever made.

Nykolaiszyn 	Really?

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. Well, can you describe what the town was like when you were younger?

Crawford 	Well, you couldn’t go in the front and eat at places, you know, and stuff, use the bathrooms and different stuff like that. You had to eat in the back. To me it was okay because it didn’t make me no difference. All my friends that I played with were little white girls, you know, because they lived in our neighborhood. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Did you attend church growing up?

Crawford 	Every Sunday, all day long, and through the week. Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	What church did you go to?

Crawford 	I started out at Sunrise Baptist Church, which is now Serenity. Then I started going down to the First Baptist Church with my grandmother. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay, well…

Crawford 	And I still attend it, but it’s changed its name: UNBC.

Nykolaiszyn 	Well, when you were going to school at Attucks, can you tell me the years you attended? What year did you start at Attucks?

Crawford 	Nineteen thirty-seven. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And what year did you graduate?

Crawford 	Forty-nine.

Nykolaiszyn 	Forty-nine. Okay, and did you start in the first grade?

Crawford 	Primary.

Nykolaiszyn 	Primary, okay. Let’s start with your primary school. Tell me about your teachers and what you remember from that time?

Crawford 	My primary teacher was Mrs. Shade. She did primary, first, and second grade. You had a little red table, round red table, for the primary kids. During that time—I could read and write before I even went to school. So I skipped from the primary to the second grade, and then from the second grade to the third grade.

Nykolaiszyn 	Wow. 

Crawford 	Because you didn’t start school until you were six.

Nykolaiszyn 	So were you learning how to read and write at home?

Crawford 	At home, yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	Who taught you?

Crawford 	My mother and my grandmother. 

Nykolaiszyn 	So education was very important to them?

Crawford 	Yes. My mother only finished the eighth grade, but she was very smart. 

Nykolaiszyn 	So how would you get to school?

Crawford 	Walk! All the way from the north part of town clear to the south part. 

Nykolaiszyn 	How long would it take you?

Crawford 	Oh, about thirty minutes. Everybody that lived in the north end would meet up on the corner and we all walked together. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Rain or shine?

Crawford 	Rain or shine. Yes, snow…there was a school, the Riverside School, but that was for whites. We couldn’t go to it, so we had to walk all the way, probably a mile and a half.

Nykolaiszyn 	Did you pass it on the way?

Crawford 	Yeah.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. Pack a lunch?

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	What would you take for lunch?

Crawford 	Sometime it might be bacon and egg sandwich, peanut butter sandwich, whatever.

Nykolaiszyn 	Would you ever trade with your friends?

Crawford 	Yeah. One boy that was in my class, he and I were the youngest two, and his mother made homemade bread all the time. He would trade me his homemade bread with ham on it for an egg sandwich. Delicious.

Nykolaiszyn 	Different today.

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	Well you mentioned Mrs. King [Ethel Shade King Masion Ford], your primary teacher…

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay, can you talk about some of the teachers you remember?

Crawford 	Oh yeah, then after I left her room I went to the next room which was Mrs. Vivian Terrell. She was the music teacher. She did third and fourth grade and music to everybody. Then you leave that room and you went upstairs to the fifth and the sixth grade was Ms. Clara Hardrick. She was an artist. She did stuff like that. Then when you leave that room you went to Mr. Ryan’s room. That was science. That was seventh and eighth. Then when you get into the high school you go downstairs to the professor’s room which was ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth. You just switch out of rooms.

Nykolaiszyn 	Were there any teachers that really just stick out in your mind for, you know, either a good experience you had with them or maybe a negative experience you had with them?

Crawford 	Yeah, Ms. Armstead. I loved Ms. Armstead. She was a very good teacher and whatever she gave you to learn, if you missed some of it, if you missed two questions on there she put your name on the board. And before Friday evening you had to come in there and get it off, get your name erased off. 

Nykolaiszyn	They were tough.

Crawford 	Very tough, yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	What about discipline?

Crawford 	Well, we were all disciplined. Yeah, you got whippings, spankings, with a paddle.

Nykolaiszyn 	What would you have to do to get a spanking or a paddling?

Crawford 	Talking in class and stuff like that—disrupting. 

Nykolaiszyn 	That would never happen to you?

Crawford 	No, I never was a disrupter. (Laughter)

Nykolaiszyn 	Would teachers do other duties outside of teaching?

Crawford 	Huh?

Nykolaiszyn 	Would teachers perform other duties either outside the classroom or in the school?

Crawford 	I didn’t mention we had a home economics room...

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay.

Crawford 	…which I loved very much. We were taught a lot of stuff in there, taught how to can, sew. We did sewing, and CPR [Cardio Pulmonary-Resuscitation]. We learned a lot of stuff in there. Her name was Vivian Clay. 

Nykolaiszyn 	What about the principal?

Crawford 	Principal Blye, he was a very stern man, very nice man. 

Nykolaiszyn 	How was he regarded by the students?

Crawford 	Very nice. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. So describe a typical day in high school for me.

Crawford 	Well, you get there and you go into his room and then you’re leaving there and you go upstairs to Ms. Armstead’s room for spelling and prose and poetry and history, all of that. Then by that time it’s probably lunchtime. You go down in the lunchroom and eat your lunch. Go back up, go to your main room and take off again to some other room. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And then what would you do after school?

Crawford 	Well, we would go all through town. There was about four of us girls that lived in the north end, we’d go through town. There was a donut shop and we’d stop and smell the donuts. Go on down by the post office, there was a park there that had a water thing and we’d sit there on that. Then we’d go on up through to the ice plant and the man would give us a snowball out of the ice plant. Then we’d head on home. 

Nykolaiszyn 	That sounds pretty good.

Crawford 	Then on Saturday everybody met down at Bull Creek, to play.

Nykolaiszyn 	So could you describe what a classroom looked like?

Crawford 	Yeah, it was desks you know, and you had your little inkwell. Then you put your books up under there, and then you had blackboards and radiators instead of—the kind of heat we had was radiators.

Nykolaiszyn 	And what do you recall of the auditorium?

Crawford 	Well, I was there when the WPA [Works Progress Administration] built the auditorium on. My uncle, he did work there. I remember that, when they built it on. And it—basketball and cheerleading.

Nykolaiszyn 	Were you a cheerleader?

Crawford 	Yes, cheerleading.

Nykolaiszyn 	What sports did you cheerlead for? Basketball?

Crawford 	Basketball. That’s all we had was basketball. We had blue pleated skirts, white socks, and white shoes, and a white sweater.

Nykolaiszyn 	Do you remember any of your cheers?

Crawford 	No. Ah, no. (Laughter) Maybe something like “Go team, go!” Eighty-three years old, not going to remember that.

Nykolaiszyn 	(Laughs) I thought I’d ask, I thought I’d ask. What do you recall of the library?

Crawford 	At our school we had a library in Ms. Armstead’s room that you could go in there and check out books. I’ve always been a reader. I remember when I was a kid and we had a cousin of mine that was staying with us. Soon as we’d eat supper, we had outside toilets, well I’d take me a book and go to keep from washing dishes. I’d take me a book and go read. (Laughs) We had a fight out there one evening. She said, “You do this every day to keep from washing dishes!” 

Nykolaiszyn 	Got to get your reading in. Are there any memories from your time in class that just come to mind when you recall your school days?

Crawford 	Just all good times. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. Outside of cheerleading did you participate in any clubs or activities?

Crawford 	We had Girl Scouts and different stuff like that. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Would you take part in any competitions?

Crawford 	We’d get out and race on the school ground, play ball, softball.

Nykolaiszyn 	So you mentioned you were a cheerleader, who were some of your bigger rivals?

Crawford 	You mean classmates?

Nykolaiszyn 	No, in terms of different cities. In terms of playing basketball, who were your rivals? Different cities?

Crawford 	Oh, all over. We beat everybody. We’d go to Pawhuska, and Tulsa, and Claremore, and Bartlesville. We had a good team.

Nykolaiszyn 	And would a lot of people come watch basketball from the community?

Crawford 	Oh, really, yes. 

Nykolaiszyn 	What about dances?

Crawford 	What?

Nykolaiszyn 	Dances.

Crawford 	Oh, after every ballgame. We had the Ryan’s Hotel, which is now still standing there and falling over. We’d go upstairs and dance up there after the ballgames. Pay a quarter and go upstairs. They had a great big hall. That building was supposed to have been a hospital and they didn’t give blacks licenses for a hospital. So he [Dr. Louis Ryan] turned it into a rooming house and put his doctor’s office downstairs and then we’d go upstairs. Then all the teachers that came to town stayed there. Go up there and dance until twelve o’clock. Twelve o’clock and go home.

Nykolaiszyn 	What kind of music?

Crawford 	All kinds, jitterbug, all kinds.

Nykolaiszyn 	Would you go with a date or would you just dance?

Crawford 	No. Everybody just leaves the ballgame and goes up.

Nykolaiszyn 	Would you date?

Crawford 	Yes and no. 

Nykolaiszyn 	So when you would, yes and no, hang out with a boy, what would you do?

Crawford 	Go to the movie.

Nykolaiszyn 	And where was the movie?

Crawford 	On Main Street. Upstairs, couldn’t go downstairs.

Nykolaiszyn 	So how did Attucks School compare to the schools attended by white students?

Crawford 	Well, they had things to play with and some of them had buses to take them to school. One time I remember us having a sandbox at that school down there and a merry-go-round that they took from the white school and brought down. That’s all I ever—I don’t remember no swings or nothing. The school is still there. I live across the street from it now.

Nykolaiszyn 	And how was the school regarded in the black community? Attucks School?

Crawford 	Wonderful. The blacks really participated with it, you know, the families. Seeing that the kids got there and on time. Can’t be late. 

Nykolaiszyn 	So you graduated in 1949. Tell me about graduation.

Crawford 	Well, to tell the truth about it, I missed one month graduating. Quit school.

Nykolaiszyn 	Can you share why you quit school?

Crawford 	Just didn’t want to go to school. It wasn’t—would’ve quit long time ago, but my mom made me go.

Nykolaiszyn 	Did you just go work?

Crawford 	I already was working.

Nykolaiszyn 	Oh, okay.

Crawford 	I was working, yes. 

Nykolaiszyn 	So you just worked more.

Crawford 	Fifteen dollars a week. Yeah, I worked more.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. So around ’49 you left school, Brown vs Board of Education, 1954, happened. How did the community feel that Attucks School was going to be closing, students would have to go to Vinita…

Crawford 	I had moved and I was grown and gone then.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay.

Crawford 	That was in the ’50s. I left Vinita in the early ’50s. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay. Did you still have kin in the area?

Crawford 	Yes. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay.

Crawford 	I left and went to Tulsa.
 
 Nykolaiszyn 	What impact do you think the school’s closing had on the community?

Crawford 	Well, I really don’t know because I wasn’t here, and I didn’t come back here. (Laughs) But I think they enjoyed going to the other school.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay, and during your time here can you tell me about some of the black businesses that were big when you lived here?

Crawford 	Yeah, across from the ballpark there was the Beer Tavern and then there was a restaurant by the Venters, George Venters had a restaurant. When I was a kid, Billy Terrell had a chili parlor down on Main Street. Used to be a lot of stuff on Main Street. We had a black garage and a black hotel, two-story hotel, Georgie Rider, grocery store. There was lots of black businesses. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And you mentioned about the doctor. Did you have access to a hospital or was it segregated?

Crawford 	Nothing but the county hospital out there, yeah. Mostly when people got sick, you didn’t go to no doctor. They just give you some homemade stuff, you know. But we did have a doctor named Dr. Sharpe that was in that building where Ryan’s was and when Dr. Ryan died he took over the practice.

Nykolaiszyn 	And did your parents and your grandmother remain in Vinita?

Crawford 	My mother died before I left Vinita. My grandmother remained in Vinita until she passed away.

Nykolaiszyn 	And where are they buried in town?

Crawford 	Out at the Fairview Cemetery.

Nykolaiszyn 	So Attucks School is on the National Register of Historic Places. Were you involved in that process?

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	Can you tell me a little bit about how that idea happened, to get the school on the register?

Crawford 	Well, I started it. When I came back to live here I tried to get certain people to—“Let’s get it on the historical site.” Nobody wanted to be bothered. Even my cousin Charles said, “We don’t want that old Attucks School because it’s got mold in it and blah, blah, blah.” Negative people. Then I went to Glenda Downing and she and I got it started.

Nykolaiszyn 	And you got it on there.

Crawford 	Got it on there. You’ll see where on some of those papers where she wrote on it, “We did it.”

Nykolaiszyn 	How did that feel to get that done?

Crawford 	Oh, wonderful! Wonderful. Then we did a monument there and we got bricks around the monument, sold bricks. I think I sold 150 because I called everybody that had went to school at Attucks, that I could think of, and they bought bricks. The rest of them, they sold about fifty, I guess, altogether. Anyway, all the people that had went to school there way older than I am. There’s three people still living that’s ninety-seven: Marylin Ryan, E.D. Irons, and Dorothy Stubbs, that’s the principal’s daughter. 

Nykolaiszyn 	And they’re still living?

Crawford 	Still living. Ninety-seven the Ryan girl is, yeah. They’re all in their nineties. Originally it’s about, only about twelve or fourteen, original people still living, that started school there.  

Nykolaiszyn 	Are there any people that you keep in touch with that you went to school there closely?

Crawford 	Yeah, in my class it’s only one person left. She and I, Verna Dean Hicks, she lives in Wichita and we keep in close touch with each other. We started the school together. All the rest are dead.

Nykolaiszyn 	I understand there’s a reunion every two years of alumni? 

Crawford 	Every two years, yeah.

Nykolaiszyn 	What can you tell me about the reunion?

Crawford 	Well, beautiful. We always have such good reunions and I enjoyed it until we incorporated with the younger group. They don’t believe in doing like they’re supposed to and also Glenda Downing and I got the school incorporated and did bylaws. I was the president for four years and we got bylaws and all that. They don’t want bylaws. They don’t—oh it’s just awful. So I don’t do much attending to it anymore. I’m still on the board, but and the lawyer—they quit on the board because they wouldn’t do it right. Just chaos. Total chaos.

Nykolaiszyn 	What’s happening at Attucks School today?

Crawford 	Nothing. In the back we’re supposed to be doing a museum. They have not tried to do nothing and somewhere I got that paper where we went to do the museum. Don’t know what I done with it. Oh, I think this is it. That’s when we, Glenda and I went…

Nykolaiszyn 	Tried to get a museum going.

Crawford 	Yeah, and they gave us rights. The school board gave us rights to have the museum, but they have not done one thing. So anyway, I said everybody wants me to run for president again, but I don’t think I will. Also I helped get a scholarship fund started. So we did quite a bit of things in that four years. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Well, Attucks School seems that it was very special to you.

Crawford 	Oh, very special.

Nykolaiszyn 	What is one thing you want people to remember about Attucks School?
 
Crawford 	All the teachers especially. We had very good teachers and janitors that kept the school clean. I  just love it.

Nykolaiszyn 	And what do you want people to remember about you Mary?

Crawford 	Just my name is all. It don’t matter. (Laughter) That’s about all. They don’t have to remember me. That’s all.

Nykolaiszyn 	Do you have kids?

Crawford 	Stepchildren, yes. I hear from them every day, either on the computer or by the phone.

Nykolaiszyn 	Well good. And how are you staying busy in retirement outside of your work with Attucks?

Crawford 	Somebody will call, “Come take me here, come take me there, and I need to go to the store!” This one lady I take shopping and I have to do half of her shopping. Go round and pick up her groceries. I get in a cart and ride and pick up her groceries, most of them.

Nykolaiszyn 	So you stay pretty busy.

Crawford	 I stay busy. Somebody always wants—oh, busy all the time. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Well is there anything else you’d like to add about Attucks School or Vinita in general?

Crawford 	Well, Vinita sucks.

Nykolaiszyn 	Okay.

Crawford 	(Laughs) It really does. I was there when they built the gym on so...WPA did that. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Did you watch it being built?

Crawford 	Yes.

Nykolaiszyn 	What was special about that time?

Crawford 	Because my uncle was working out there and I was little and I’d go out and holler at him. Then when they put the stage up there I thought, “Oh boy, we’re going to have lots of places to do plays,” which we did, and stuff. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Did you participate in a play?

Crawford 	Oh yeah. We had a little, one of our music teachers, had a little band. We had a little band.

Nykolaiszyn 	Good memories.

Crawford 	Yeah, good memories. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Favorite teacher?

Crawford 	Favorite teacher? Well, I would say Ms. Armstead.

Nykolaiszyn 	Why so?

Crawford 	Lucille Armstead, because she seen—and she was nice. She seen that you got your lessons. Of course all the teachers did. Very good educators, they was. 

Nykolaiszyn 	Well thank you so much for sharing your memories of Attucks School today. We really appreciate it.

Crawford 	Well thank you, you’re welcome. 

------- End of interview -------
