Mary Lois Wiley

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Tanya Finchum 
& Stacy DeLano
March 28, 2017
Stillwater, Oklahoma


Finchum	Today is March 28, 2017. My name is Tanya Finchum. I’m with Oklahoma State University, and today I am in Stillwater to interview Mary Lois Wiley. You go by Lois as I understand it, so thank you for having us. And along with me today is Stacy DeLano with the Stillwater Public Library. So, let’s begin with learning when and where you were born.

Wiley	I was born in Okmulgee County, a little suburb called Tolan.

Finchum	And what year?

Wiley	Nineteen twenty-seven.

Finchum	Nineteen twenty-seven.

Wiley	Nineteen twenty-seven, yeah.

Finchum	And what were your parents doing in Okmulgee County?

Wiley	They were farmers.

Finchum	Had they been born there?

Wiley	No, my father from Arkansas, and my mother from Texas.

Finchum	Well then, how did they meet?

Wiley	Well, my mother came here I think in 1900, and my father came here from Arkansas in 1890-something. 

Finchum	Okay. And what did they farm?

Wiley	They farmed out east in Okmulgee County, a little town called Beggs.

Finchum	Beggs?

Wiley	Beggs. B-E-G-G-S.

Finchum	Beggs, okay. I’ve heard of that. I’m not sure where it is, but I’ve heard of it. 

Wiley	Yeah, it’s out on Highway 16, between Okmulgee and…. It’s about fourteen miles [northwest] of Okmulgee [and about six miles east of Slick, Oklahoma].

Finchum	And did you have brothers and sisters?

Wiley	I had three brothers and seven sisters.

Finchum	That’s a big house. (Laughs)

Wiley	Yeah, it’s a big family.

Finchum	And where did you fall in the order?

Wiley	I was fourth. I’m the fourth child, the second daughter.

Finchum	So you got to call the shots a little bit sometimes?

Wiley	Yes. (Laughter)

Finchum	Well, did your mother have a big garden?

Wiley	Yeah, she’d have a big garden every year.

Finchum	And canned and all of that?

Wiley	Yeah, canned all through the summer.

Finchum	And you’d have to help with that?

Wiley	Yeah, we helped in everything. (Laughter)

Finchum	Had a few chores. 

Wiley	Yes.

Finchum	Did she raise chickens?

Wiley	Yes, she had chickens. She had a whole lot of chickens.

Finchum	And whose job was it to get them ready for dinner?

Wiley	Yeah. (Laughs)

Finchum	Did she do it, or did your dad do the, when they chopped their heads off?

Wiley	Oh, my mother did.

Finchum	She did? I’ve asked that question a lot, and I get mixed. Most of the time it is the woman that has to do that.

Wiley	Yes, yeah.

Finchum	Well, were you born at home?

Wiley	I was born at home. 

Finchum	Were the others?

Wiley	Yeah, they were born at home except the last ones. They was born in the hospital, the last two sisters.

Finchum	And when someone got sick, would the doctor come out to the place or…

Wiley	I don’t remember any of us being sick. My brother, I had a brother, he had a kind of asthma, but he never went [to the hospital]. My mother always took care of that. [She had home remedies. I never had no broken bones or sickness, only a few winter colds.]

Finchum	No broken bones or anything like that?

Wiley	No, never was sick.

Finchum	Did she have home remedies?

Wiley	Yes. (Laughter)

Finchum	Do you remember one in particular?

Wiley	Well, when we have a flu or something, we take brewery tea. Get a weed out in the country, and what you do is we make tea out of it, put a little lemon in it, and next morning we be all right.

Finchum	Did it taste good or bad?

Wiley	It was good, it wasn’t bad. Tasted like tea.

Finchum	Well, was church an important part of the family life back then?

Wiley	Not too good, but eventually was. The church was after we moved to Wagoner County. We lived in Wagoner County most of our lives.

Finchum	That’s pretty close to Okmulgee County, isn’t it?

Wiley	Yeah, it connected down there by Porter. 

Finchum	Okay, I was thinking they might have.

Wiley	By Porter, Oklahoma, by Muskogee County.

Finchum	Well, where did you go to elementary school?

Wiley	I started in Gibson Station, in Wagoner County, little place up there by Wagoner, in Wagoner County, in a school named Gibson Station. 

Finchum	And how many were in your class group?

Wiley	Oh, I can’t recall. It was quite a few. I’d say about fifteen or twenty.

Finchum	Okay, that’s quite a few. 

Wiley	Yeah, at the time.

Finchum	And how would you get to school?

Wiley	We walked to school. Sometimes we walked at least two miles.

Finchum	One way?

Wiley	Yes, that’s when I first started, two miles, but further on—I went to thirteen different schools. We just moved around, different places. One time we had about five miles of a walk, but we didn’t go. We went about twelve days that year. The whole year, only about twelve days. That was out here by Broken Arrow and Coweta.

Finchum	You moved around because of the farming, mostly?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Well, would your dad plow with horses or mules?

Wiley	He had horses at first. Eventually, we bought a farm down by Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, Broken Arrow and Coweta, and we had a tractor then. We got a tractor.

Finchum	Did you have to drive or get to drive it?

Wiley	No, I never did drive a tractor.

Finchum	Well, with six brothers, I guess that was….

Wiley	No, it was three brothers, and when my brothers—by that time there was a war going on, and my brothers was in the Army. We had to help my dad. I just had one brother kind of down my age. My two older brothers, they was the second, they was the third kid. I had my older sister, then my two brothers, then me. My two brothers, they had gone to the Army, so we girls had to help my father farm. That’s when I helped, plowing and planting and do all that farm work. We had a big pecan orchard and we had to pick up pecans and stuff like that. We raised hogs and pigs off our farm. 

Finchum	They pretty much managed to survive based on what you grew?

Wiley	Yes. 

Finchum	Have a milk cow?

Wiley	Yeah, we had to milk about three cows every day.

Finchum	And is that easy to do, or not?

Wiley	Yeah, it’s easy. (Laughter)

Finchum	I have tried it once, and it didn’t work for me. 

Wiley	We had a cow a piece to milk every morning and in the evening.

Finchum	Well, what was the favorite thing that your mother cooked for you?

Wiley	We love chicken and dumplings. (Laughs) Chicken and dumplings and all our vegetables in the garden, mustard greens, cabbages, and just stuff like that.

Finchum	With that many in the family, how many cans would she try to do in a season?

Wiley	During that time, we run about fifteen hundred cans and stuff. Big gallons of green beans, all that vegetables and stuff. Canned everything. Canned our beef.

Finchum	Meat?

Wiley	Yeah. Take beef and cook it, and make jelly and all that stuff. We had a whole lot of hogs, so we raise a whole lot of hogs, and we never had to go to the store. Only time we went to the store for something was like salt, baking powder, and sugar, something like that, but all the other stuff, we raising.

Finchum	And would your mother sell the eggs, or…

Wiley	Yes.

Finchum	…trade them for something else, I guess? Well, did she make your clothes?

Wiley	Yes. Made all our clothes, or almost all of them.

Finchum	Did she have one of those machines with the treadle, or whatever they call those?

Wiley	Yeah, a sewing machine.

Finchum	Yeah, with the pedals.

Wiley	Yeah. 

Finchum	Where would she get her fabric?
 
Wiley	In town, she’d go to the store.

Finchum	And did she quilt with the scraps?

Wiley	Yes. We had quilts. We had quilts and sheets and stuff, blankets and all that stuff, she made it. 

Finchum	Well, I would imagine laundry day was quite a chore with that many.

Wiley	We washed on a rubboard, and eventually we got our washing machine.

Finchum	That was a happy day, I bet. 

Wiley	Yes.

Finchum	Well, did the house always have electricity?

Wiley	No, not always. 

Finchum	Well, when you were younger, how would you do your homework? Did you have to do it before dark?

Wiley	No, we did it at night. Coming in from school we had our chores to do, get wood in for the night, feed the chickens, just different things. We’d cleanup new ground, cleanup ground. Like there’s a thicket of rural woods or something like that, we chopped the wood, the trees down, and cleaned up and next year we’d have it to cultivate, cultivate, plant stuff like that. We had a 100-acre farm, but there was trees and stuff on some of it. So we get them trees and things out, and eventually we made it all to cultivation.

Finchum	A lot of hard work. 

Wiley	Yeah, that’s right.

DeLano	Mrs. Wiley, did the Dust Bowl affect your family’s farm?

Wiley	The what?

DeLano	The Dust Bowl. Did it affect any of your family’s farms?

Wiley	No.

Finchum	Well, with all of that work, what would you do for fun?

Wiley	Oh, we had tons of fun. (Laughs) We’d rest on Sunday and go visit and play ball. We’d go to ball games and stuff like that, on Sunday. 

Finchum	On Sunday.

Wiley	After Sunday school, after church. (Laughter) 

Finchum	Now, what kind of ball? Softball, baseball?

Wiley	Softball. 

Finchum	Softball. The boys and the girls get to play together?

Wiley	No, we played together in school, ball together. But on Sunday, the boys would go to different places, high land or something, and we’d go up there and play.

Finchum	Well, at what point did you come to Stillwater?

Wiley	Well, we lived seventeen miles east of Broken Arrow on [Highway] 71. We stayed down there until we got almost grown and some got married down there. Then after we got married, I came to Tulsa and stayed a while, about two years, and then we went down to Oklahoma City, and I left Oklahoma City and came to Stillwater in ’56 I think I came to Stillwater.

Finchum	You’ve been here a while, then. 

Wiley	Mmhmm. Came here and I started working. I started working when I was in Oklahoma City. That’s where I learned how—well I always did know how to cook. I was always the breakfast cook at home. My older sister was the cook at home, and when she left, went to California, I took over. And I cooked every morning. Before I went to school, I cooked their breakfast. Then, walked about a mile to catch the bus.

Finchum	Wow. Did you get to leave the dishes for someone else to wash?

Wiley	Yeah. (Laughter) Yeah, sometimes my parents wouldn’t be up out of bed before we leave to go to school, because we leave to go to school by seven o’clock. Of course we had to go up about a mile to catch the bus, and then we leave there, we go about, oh it’d take a little while, go out and get somebody else and by the time we get to school it would be nine o’clock, and we’d leave home at seven o’clock. And we go about thirteen miles, I think, to school every morning. 

Finchum	Were most of the students black? Were they African American, in that school…

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	…there, at that time?

Wiley	Uh huh. 

Finchum	So what would you fix for breakfast?

Wiley	Mostly I cooked some bacon and eggs and rice. We never did eat no cereal. (Laughs) We didn’t know what cereal was. We eat mostly bacon and eggs.

Finchum	That’s better anyway.

Wiley	Bacon and eggs and rice and oatmeal.

Finchum	Biscuits?

Wiley	Yeah, biscuits. I had to make them every morning.

Finchum	Big old iron skillets?

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	Well, let’s back up. How did you meet your husband?

Wiley	Well, we went to school down there in Broken Arrow. Met him down there. But, about two years, we separated, and I came to Oklahoma City, after I got done with that. Me and my first husband separated.

Finchum	And you started working at that point, as a cook?

Wiley	Yeah, I worked a little bit in Tulsa, when I was married to my first husband. I worked at St. John Hospital there. And then when I went to Oklahoma City, I cooked at O’Mealey’s cafeteria (Classen Cafeteria). When I came to Stillwater, I cooked at Gamma Phi Beta sorority house [for twenty-three years].

Finchum	Oh.

Wiley	I cooked there about thirty-nine years. But I worked two more sororities before I started working at Gamma Phi Beta. So all total I worked, through all the houses, for about forty-two years, until I retired. 

Finchum	I can’t imagine what that was like, with all the girls and the drama. (Laughs)

Wiley	Yeah, bunch of them.

Finchum	Well, did you live there, at the sorority? Would you live there or have to come early enough to cook?

Wiley	I’d come there and cook every morning, seven o’clock. I still hear from some of the girls. 

Finchum	What would they call you?

Wiley	They called me Lois. 

Finchum	Lois.

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	Miss Lois?

Wiley	Just Lois. I had some nice kitchen boys. They were nice too. They all were nice. 

Finchum	What was the favorite thing you cooked for them?

Wiley	Macaroni and cheese. (Laughter) They talk about that now if I see them, about macaroni and cheese.

Finchum	From scratch?

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	Not desserts?

Wiley	There’s a dessert I made. I don’t know, we just called it graduation dessert. Always made it special, and so they took that recipe down to Dallas, that recipe. 

Finchum	That was kind of a fun job to have, in a way.

Wiley	Mmhmm, it was. Yeah. You’re going to meet them all the time.

Finchum	And would they have to come dressed for breakfast? Or could they come in their pajamas?

Wiley	They come dressed. They’d be on their way to school, when they get up. They don’t want to get up early. They just come and eat.

Finchum	And then you would do dinner?

Wiley	Mmhmm. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner.

Finchum	Oh, you served lunch too?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	So you had to cook all day. 

Wiley	Yeah. On Monday nights, they’re all coming, the pledges and all, about 150 girls there on Monday night.

Finchum	Wow. I hope you had help.

Wiley	Yeah, I had help on Monday night.

Finchum	Was it hard to get that job?

Wiley	No.

Finchum	No? Is that the reason you came to Stillwater?

Wiley	No.

Finchum	No? Well, what brought you to Stillwater?

Wiley	I got married again, and my husband was working in Stillwater. He was already here.

Finchum	So, this is your second husband.

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	Okay. And what was he doing in Stillwater?

Wiley	He was working too. He was a cook, also.

Finchum	Cook, okay! So, who cooked at home?

Wiley	We both cooked at home. (Laughter)

DeLano	What were your impressions when you first got to Stillwater? What did you think of Stillwater?

Wiley	It wasn’t much. The one think I liked about it, I could walk to work. (Laughs) In Oklahoma City, I had to catch a bus, then catch a bus again to go out on Twenty-third. Had to catch a bus twice just to get to work. But here, I just get out and go right up the street. I didn’t live far from it.

Finchum	Do you remember what street you lived on when you first came?

Wiley	Came here? On Jefferson Street.

Finchum	Jefferson, okay. 

Wiley	Twelfth and Jefferson.

Finchum	Is the house still standing?

Wiley	No, they tore it down about, not too long ago.

Finchum	So, in 1956 is when you came here?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

Finchum	That was about the time they were integrating the schools.

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Do you remember much about that conversation?

Wiley	Not too much, but I remember down on Washington Street—I had two kids by my first husband, and they was going to school at Washington. And, I had two more, so four altogether. And they went to Washington School. They started at Dunbar School down here.

Finchum	It’s actually Booker T. Washington, isn’t it? But they call it Washington?

Wiley	They call it Booker T. Washington down here, I think.

Finchum	Okay, call it both. Well, do you remember going into that school, Washington School, as a parent?

Wiley	Yeah, I went down there when they’d have school plays and something like that.

Finchum	Well, did they have a pretty good sports team?

Wiley	Yeah, it was pretty good. Had a good football team.

Finchum	So, which children went there?

Wiley	All my four last ones, they went down there. Well, my last two, they didn’t go down there.

Finchum	They switched by then?

Wiley	But two of them went down there.

Finchum	Where did your husband work as a cook?

Wiley	He worked at Taylor’s Café and at a pizza place. Thurmond, I think it named Thurmond Pizza, until he passed away.

Finchum	Where was that?

Wiley	Here in Stillwater. He worked at Smith’s Café, too, down on Main Street. I think by the Stillwater Bank on Main Street.

Finchum	Okay.

Wiley	And Dewey Luper’s, he worked up there.

Finchum	What was his specialty when he cooked?

Wiley	Oh, (laughs) I don’t know.

Finchum	Did he do chicken-fried steak?

Wiley	Yeah, yeah, I think so.

Finchum	Well, in the ’50s, were things pretty separated between the blacks and the whites still, at that point in Stillwater?

Wiley	Yeah, I think so. Yeah. 

Finchum	Separate drinking fountains, do you remember any of that?

Wiley	I don’t know, I didn’t go around that much. I guess there was, but...

Finchum	Too busy taking care of those sorority girls.

Wiley	Yeah. (Laughter) They kept me busy. I didn’t see much of that, you know. 

Finchum	Would you go to the theater?

Wiley	No, I never did go to no show.

Finchum	Okay. And then, where would you go to church?

Wiley	I went down at Lawson Temple Church of God in Christ.

Finchum	When you first moved?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

Finchum	It’s close to the ballparks now. Is that where it’s always been?

Wiley	Yeah, uh huh. Right across the street from the park.

Finchum	Okay. And then, Mount Zion is up on Ninth. Has it always been there, too?

Wiley	No. It was down at Eleventh Street, on the corner of Knoblock.

Finchum	Knoblock and Eleventh.

Wiley	Yeah. 

Finchum	And they moved it. Do you know why?

Wiley	I guess they wanted a bigger place or something. I don’t know.

Finchum	Well, is the first one still there?

Wiley	No, it’s not there.

Finchum	They tore it down?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Well, where you lived, did you have any flooding?

Wiley	Yeah. It flooded in ’56, ’56 and ’59. It flooded ’56 and ’59, cause we had to move out. And that’s one reason we moved. Moved [to] Eleventh, from Jefferson and Twelfth to Eleventh and, (laughs) I can’t think of the street! Eleventh and [West], right there across, right on the corner, down from that school up there, the library.

DeLano	Duck?

Wiley	Yeah, Eleventh and Duck. I moved up there.

Finchum	Okay, kind of got a pretty good idea of where that is, yeah. That puts you a little bit further from the University. You had to walk a little further.

Wiley	Yeah, a little further, but by that time, I was driving. I had a car, got me a car, and I was driving that.

Finchum	Who taught you how to drive?

Wiley	My son-in-law. (Laughter)

Finchum	Was it pretty hard, to learn?

Wiley	No, it wasn’t hard.

Finchum	Stick shift?

Wiley	No, it wasn’t stick shift. 

Finchum	Got an automatic. Hey, me too. (Laughter) So, where do you go to church nowadays?

Wiley	I still go to Lawson Temple.

Finchum	Lawson Temple, okay. And has the community changed much from when you first moved here? 

Wiley	Yeah, it’s changed quite a bit. 

Finchum	Doesn’t seem to be as many families in one spot anymore.

Wiley	No, they’re all over town now. Blacks were all together down there, around the school there.

DeLano	Why do you think that the families got dispersed?

Wiley	What do you mean?

DeLano	Why do you think that the families all lived in one area, then all moved away?

Wiley	I guess that’s what they did when they first came here, I think. They were already like that when I came here. But the people, it started flooding, they started moving out. I mean, that’s why we moved out.

DeLano	So a lot of people, after the floods, moved away from that area by the, now present, library.

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	The urban renewal wasn’t until a little bit later.

Wiley	Yeah. Urban renewal moved a whole lot of them.

Finchum	Well, when did you move in this house, where we are now?

Wiley	I moved here in, I think ’79, ’78, ’78 or ’79.

Finchum	Well, we’re pretty high here. There shouldn’t be any flooding.

Wiley	Yeah. (Laughter)

Finchum	Or we seem to be pretty high.

Wiley	It’s high. I think it’s the highest place up here.

Finchum	(Laughs) Is that why you picked it?

Wiley	(Laughs) Yeah.

Finchum	So, you retired when you were how old?

Wiley	I retired in ’97 from the sorority. And then I came in and worked down here, this restaurant, this nursing home. I worked down there about two years, and then I retired.

Finchum	So you were in your seventies when you decided to kick your heels up a little bit. Well, what would you do for fun as an adult? When you weren’t working, what would you do? Play cards, or go dancing, or…?

Wiley	No, go out. I’d usually go out of town a lot of times, to different churches. I went to a—we have a group of women, the Church of God in Christ ladies. We have a big meeting every year in May, and I go to that meeting every year, to different states. I have been to about every state in the United States. I think I’ve been to forty-five. Different years I go to different places, Texas, Arkansas, all down and out west, and in between. (Laughs)

Finchum	Do you have a favorite spot?

Wiley	Well, we went to Atlanta a lot and Texas. Went to New York, and New Jersey and all that. All them places I’ve been, Denver. I think in Arizona, Wyoming, all them states. Utah.

Finchum	Well, back when you were fixing breakfast for your brothers and sisters, you probably never thought you’d get to some of those places.

Wiley	Yeah, that’s right, but I always go. I still went when I was working at the sorority house. See, the convention, the women’s convention don’t start until about the middle of May, and school be out then and I can go.

Finchum	Would it be a weeklong thing?

Wiley	Uh huh, it’d be a week.

Finchum	And just women?

Wiley	Uh huh. It’d be quite a few men too, bishops and things like that.

Finchum	Well, were you in the choir, or teach Sunday school or…?

Wiley	I was in choir and I taught Bible there, and I was a prison and widow worker. I was a district worker, would go to districts, and the states. I worked in the state, and the district, and our local.

Finchum	Did a little bit of it all, huh?

Wiley	(Laughs) Where I go to them meetings now, I worked there, too. Hospitality.

Finchum	Is Stillwater one of the smallest places represented?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Is it?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

Finchum	So, where do you consider home?

Wiley	I say Okmulgee.

Finchum	Okmulgee? And you were there from the time you were born until you married?

Wiley	We left Okmulgee County…

Finchum	Went to Wagoner.

Wiley	…and went to Muskogee County. And then went to Wagoner County. Then I lived in Tulsa County, and went to Oklahoma County, and came to Payne County.

Finchum	You’ve been to several.
	
Wiley	Yeah, I did. I went to thirteen different, about seven different schools all my life. 

Finchum	Hard to keep up with friends when you had to move, isn’t it?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Well, where did your parents finally settle and stay?

Wiley	Okmulgee.

Finchum	Okmulgee?

Wiley	Uh huh. They retired there in—by ’56, they retired and moved back to Okmulgee.

Finchum	That’s where they’re buried? Are they buried there?

Wiley	Uh huh.

Finchum	So, Stillwater, you’ve lived here longer than anywhere else?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	Do you remember, like, some of the prominent black families that were active in the African American community when you came to Stillwater?

Wiley	Yeah. I know—I think Herman Murray, he worked in the African American project. 

DeLano	So Mr. Murray was a leader in the neighborhood?

Wiley	Yeah, he was doing stuff and worked. I never did work with that black stuff like that.

Finchum	Well, was the minister of your church pretty, was he in charge of the community?

Wiley	Yeah, he was a, Lawson.

Finchum	Lawson.

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Okay.

Wiley	He didn’t participate in much of that.

DeLano	And so, when did Church of God in Christ become known as Lawson Temple?

Wiley	It was, that church been there about ninety-something years, but his dad was the pastor. And after his dad passed, [Reverend Fred D. Lawson, Jr.], he took it. And when he passed, I think they put Lawson Temple.

DeLano	In memory of him?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	And so, did his father, Mr. Lawson, start the church?

Wiley	Uh huh, in, yeah, in 1924.

DeLano	So, Church of God in Christ started in 1924 with Mr. Lawson, Sr.

Wiley	Senior, Senior Lawson, uh huh. And Junior took it over in ’56, I think. 

DeLano	And so, who was the pastor after the second Mr. Lawson?

Wiley	Johnson, the one that’s there now. 

DeLano	So, he’s been there quite a while, then, as pastor. 

Wiley	Yeah, Johnson. He’s been there about ten years. About twelve years.

DeLano	Oh! So, the younger Mr. Lawson was there for quite a while?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	Do you remember what his first name was?

Wiley	Fred, junior. Fred Douglas, Jr. 

DeLano	And were there a lot of businesses in the neighborhood where you lived there, that were owned by African American families?

Wiley	Mmm, I think one or two. I think one or two. Mr. Thomas he had a café when I came here.

DeLano	Mrs. Bailey’s [Gloria Thomas-Bailey] father?

Wiley	Yeah, I think.

DeLano	So he had a café, and there were a few other businesses owned by black families?

Wiley	I think Murray had, I think he had a business, too, at one time. I think that’s about all.

DeLano	So, where would you do things like get your groceries?

Wiley	There was a grocery store here on Tenth and Main. That’s where I got mine at. [And there was Mr. Johnson’s grocery store on Twelfth and Hester.]

DeLano	And so sometimes you would visit the stores on Main Street?

Wiley	Uh huh, and this is W & W [Food Mart], down here on Seventh and Duck. 

DeLano	Kind of where Strode’s [Funeral Home] is?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	The Annex, and did you feel welcome there?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	And were there any times where you didn’t feel welcome where people who were white were, here in Stillwater?

Wiley	I don’t recall. 

DeLano	I know Mrs. Bailey says that she didn’t recall, really, there being very much in the way of racial tensions. Is that your thought, or do you recall any instances?

Wiley	Yeah. I don’t either. 

Finchum	Where would you go to the bank?

Wiley	I went up to the First National Bank, up here on, wherever it is now, that bank, has that drive-in bank right behind.

Finchum	I know where you’re talking about, but I don’t know what it’s called now. 

Wiley	Yeah, it’s still the bank that I had when I first came here. Still got it.

DeLano	Wow, loyal customer. (Laughter) Well, how about your kids? When they were young, your first years in Stillwater, what sort of things would they do for fun or recreation?

Wiley	They played ball. I have one son, he was in everything. He was in wrestling, football, baseball, and one run track. They all kept busy.

DeLano	And so, you said then that you had kids who did go to Washington when it was segregated?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	Then they made the jump over to the integrated schools?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	Do you remember what it was like for them, when they made that change?

Wiley	No, I didn’t see no difference.

DeLano	So not, they weren’t nervous or…

Wiley	Mm-mm.

DeLano	…or scared or anything?

Finchum	How many boys and girls, you had six total?

Wiley	Yeah. One girl and five boys.

Finchum	Oh, okay. That’s why sports were so, you were so busy with that.

DeLano	And so, they ended up graduating or going to school and graduating here in Stillwater?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	And did any of the kids stay here in Stillwater?

Wiley	Well, one of them, two of them still here.

Finchum	They would consider Stillwater home?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	Mrs. Bailey had mentioned something about another park that was in that area in the neighborhood where you lived, that isn’t there now. Do you recall that park that was maybe on Fourteenth Street?

Wiley	Fourteenth Street? Yeah, there’s one down there. Fourteenth? There’s a park across the street from the church, the Church of God in Christ. One down here on Twelfth Street, I think. I ain’t never been to that. I’ve been to one here across the street from the church. Oh yeah, and they had another good—Mrs. Johnson, they had a grocery store, too, here.

DeLano	And Mrs. Johnson, the Johnsons, they were an African American family?

Wiley	Yeah, uh huh. 

DeLano	And so they had a grocery store, and do you remember where it was located?

Wiley	It was on Hester, Twelfth and Hester.

DeLano	And so did you say Mrs. Johnson was the one who owned it?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	So a woman owned the business?

Wiley	Well, she had a husband who was with her then.

DeLano	Gotcha.

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	And so, what were the lives like for women then? Did you feel like you had a lot of freedom to do things that you wanted to do, or did you feel like you were kind of tied to your house, and to taking care of the family?

Wiley	I think they did what they wanted to. (Laughs) I was busy working three meals. I didn’t, I just went to church and back to work. 

Finchum	Well, when your children needed disciplined, who would do that? You or your husband?

Wiley	Both of us. My husband worked at night mostly, and I worked at day.

Finchum	Well, would they go to, I think it was the Crystal Plunge, the swimming pool?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Would they get to do that?

Wiley	Mmhmm. Yeah, they went there, to the swimming pool. Went to play ball and different things. 

DeLano	Did you ever get to meet or talk very much with the principal of Washington, Mr. Ward?

Wiley	Principal, no, I didn’t. 

DeLano	That’s probably good. That means you didn’t ever get called in, (laughter) for kids. 

Finchum	You remember anything in particular about the neighborhood when you first moved? Were people friendly to you and….

Wiley	I’d say no, they weren’t friendly. (Laughs)

Finchum	They weren’t? (Laughs)

Wiley	Hm-mm.

Finchum	Newcomer?

Wiley	Yes.

DeLano	Did you end up making friends, though?

Wiley	Yeah, I made friends out of church people.

DeLano	And so, who were the names of some of the families in Lawson Temple, other than the pastor’s family?

Wiley	There’s the Thames, the Thames and the Linzys. 

Finchum	Do you recognize those names?

DeLano	I do recognize Linzy. Mrs. Bailey was able to identify him in some of the nice football pictures, one of the sons, yeah.

Finchum	And the other name was Thame?

Wiley	Uh huh. T-H-A-M-E-S.

Finchum	Thames.

DeLano	And so, what would a church service look like, on a Sunday?

Wiley	It was good. Weren’t many people there, but it was good.

DeLano	So it had a small congregation?

Wiley	Mmhmm, yeah.

DeLano	So you’d start out with, what? Sunday school?

Wiley	Mmhmm, Sunday school.

DeLano	And then what would happen?

Wiley	Then, we have our church service. And then, we come back at night, at evening, about six o’clock, and have Willing Worker.

DeLano	Have a what?

Wiley	Willing Worker. That’s a class for the young people. I lost a tooth. It lasts about ten o’clock. Then we go different places, Langston, Meridian, and have church every first Saturday of the month. They come here, we go there, one Saturday. Just change around like that. 

DeLano	And did you have other days where you went to the church?

Wiley	Yeah. We had church on Wednesday and Friday night and Sunday, Sunday night.

DeLano	And so, I was familiar with those Wednesday services. What would you all do on Friday evenings?

Wiley	Oh, we’d have a regular church service. They called that pastoral night. 

DeLano	And did you have wedding ceremonies there?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

DeLano	Do you remember any that were back in the ’50s, kind of, what it looked like or what the ceremonies were like?

Wiley	No. We had anniversaries, different things like that. There was revivals and stuff. They was good, too. Revivals, anniversaries.

DeLano	Would the revivals be inside the church or outside the church?

Wiley	Inside.

DeLano	And what would happen at a revival?
	
Wiley	Well, people come to the Lord and some other things.

Finchum	The minister would be from another church, typically, for a revival?

Wiley	Uh huh, yeah. 

Finchum	Lot of good music?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	You have a favorite church song? What’s your favorite?

Wiley	A whole lot of them. (Laughs) Let’s see, “There’s Something Within Me,” and “Through it All,” and I can’t think of another one.

Finchum	Well, that’s okay. 

Wiley	“Precious Lord,” “Just Another Day.”

Finchum	“Just Another Day.” Not “Amazing Grace,” huh?

Wiley	Yeah, “Amazing Grace.” (Laughter)

DeLano	And were baptisms held inside the church?

Wiley	No. We went to the Baptist church to be baptized. They had one at their church.

DeLano	They had a baptismal?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	And that’s the First Baptist Church, over by the courthouse?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	And so they would occasionally let everyone come over for baptisms?

Wiley	Mmhmm. 

DeLano	Well, do you remember voting?

Wiley	Yeah.

DeLano	Do you happen to remember any of the times when you first voted?

Wiley	First time I voted? I think I was—I don’t know whether I was in Oklahoma City or not, or Tulsa. But, I don’t know, (laughs) but I remember voting here, too. I don’t remember the first place or time.

DeLano	Were there any people who were in the African American community who were political or politicians? Anyone who was running for offices?

Wiley	Yeah, there were….

Finchum	Well, do you remember when John F. Kennedy was shot?

Wiley	Mmhmm. 

Finchum	And how that impacted the community?

Wiley	Yeah, I was at the sorority house. I was on a break when I first heard it, sitting in my room at the sorority house when I heard that he got shot. 

Finchum	How did the community respond or react?

Wiley	Everybody was sad. 

DeLano	And do you recall the same with Martin Luther King?

Wiley	Yeah, I was at work.

DeLano	And what did you think about Mr. King?

Wiley	He, I think he was all right. 

DeLano	And what did you think about Mr. Obama becoming president?

Wiley	I think that was nice. I think he was real smart, and he couldn’t do what he wanted to do. Every time he did something, they were against him. I think he has got this peace in him and that’s kept going.

Finchum	Probably never thought you would see the day when he was elected.

Wiley	Mmhmm. 

DeLano	Well, we’ve tired you out. (Laughter)

Finchum	Anything we need to ask that we don’t know to ask? Any special memories of Stillwater?

Wiley	(Laughs) No.

Finchum	Of OSU?

Wiley	No.

Finchum	Did you get to see any of the girls get thrown in Theta Pond when they got engaged?

Wiley	(Laughter) No.

Finchum	They did some of that! Well, I guess more to the boys than the girls.

Wiley	Yeah, I think so. (Laughter)

Finchum	Well, and they had streaking while you were there, too, right?

Wiley	Yeah, they had it. (Laughter)

Finchum	You’ve seen some changes on campus, too, I’d say. 

Wiley	Yeah, a whole lot of them. Yeah, I had a sister go up there and a niece. I told them they won’t know the campus now if they go up there. So many things have changed.

DeLano	What’s the biggest change that stands out to you?

Wiley	The way they all change, different things. 

Finchum	Well, when you first got here, they were just finishing building the Student Union, I guess.

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	In ’56, ’57, through there.

Wiley	I haven’t been back up there. I just pass through there now.

Finchum	It looks pretty now. They’ve worked on the landscaping a whole lot.

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	When was the last time you were at the sorority house?

Wiley	I haven’t—I was up there once. They haven’t changed it. They have something about coming in, cooking. I don’t know what, but they don’t have no cooks like they used to have. 

Finchum	No, that’s what I’ve heard, too. Well we’ll finish by asking, how do you want to be remembered?

Wiley	Oh, I don’t know. (Laughs)

Finchum	As a good cook, a good mother, a good friend?

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Good Christian?

Wiley	Yeah, that’s right. That’s all right.

Finchum	All of the above?

Wiley	Mmhmm. Yeah. I remember all the girls, I like to sit here and think about it. See that? (Gestures) From a little girl that talks about when she gets old and fat, think about her. I don’t know where—I wonder where she’s at now. 

Finchum	She’s probably wondering how you’re doing. 

Wiley	Yeah. She said when she gets old and fat, she’d think about the food and stuff and things she did.

DeLano	Are you looking for the letter behind you?

Finchum	The framed piece?

Wiley	Yeah, it’s…

Finchum	Are you looking for this, here?

Wiley	Yes. You can read if you want to.

Finchum	“Ode to Lois.” 

DeLano	(Gasps) Aw!

Finchum	I’ll read for the recording. 

Funny how it seems only yesterday, when I was a pledge, coming over to the house for Monday night dinner. And on one of those many Monday nights, I’m not quite sure which, for it’s all rather vague now, I realized that our dinner did not magically appear and disappear. But that busy young men, in white coats, brought in our plates, answered innumerable bells, listened to songs they had probably heard many more times than I, and sometimes, even seemed to be enjoying themselves. This I’ve learned later, is carefully concealed, except for certain times…

Remember the trivia-Jeopardy bowl? 
It was a marathon one;
how those buzzers buzzed,
we had lots of fun.

And the carefully planned sneaks, 
ah the nostalgia of it all;
from pledges to seniors, 
and even to houseboys I recall.

Lois and her quiet ways
never had much to say.
But she was always there, 
good as gold, 
to fill our stomachs
with all they could hold. 

Houseboy entertainment
was out of sight;
but it was climaxed
on Houseboy Awards Banquet night. 

Yes, the Academy has outdone itself;
it’s a fine group of men 
we call our houseboys
and I consider my friends. 

So from the bottom of my Gama Phi heart, 
I wish you good luck, and with that, I depart. 
And someday when you are old and fat, 
maybe you’ll read this and remember that, 
somewhere in some far off school,
sits a schoolmarm oh so cool;
thinking of her college years, 
wiping away sentimental tears;
and in her memories, you’ll remain,
I hope in yours she’ll do the same. 

Love, Eowana 

Wiley	Eowana.

Finchum	Is that how you say that?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

Finchum	That was a long time ago! May of 1969.

Wiley	(Laughs)

Finchum	“Lois and her quiet ways.” Were you really quiet?

Wiley	I don’t know.

Finchum	Didn’t fuss too much, huh?

Wiley	(Laughs) No.

Finchum	Well that was very nice. I like that. That’s a good way to end, don’t you think?

Wiley	Mmhmm.

Finchum	Well, we appreciate you talking with us. Anything else you want to add before we flip our off button?

Wiley	No.

Finchum	No. Been a pretty good life?

Wiley	Yeah, I’ve had a pretty good life. Pretty good vacations, I went when I was able, you know. I have a sister who said when she retires, she’s going to travel, too. But when she retired, she was sick, and she couldn’t get to do like I did. I put mine in there while I was young and worked too. I put all mine together, working, and went too.

Finchum	Well, you had to go for her. 

Wiley	Yeah.

Finchum	Well, I’m glad. We thank you very much for talking with us.

Wiley	Yeah, I’m glad you all came by.

------- End of interview -------
