Diane Hubbard

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Tanya Finchum 
August 9, 2014
Vinita, Oklahoma


Finchum 	Today is August 9, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum, and I’m with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in Vinita, Oklahoma to talk to graduates or attendees of Attucks School here in Vinita. Today I am with Diane Willis Hubbard. Thank you for having us.

Hubbard 	You’re welcome.

Finchum 	Thank you for coming. Let’s start with learning a little bit about you. When and where were you born?

Hubbard 	I was born in Vinita, Oklahoma, 1947, February 16. 

Finchum 	What did your parents do for a living?

Hubbard 	My dad, he worked as a cleaner and presser of clothes. My mom, she was a LPN. 

Finchum 	Did you have brothers and sisters?

Hubbard 	Yes, I have two brothers and one sister. Dwain Willis, Jr., everybody knows him as Buzz. My sister is Jennifer Willis. My other brother is Dale Willis. 

Finchum 	Where do you fall in the order? 

Hubbard 	I’m the oldest.

Finchum 	You’re the oldest.

Hubbard 	I’m the oldest.

Finchum 	Were you the bossy one?

Hubbard 	Yes. (Laughter)

Finchum 	Did you live in town or out in the country?

Hubbard 	We lived in town.

Finchum 	In town.

Hubbard 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Describe your house you grew up in?

Hubbard 	My house I grew up in was a three-story, I think seventeen rooms. It was on South Second Street. Everybody came there to play and go on. It was my grandmother and grandfather’s house, which he built for a hospital. He was a doctor. He got sick and passed away. I think it was in 1931 or ’33, I can’t quite remember. So my grandmother turned it into a room and board, and the whole family lived there. The whole family has been living there for I don’t know how long, but anyway, we are all on our own now. My brother still lives there. 

Finchum 	Seventeen rooms? So you just divided them up between the families, different families?

Hubbard 	Mostly my mother and father and the kids stayed there, but we always had other relatives come in and spend the summer. Every holiday we’d all get together and just have a good time. 

Finchum 	Where had he learned to be a doctor? 

Hubbard 	Him?

Finchum 	Yes, your grandparent.

Hubbard 	He went to Meharry College in Nashville, Tennessee.

Finchum 	Was he from Tennessee?

Hubbard 	He was from Mississippi. 

Finchum 	Mississippi. Okay.

Hubbard	I can’t think of that little town’s name. I look it up all the time. It was a small town in Mississippi.

Finchum 	How did he end up in Vinita?

Hubbard 	You know, I never did really know, but well in a way yes I do know. Somebody contacted them and told them that they needed a Negro doctor in Vinita and so he came. He checked it out and decided to stay here. 

Finchum 	He built the hospital. Was it in operation for any length of time?

Hubbard 	Well, as a doctor’s office at first. Then he, you know, built on to make more rooms to make more room for the hospital. That’s when he got pneumonia and he passed away.

Finchum 	How many children had he had?

Hubbard 	It was nine of them. 

Finchum 	Seventeen rooms came in handy then.

Hubbard 	Yeah. (Laughs) The oldest was Louis Ryan. He was a teacher in Vinita. He was a science teacher and a coach. He’s in the Coach’s Hall of Fame and now they are trying to get him into the Educator’s Hall of Fame. Let’s see, who is next? Aunt Marilyn, who is the only one that is still living. She lives in Rockville, Maryland. She’s ninety-two years old. She worked at the Library of Congress until she retired. Then Uncle Davis. He’s a research chemist. He lived in Alabama at that time, then moved to Maryland. Uncle Cecil, he was a pilot. He taught flying. He taught the—where are the black fliers?

Finchum 	The Tuskegee airmen.

Hubbard 	Yes, the Tuskegee group, he taught them. He lived in Nashville, Tennessee. Then there is Uncle Herbert, he was doctor. He died probably about ten years ago. He lived in Atlanta, Georgia. My Aunt Juanita, she was a home ec teacher here in Vinita. Aunt Laura, she passed away in 1947. I don’t know what, I don’t think Aunt Laura did anything. She was pretty young when she passed away. Then, there was my Aunt Bee. She was a banker. Then there was my mother, LPN. I think that’s all of them.

Finchum 	All very educated and…

Hubbard 	All of them were.

Finchum	…and ventured away from Vinita then.

Hubbard 	All except my mother and Uncle Louis.

Finchum 	Had some of them gone to Attucks?

Hubbard 	All of them did.

Finchum 	All of them had.

Hubbard 	All of them did, all of them graduated from Attucks.

Finchum 	Okay. That’s impressive, too. 

Hubbard 	My Uncle Louis even taught at Attucks before they integrated. 

Finchum 	Was he one of the favorite teachers I hear?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. (Laughs) Then he moved on to Vinita High School.

Finchum 	Helped make that transition better for others?

Hubbard 	Yeah.

Finchum 	When did you go to Attucks?

Hubbard 	From 1951 to 1956 I think is when it was. We used to go to the school so often. I was five years old, the girls would come by the house and pick us up to take us to school with them, you know, the older girls. As they said, since we were going there every day, we may as well enroll. So they enrolled me at five years old. (Laughs)

Finchum 	And you were ready?

Hubbard 	I was ready.

Finchum 	Who was your teacher? Do you remember?

Hubbard 	Oh lord yes.

Finchum 	First grade teacher?

Hubbard 	First grade teacher was Daisy Barker. She taught first and second grade. Then Ella Mae Harriss taught third and fourth grade. Mrs. Hardrick, I can’t think of her first name, taught fifth and sixth grade. That’s when we integrated, after the sixth grade.

Finchum 	Do you remember that time period any? Switching to Vinita?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah.

Finchum 	Was it hard?

Hubbard 	Well, at first we didn’t want to go, you know. We got used to it. Everybody was friendly and everything. We all became friends and still are. Some of us are still friends.

Finchum 	How many students would be in your class at Attucks?

Hubbard 	Just in our grade? I think we had just about the biggest grade which was about, I think there was twelve of us.

Finchum 	Pretty small.

Hubbard 	Yeah.

Finchum 	A good number to work with. 

Hubbard 	Yeah. We all graduated together, maybe with the exception of two or three that had moved. 

Finchum 	What would you do for like recess?

Hubbard 	Oh, we’d go out and play. They had playground equipment. We’d play ring-around-the-roses, or volleyball, or on the swings, and the merry-go-rounds, and the slip-n-slides, get all skinned up. (Laughs) We had good times. We really did.

Finchum 	Did it have a cafeteria?

Hubbard 	No, huh-uh. We had to either bring our lunch or we went home for lunch.

Finchum 	Which did you do?

Hubbard 	Most of the times I went home for lunch.

Finchum 	It was walking distance?

Hubbard 	Yeah, it was walking distance.

Finchum 	What would you have?

Hubbard 	Usually a sandwich, or sometimes my mother would fix a full meal at noon time.

Finchum 	So you were close enough to walk. When would school start? At eight or nine?

Hubbard 	Nine. 

Finchum 	Nine?

Hubbard 	Yeah, it started at nine. 

Finchum 	And go to? Finish up at?

Hubbard 	Four o’clock. 

Finchum 	A little longer. Interesting. What were the school colors?

Hubbard 	Blue and white.

Finchum 	Blue and white. And the name, team name? 

Hubbard 	Warriors, Attucks Warriors.

Finchum 	Did you attend many of the sporting events?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. 

Finchum 	Well, since your uncle coached, I guess you did.

Hubbard 	Yeah, he coached my dad, They had one of the best basketball teams in Oklahoma.

Finchum 	And your dad was on the team?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh.

Finchum 	What was his name?

Hubbard 	Dwain Willis.

Finchum 	What position did he play?

Hubbard 	You know, I don’t know. I was little. (Laughs)

Finchum 	You were little. Okay. Understand.

Hubbard 	I wasn’t born. I don’t know. I’m thinking about the baseball. He used to play baseball really good. They said he was one of the best baseball players that there was, and he should have been in the big league.

Finchum 	Well, what stopped him? 

Hubbard 	Well, the integration thing. They say he should have been right up there with Jackie Robinson.

Finchum 	Did any of those skills pass on down to the next generation?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. We all played ball, softball or baseball or whatever, but we all did. 

Finchum 	Did you have to work when you were in school?

Hubbard 	No.

Finchum 	Any chores at home?

Hubbard 	Oh yes. (Laughs) We did. We washed, we washed dishes, we cleaned, we ironed. I mean we ironed. You ironed sheets and everything. My grandmother would sit right there and watch you, and you better not put a wrinkle in there. She would make you sprinkle it down and get it out.

Finchum 	Starch them too, or just iron?

Hubbard 	She would starch them. Yes, sprinkle them down and put them in the refrigerator overnight and then we would iron them the next day.

Finchum 	In the refrigerator?

Hubbard 	Yeah, to keep them fresh. Uh-huh.

Finchum 	You don’t do that today, do you?

Hubbard 	Oh no. Very seldom do I iron anything. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Were the irons electric?

Hubbard 	Yeah, they were electric then. We had an old wringer type washing machine, where you had to have two tubs of water for rinsing and then your wringer like washer. Then we hung them on the line.

Finchum 	Then you pressed them.

Hubbard 	Then we pressed them. I was so glad when we got a dryer. (Laughs) I remember the first TV we even got.

Finchum 	Really?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. It was in the early ’50s. 

Finchum 	How many stations did you get?

Hubbard 	I think three. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Did all the neighbors come to watch too? 

Hubbard 	Yeah, yeah, yeah, then everybody started getting TVs. We listened to the radio a lot.

Finchum 	Music?

Hubbard 	Yes. I mean all the kids in the neighborhood and out of the neighborhood would come to our house, because we had a basketball goal in the back, then on the south side of the house, we always played ball. We always had something going. We had two big porch swings. We’d break them down all the time, swinging so high. My cousins and I, there was three of us that stayed just real close, you know. We’d get in the living room and we’d play the piano and sing and open the window so everybody could hear us. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Could you carry a tune?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah we could, yes we could. It was really—we were good.

Finchum 	Do you remember anything in particular that you want to sing for us?

Hubbard 	No, (laughter), not now.

Finchum 	Not even one little line. 

Hubbard 	Not now. 

Finchum 	As a teenager, would you go on dates? 

Hubbard 	Yeah, we would occasionally. 

Finchum 	What would you do?

Hubbard 	Go to the movie. That’s about it.

Finchum 	Here in Vinita?

Hubbard 	You could go to a movie or you could go to a ballgame or something.

Finchum 	Was the movie house integrated?

Hubbard 	Well, we had to sit up in the balcony and the whites sit down below, but really we could see better, you know, from the balcony. 

Finchum 	They would make sure that you didn’t sit downstairs?

Hubbard 	Yes. 

Finchum 	Someone there to watch?

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	Huh.

Hubbard 	Somebody stood right there.

Finchum 	Times have changed, thank goodness.

Hubbard 	I know it, I know it.

Finchum 	Have any issues with going into restaurants or places like that in town?

Hubbard 	You know, I never did, but there was one restaurant, still is here, Clanton’s. They would have the black people to sit in the back. They had a place for them in the back. I never would go in there. My mother, she would not go in there, even if she was still living today, she wouldn’t go just because of that, you know. We didn’t go to too many restaurants. My dad, when he was off on the weekends, we’d get up early, and we’d go out for breakfast or something like that.

Finchum 	With Vinita being here, were there rival teams for Attucks? Any rival teams?

Hubbard 	Yes, yes.

Finchum 	Like who would they play? Who would be their biggest…

Hubbard 	They would play like Pawhuska, Nowata, Muskogee. I can’t remember all of them.

Finchum 	You’d have to travel a little ways.

Hubbard 	I think Tulsa. Yeah, they traveled a lot. They traveled a whole lot. My uncle would pack them just about all in his car. They didn’t have buses. His car and maybe another car would take them. 

Finchum 	The basketball team?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh.

Finchum 	That’s a lot of responsibility.

Hubbard 	Yes it is.

Finchum 	He probably fed them, too. 

Hubbard 	Yes. My uncle’s sister-in-law had a restaurant next door to us, and she would feed the team.

Finchum 	And they won state champions a couple times?

Hubbard 	Yeah, yeah.

Finchum 	Did the town celebrate? Or I guess the school did at least.

Hubbard 	The school did. 

Finchum 	Good times.

Hubbard 	Yeah, we did. We really had good times.

Finchum 	Describe a typical day for you. Take us through the building. Where would your classes be?

Hubbard 	Well, my first grade class, as you come up the steps to your right, it was the first door on your right. My third and fourth grade was about two doors down from it. Then my fifth and sixth grade was across the hall from it. Then we had a big gymnasium. We had a big trophy case, and it was full. 

Finchum 	Mostly sports or some academic, too?

Hubbard 	All sports, all sports, but I’ll tell you one thing, you learned. I mean, there wasn’t no playing around when it came to learning. They would spank you.  (Laughs)

Finchum 	Girls, too?

Hubbard 	Yeah. Well, we had one teacher, she would take your hand and she would bend it back like that, and boy, that old paddle. So we tried to stay away from the paddling. (Laughs) I mean they would make you stay after school, you know. They would teach you. My uncle would even come over to the house and help me with my homework and stuff.

Finchum 	Did he do that for others, or just because you were a relative?

Hubbard 	Just because I was a relative, I think. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Did it have a library? Do you remember if it had a library?

Hubbard 	Yes, it was very small, I think, very small library. 

Finchum 	Was it just for the students, or could people in the community use it?

Hubbard 	No, just for students. 

Finchum 	Just for students. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. 

Finchum 	Were most of the classes, high school classes, geared toward getting you into college or into a trade?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. You know, most of the people that graduated from Attucks went to college. I know my whole family did.

Finchum 	They came from educated people, too.

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Every one of them went.

Finchum 	It was important. And was church equally important?

Hubbard 	Oh yes, yes. We went to church all the time. If we didn’t go to church, we couldn’t go to the movie. (Laughs)

Finchum 	So who was the disciplinarian at home? Your mom or your dad?

Hubbard 	Well, my mom kind of ruled the roost, I think. (Laughs) All Daddy had to do was look at us, you know. He would give you a certain look, and you would straighten up. They were very good parents, very good.

Finchum 	Did you all meet around the dinner table? Or supper table I guess I should say. Which did you call it, dinner or supper?

Hubbard 	Dinner. Yeah, we all had to sit at the table and eat together.

Finchum 	Would you have lunch—oh you came home for lunch. 

Hubbard 	Yeah, we’d have breakfast. My dad, he would always cook breakfast. Lunch, we had three meals a day, plus snacks. I mean, we always had plenty of food. You can look at us today and tell. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Well once you got out of Attucks, you went to Vinita High School, and graduated then?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh.

Finchum 	What year?

Hubbard 	Sixty-four. 

Finchum 	Did you have a favorite subject?

Hubbard 	Well, what did I like? I like typing. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Not math?

Hubbard 	Not math, not science. I kind of like history. 

Finchum 	Had you planned on going to college yourself, at that point?

Hubbard 	Well, yeah. 

Finchum 	Were you?

Hubbard 	Yeah. My aunt had a real estate business. One of my aunts on my dad’s side, she had a real estate business in Tulsa. She wanted me to move there and be her secretary, you know. So I did, that’s when I enrolled into Draughon’s [Business College].

Finchum 	It was a two-year program?

Hubbard 	Yeah, uh-huh. 

Finchum 	When you finished that, what did you do? 

Hubbard 	I came back to Vinita. I worked for the Neighborhood Youth Corp. It’s where kids that were dropping out of school, we would get jobs for them but they had to attend night classes. We would take them on field trips and things like that. Then where did I work? I think it was Sequoyah Furniture Company. Then it phased out, and I worked at Cinch, its electronic connectors, for a while, but I didn’t like that at all. (Laughs) One of my mother’s friends, she was the director of nursing at Eastern State Hospital. I came in one night and I was just a fussing, “I hate that job, I hate that job.” She says, “Well come and go to work for me.” (Laughs) I said, “Doing what?” “Secretary work like you supposed to.” She hired me at Eastern State, and I worked out there for twenty-eight years. Retired in 2000. 

Finchum 	I don’t know a great deal about Eastern State. Can you tell us a little bit about it?

Hubbard 	It’s a mental hospital.

Finchum 	Mental hospital.

Hubbard 	It’s a mental hospital.

Finchum 	Did they have many patients then?

Hubbard 	When I first went there, they had like 2000 patients. When I left there, they had a maximum of about 200. Big change

Finchum 	Big change.

Hubbard 	And it’s really changed now. They don’t even have civil patients anymore. It’s all forensic, all criminals. 

Finchum 	So when did you[start] there?
.

Hubbard 	Well, I started in 1972.

Finchum 	So you saw lots of changes during that time?

Hubbard 	Yeah. 

Finchum 	Would they accept blacks, too, at that time?

Hubbard 	Yes, but they did have a black mental institution in Taft, Oklahoma. Then they started integrating them, too. They cleaned out Taft, and brought all of them to Vinita. What was I going to tell you? (Laughs)

Finchum 	Closed Taft, if they brought them here.

Hubbard 	Yeah, they closed Taft, but they opened it up with something else. It think it was a prison or something. I think that’s what they have down there. They do have a prison down there now.

Finchum 	Well, did you feel safe working there with the mental patients?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. Yeah, I loved it. I really did.

Finchum 	Did they have things for them to do like…

Hubbard 	Oh yeah.

Finchum 	… like gardening or whatever it might be? 

Hubbard 	They had a full farm…

Finchum 	Farm?

Hubbard 	…when I first got there. I mean they grew all the vegetables. They had cattle and stuff like that. They had hogs, you know. They butchered all their meats and grew their vegetables. You know, they would have to buy some stuff. The patients worked. They paid them a certain amount of money. They had other jobs for them to do, too. Since it was a state institution, it really didn’t cost the patients anything if they could not pay.  I’ll tell you, it was a good place to work, really. It really was. Then it just got, I don’t know just... (Laughs)

Finchum 	Things change…

Hubbard 	Things change, because we just used to enjoy going to work, really enjoy it. 

Finchum 	You were a …

Hubbard 	I worked in the nursing office. 

Finchum 	Okay.

Hubbard 	Then I worked in the EEG/EKG department. I’ve been everywhere out there. Then they had this, what they called the Ambulance Service where we transported patients to like Oklahoma City, Little Rock, the one in Topeka, Kansas, just all over. We’d take them to Norman for medical help. Well, they wanted to know if I wanted to do that. So, I did that, oh lord, for about ten years and then I quit. (Laughs) Two months and I was back. I quit and moved to Tulsa. I worked for AVIS Reservation Center. Well, I just didn’t like that Tulsa traffic and stuff, so I came back to Vinita and back out to the hospital, and I started working in the medical records. I spent my last ten years say in medical records. 

Finchum 	Vinita’s home. You kept coming back.

Hubbard 	Vinita’s home.

Finchum 	Didn’t ever want to live anywhere else?

Hubbard 	No, I really didn’t.

Finchum 	Did you meet your husband here?

Hubbard 	He was from Vinita.

Finchum 	How did you meet?

Hubbard 	Oh we just grew up together.

Finchum 	Grew up together.

Hubbard 	Yes. Grew up together. He went into the service and was gone a long time, and he lived up in Pennsylvania. He would come home all the time, you know. Finally, we got together. Finally. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Got married when? What year?

Hubbard 	Ninety-six.

Finchum 	Ninety-six.

Hubbard 	Ninety-six.

Finchum 	Not too long ago.

Hubbard 	No, and he passed away.

Finchum 	Was he in the Air Force or Army?

Hubbard 	Army. He had a career. Then he worked as a civilian on an Army base after he retired from the Army. He retired from that and came back to Vinita.

Finchum 	So he had gone to Attucks, too? 

Hubbard 	Yes, oh yeah. 

Finchum 	Everything comes back to there. It was a very good school I understand.

Hubbard 	It was a good school.

Finchum 	Did you do the “Pledge of allegiance” and say a prayer and all that in the morning?

Hubbard 	Oh yes, and say a prayer every morning. We sure did.

Finchum  	Did you have programs like at Christmas?

Hubbard 	All the time, yes. We even entertained the mental patients out there. We’d do little skits for them and sing for them. Things like that.

Finchum 	Had buses to take you there or did you have to recruit parents?

Hubbard 	A bus took us, a bus took us. Yeah.

Finchum 	The school had electricity?

Hubbard 	Oh yes.

Finchum 	No air conditioning?

Hubbard 	No. Had that heat though (laughs), those old radiators, you know. All those, oh they’d be so hot, you know. No air. 

Finchum 	Would you have spelling bees?

Hubbard 	No, we never did have a spelling bee, that I know of. No, I don’t think we did.

Finchum 	Debate teams?

Hubbard 	No.

Finchum 	PEP clubs?

Hubbard 	Yep.

Finchum 	Cheerleaders I guess, PEP clubs?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. My mother, she was a cheerleader. 

Finchum 	She had gone there, too, I guess.

Hubbard 	Yeah, they all went there. 

Finchum 	Oh…

Hubbard 	Uh-huh.

Finchum 	The school was important for the community wasn’t it?

Hubbard 	Oh yes, yes it was.

Finchum 	When they closed it and separated, did that impact the community much?

Hubbard 	Not too bad, no. You know, they still kept the school open, but they only had grade school and it was integrated also. They changed the name of the school to South East. Then, they eventually turned it back to Attucks. 

Finchum 	Interesting. Have any idea where that name came from? 

Hubbard 	Attucks? Yes. There was a guy named Attucks. Christopher Attucks, I’m trying to think, what did he do? I can’t remember. That’s who it was named for, Christopher Attucks. 

Finchum 	Was your mother a homeroom mother?

Hubbard 	Yes, oh yeah. They had the PTA.

Finchum 	An active one?

Hubbard 	Very active.

Finchum 	Would they have fall carnivals? 

Hubbard 	No, we never did have a carnival. 

Finchum 	Art classes?

Hubbard 	No.

Finchum 	No? No art? Just music.

Hubbard	Just music.

Finchum	And math and science.

Hubbard 	And math and science and plenty of it. Home ec…

Finchum 	When they made you switch over to Vinita, did you ride a bus?

Hubbard 	No, we walked.

Finchum 	You walked?

Hubbard 	Yes, it wasn’t that far, maybe about twenty minutes. Then, if it rained or snowed or whatever, my dad would take us.

Finchum 	Had a car?

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	By that time.

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	Did your mother sew much?

Hubbard 	All the time. She used to make all of our clothes, except the boys. She made the girls’ clothes.

Finchum 	Didn’t do boys?

Hubbard 	No. I think that’s where I learned to sew. I used to make all my clothes. She would cut her own patterns and stuff out. She would look in the catalog, and she would see something, and she’d cut that pattern out and make it. She was a pretty talented lady. (Laughs) And one of the best cooks that there is.

Finchum 	What was her favorite dish?

Hubbard 	You know, I don’t know what her favorite dish was, but she loved to get in there and make just a plain old cake. That was the best tasting cake. 

Finchum 	From scratch?

Hubbard 	From scratch. No recipes or nothing. She never used a recipe. Never.

Finchum 	Did they have a garden?

Hubbard 	Uh, did we have a garden? Yes we did. All the salad. You’d have to see. You’d have to see the lots. All the south side and all the west side, garden. Finally, my mother got tired of the garden, so she planted a bunch of fruit trees out there in the back. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Well, she still had to can I guess. 

Hubbard 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Can the fruit.

Hubbard 	At least she didn’t have to tend to them like she did the garden. Well, we did too. We’d have to get out there and pull weeds and stuff, too.

Finchum 	She did a lot of canning and your grandmother, too?

Hubbard 	We all did. We all helped. I’d get tired of peeling those old peaches. I’d reach up under that water and squeeze them trying to get rid of them. I was ornery. (Laughs)

Finchum 	You solved problems creatively.

Hubbard 	Yes. 

Finchum 	Being ornery. They had the big cellar then if she canned a lot?

Hubbard 	Well, they had what they called a smokehouse a long time ago. They even smoked their meats and stuff. That was before I came along. They would smoke their meats and stuff. They burned coal. They had what they call a coalhouse, and we had this big old stove right in the front. You talk, it’d keep the whole house warm.

Finchum 	All seventeen rooms?

Hubbard 	Just about. I’ll tell you that heat would go upstairs. It would be something else. Don’t get close to it, you would burn yourself. I’ve got scars all over me from that stove.

Finchum 	Did the house have an indoor toilet, bathtub?

Hubbard 	Yeah. Yeah. One upstairs and one downstairs. 

Finchum 	You didn’t have to worry about going to the outhouse then.

Hubbard 	No. Oh no, never went to an outhouse.

Finchum 	A lot of people have. 

Hubbard 	Oh, I know.

Finchum 	Just asking.

Hubbard 	I know. There was a guy that lived down the street from us. He hasn’t had bathroom facilities very long at all. Maybe ten years.

Finchum 	Really?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh.

Finchum 	Did the house have electricity by that time?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah.

Finchum 	When your grandparents built it, would they have already had power by then?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Yeah.

Finchum 	I can’t imagine growing up in a seventeen-room house. Plenty of room, if you wanted to be by yourself you could find a spot. 

Hubbard 	We had a third floor that they had parties and stuff, you know. A lot of Attucks proms were held there. They had big bands that would come and play on weekends. I mean it just, everybody came there for everything.

Finchum 	Kind of just the community center for the neighborhood.

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	Do you remember some of the bands?

Hubbard 	The only one I really remember was the Ivory Star, and he used to come there all the time.

Finchum 	The dances would be slow dance, ballroom, jitterbug, what?

Hubbard 	Oh, just everything.

Finchum 	All of it?

Hubbard 	All of it. Yeah.

Finchum 	And you’d get to go? 

Hubbard 	No, not until later. 

Finchum 	When you were in Attucks, did they still have them there?

Hubbard 	Yeah, we had them there. We had the parties there. They sure did. We had parties there even after I grew up. Everybody said, “Where can we have a party,” and I said, “Well we still got 219, an empty hall upstairs.” (Laughs) So we had several parties there. 

Finchum 	The third floor wasn’t broken into individual rooms?

Hubbard 	It had two rooms, one on each end.

Finchum 	Two big ones. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Then a great big hallway. Almost as big as, as long as the house.

Finchum 	Had a piano?

Hubbard 	Had a piano.

Finchum 	Did you take piano lessons?

Hubbard 	Yes I did. Can’t play today. (Laughs) My piano teacher, she had a habit of hitting your fingers when you’d mess up, you know. I got tired of that and I just quit. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Would you have to do recitals?

Hubbard 	Yes. Sure did. Mrs. Blye was my piano teacher. She was the principal’s wife, the principal of Attucks. 

Finchum 	They kept tabs on you in and out of school.

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Yeah.

Finchum 	How long did your grandmother live?

Hubbard 	She was eighty-five, I think. She passed away in ’75, I think.

Finchum 	Had been a widow for quite a while then. It was your mother’s mother who had had the seventeen-room house?

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	They had come from Tennessee or Mississippi?

Hubbard 	She came from Tennessee. Yeah, she was born in Tennessee, and he was born in Mississippi. Covington, Tennessee is where she’s from. 

Finchum 	Then your father?

Hubbard 	He’s from Vinita.

Finchum 	He’s from here. Okay.

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. 

Finchum 	Are they still living, your parents?

Hubbard 	No. They both passed away. My dad passed away in ’92 and she passed away in ’04, I think. The house caught on fire.

Finchum 	The seventeen-room house?

Hubbard 	Yeah, but just that one area burned. They never did decide what caused the fire or anything. Anyway, my sister happened to be home, late for work. It’s a good thing she was because she heard the fire alarm go off. She said, “Oh what did Geraldine do now?” So she walks in there, she’s on fire. She died from thermal burns. 

Finchum 	Awful way to go.

Hubbard 	It is, it is. I mean she didn’t completely burn up or anything like that. She was just bad scarring. 

Finchum 	Pretty long life otherwise.

Hubbard 	Yeah, she would be eight-eight now. 

Finchum 	Do you have children?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh, three. 

Finchum 	They wouldn’t have gone to Attucks. 

Hubbard 	Well, they went to Southeast. 

Finchum 	Okay. Are they in Vinita?

Hubbard 	Yes, they are in Vinita. 

Finchum 	They all stayed home, too. 

Hubbard 	They all stayed home, too.

Finchum 	What is it about Attucks and this community that keeps people here?

Hubbard 	You know, I don’t know because there really is not that much around here, you know. Not really, especially job wise. I guess everybody worked at the hospital. Now my middle daughter is a beautician. Angela, my oldest daughter, she had to retire early because of her health. She has arthritis so bad where she’s been thrown around at that hospital. 

Finchum 	Lifting.

Hubbard 	Lifting and patients fighting you, whatever, you know. Then my middle daughter, she works for the Home of Hope. 

Finchum 	I’m not familiar with that.

Hubbard 	Okay, that’s for adult special needs.

Finchum 	She has patience then. 

Hubbard 	Yeah, it’s kind of like a private deal, you know. 

Finchum 	They all stayed in Vinita. It’s just home, I guess, is what it comes down to.

Hubbard 	Yeah, it’s home. See we go all the time. It’s all right to visit Tulsa. I have plenty of kin people in Tulsa, a whole lot of them. We go to Joplin. We go everywhere.

Finchum 	When you were in high school and a little bit older, did you go to Boley any?

Hubbard 	Boley?

Finchum 	Boley?

Hubbard 	My aunt lived in Boley.

Finchum 	And what was her name?

Hubbard 	Bee, the one who worked for the banks.

Finchum 	And her last name?

Hubbard 	Irons.

Finchum 	Irons. Okay.

Hubbard 	Lela Bea Irons, Yeah, her husband ran the training school there in Boley. 

Finchum 	Okay. I’ve talk with Henrietta Hicks. Does that name sound familiar? She’s in Boley.

Hubbard 	Henrietta Hicks, that name sounds, yes. 

Finchum 	It was a happening place back in its day. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. I know Henrietta and her sister both.

Finchum 	JoAnn. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Mary Jo [Matthews].

Finchum 	Yes.

Hubbard 	Yes she, Mary Jo, then my cousin that lives in Oklahoma City now, they were good friends in high school in Boley. 

Finchum	They had dances and dance halls and all that. 

Hubbard	They had a little bit of everything. We used to go Boley and spend the summer. I’d go to Boley and spend the summer. They’d come to Vinita and spend a summer or whatever. 

Finchum 	They talked a lot about Trulove’s hamburgers. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. I remember that. (Laughs) 

Finchum 	One of the things they missed. 

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. (Laughs)

Finchum 	So Vinita didn’t have that kind of happening scene?

Hubbard 	Well, we had—my mother had a little restaurant before she became an LPN. She did hamburgers and you know ice cream and stuff like that. Nothing big, chili and stew. Then her sister-in-law’s sister had a little restaurant right next door to us. She did barbeque, chicken. I mean she did everything. That little place stayed busy. Had it right there in her house. All the front of her house was restaurant.

Finchum 	So cooking ran in the family a little bit?

Hubbard 	Yes.

Finchum 	People would come from other places to there, too, or just mostly the neighborhood?

Hubbard 	Yeah. Everybody would come there. Most of the kids ate lunch there and everything. I used to go over there and have lunch every once in a while.

Finchum 	What was Vinita the town like when you were in high school?

Hubbard 	You know, we used to have a lot of fun in Vinita is all I can say. We did. I mean, we’d go up town and look around. We’d walk at night, and we had what they called the Sale Ground Hill. It’s right down the street from us. Anyways, it’s a big steep hill. We’d ride our bicycles down that thing. You talk about skinned up now.  I got more scars on me from that thing cause it was rock for a long time. It was a rock road. We’d take those old bicycles down that road. It was fun though. (Laughs)

Finchum 	It was called what hill?

Hubbard 	Sale Ground Hill

Finchum 	Sale Ground. Well if you had snow, did you sled down it in the winter?

Hubbard 	No, huh-uh. It was a little dangerous.

Finchum 	Okay, just checking. (Laughter) Not too many hills in Stillwater. That’s why I was asking. 

Hubbard 	I see a lot of kids, though, in the snow. Where Walmart is, there is a big hill right behind the old country club. I see a lot of them sledding down that. 

Finchum 	What were some of the family traditions that have been passed down to you or do you have any?

Hubbard 	Cooking.

Finchum 	Cooking. 

Hubbard 	Holidays we barbeque. Summer holidays we barbeque. I mean we really do it. Then Thanksgiving, Christmas, I mean every holiday we do something. The whole family used to get together on holidays. I mean the entire family, Ryan bunch, used to together.

Finchum 	Well, what was the one dish that everyone expected to have?

Hubbard 	Turkey and dressing.

Finchum 	Not a particular pie?

Hubbard 	Well, they want that too. They want everything. My oldest daughter will just start naming off stuff. I said, “You’re not going to help cook. I’m not cooking all that stuff.” (Laughter) I do all the cooking. All of it…

Finchum 	Dressing from scratch pretty much?

Hubbard 	Yes, Uh-huh. Everything from scratch. 

Finchum 	Do you have a recipe book?

Hubbard 	I have recipe books. I use them sometimes.

Finchum 	Sometimes?

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Like my dressing and stuff like that I don’t have to have a recipe for that. You just go by taste. 

Finchum 	They might not be able to replicate it. You might want to write it down for their daughters.

Hubbard 	Well, they watched me enough. I learned to make it by watching my mother, you know. 

Finchum 	Okay.

Hubbard 	I told them, “If you all get in this kitchen, you all can do it.” “We rather you do it.” I say, “Yeah.” 

Finchum 	Well, at Christmas would you have a tree as a youngster?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. Oh yeah, always.

Finchum 	Real or artificial?

Hubbard 	Well, we had real ones for a long time. Then when the artificial ones came out—I remember the first artificial tree we had was aluminum. Remember those?

Finchum 	I remember silver ones.

Hubbard 	Yeah, those silver.

Finchum 	Uh-huh.

Hubbard 	They had the lights, you know, the color lights that you had a little wheel that went around. That was the prettiest thing I thought. Then the more I looked at that I said, “That’s ugly. (Laughs) I need a real tree.”

Finchum 	And it doesn’t smell. You need the smell.

Hubbard 	You need that smell. Now we use artificial. I’ll get tired of one and go buy another color or something like that. 

Finchum 	Do you exchange Christmas letters where you tell what’s going on for the whole year?

Hubbard 	No, I never have done that. Now I have a cousin who does it all the time.

Finchum 	Some people get into it, others don’t. I thought I’d ask.

Hubbard 	No, huh-uh.

Finchum 	Have you traveled very much?

Hubbard 	Yes, just in the states. Well I went to Mexico a couple of times, but that don’t count. (Laughs) 

Finchum 	You may count it. I’ve been there once, won’t go back. 

Hubbard 	I’m not going back. We’ve been to California, Las Vegas. I use to travel a whole lot when I was bowling.

Finchum 	Bowling?

Hubbard 	Yeah, we’d go to the national tournaments. Been everywhere; Florida, Milwaukee, Indiana. Did I say Las Vegas? Las Vegas. Where’s that other town at in Nevada?

Finchum 	Reno?

Hubbard 	Reno. Yeah. Lake Tahoe, I’ve been a lot of places. 

Finchum 	You’re actually competing yourself?

Hubbard 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Bowling?

Hubbard 	Yeah, yeah.

Finchum 	How long did you do that?

Hubbard 	I’ve been bowling ever since the late ’60s, until my knees got so bad I had to quit. I quit just about five years ago.

Finchum 	Did they have a bowling alley in Vinita?

Hubbard 	Used to have. She was going to rebuild and they couldn’t get the loan, so she just quit altogether. She only had like a six-lane bowling alley. We always went to Miami or Pryor and bowled in leagues.

Finchum 	How heavy was your ball? 

Hubbard 	Twelve pounds, yes. I tried heavier balls, but it didn’t work. It hurt. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Well, do you have a favorite memory from Attucks from your days at the Attucks school?

Hubbard 	Oh, really I like the music department. I really loved the music department. We had a really good music teacher. Her name was Ella Mae Harriss. She was just really good. She gave everybody a chance at singing and stuff like that. I really liked that. I liked the little picnics that we used to have all the time. 

Finchum 	Did you have to bring your own things for the picnic or the school did it?

Hubbard 	No, the school did it. Uh-huh.

Finchum 	Things you miss the most?

Hubbard 	Things I miss the most are those teachers. I really do. Now, the teachers, a lot of the teachers that were from out of town, they stayed at our house.

Finchum 	For the year?

Hubbard 	Yeah, just for the year. They’d go home on weekends, you know. In fact, one of them just passed away not too long ago. Mrs. Marian Ford, she was the typing teaching. She just lived in Wagoner. I went to her funeral. 

Finchum 	They would come and stay during the week and teach, then go back wherever they…

Hubbard 	Uh-huh. Then go—uh-huh. 

Finchum 	Interesting.

Hubbard 	We had a couple from Tulsa, one from Ponca City, one from Kansas, somewhere up in Kansas. Emporia is where she was from. 

Finchum 	Attucks must have been a pretty good place for people to come to want to work?

Hubbard 	It was, it really was. 

Finchum 	Did it have a fight song or cheer or anything that you remember? A particular one?

Hubbard 	Uh, no. 

Finchum 	No.

Hubbard 	No, I don’t remember.

Finchum 	I think that runs through my questions. Is there anything else that you want to add before we close off?

Hubbard 	Well, I can’t really think of anything. 

Finchum 	The transitioning wasn’t hard?

Hubbard 	No, it wasn’t bad. After we did it, you know. Like I said, everyone got along. Still have friends, white friends and black friends, you know.

Finchum 	Some of the ones that were in your classes at Attucks were in your classes, too, in Vinita?

Hubbard 	Oh yeah. 

Finchum 	So you weren’t just there by yourself.

Hubbard	 No, I wasn’t there just by myself. Huh-uh. In fact, I think, we had no dropouts. 

Finchum 	That’s really good. Well, “Yay Attucks!” (Laughter) Well then I will close out and say thank you very much for coming. It’s been a pleasure.

Hubbard 	Well, I enjoyed. Nice meeting you.

Finchum 	Nice meeting you, too.

------- End of interview -------
