Frances Ramsey

Oral History Interview

Interviewed by Tanya Finchum 
August 9, 2014
Vinita, Oklahoma


Finchum 	Today is August 9, 2014. My name is Tanya Finchum. I’m with Oklahoma State University, and today I am in Vinita, Oklahoma, to speak with Frances Ramsey. This is regarding the Attucks School here in Vinita, so thank you for coming today.

Ramsey 	You’re welcome. 

Finchum 	Let’s start with having you tell us when and where you were born. 

Ramsey 	I was born in Vinita, Oklahoma, December 23, 1930.

Finchum 	Around the Depression time. What did your parents do for a living?

Ramsey 	Well they mostly done farming, you know.

Finchum 	Farming?

Ramsey 	Yes, but no, my daddy worked at the hospital here in Vinita, Oklahoma. My mother was just a regular housewife, you know. She stayed home and took care of the children.

Finchum 	And how many brothers and sisters did you have?

Ramsey 	I had eight.

Finchum 	And where were you?

Ramsey 	No, I mean there was eight of us. I had six brothers and one sister.

Finchum 	Boys outnumbered you girls then.

Ramsey 	Yes, altogether. (Laughs)

Finchum 	What order were you?

Ramsey 	I’m the baby.

Finchum 	You’re the baby.

Ramsey 	I’m the baby. I’m my mama and daddy’s baby. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Did you get away with a lot of things? 

Ramsey 	They said I did, but I don’t think so. I think I really did really, from my daddy anyway.

Finchum 	You grew up on a farm?

Ramsey 	Well no. We grew up in Vinita, but like I said, they raised their own garden and stuff, you know.

Finchum 	Okay. Did you have chores?

Ramsey 	No, I didn’t have too many chores.

Finchum 	Being the baby you might not.

Ramsey 	No, I didn’t.

Finchum 	Describe the house you grew up in?

Ramsey 	Oh, it was on North Third Street as far as I can remember. It had—you know I don’t really know how many bedrooms we had. I know we had a living room and a kitchen, maybe two or three bedrooms, maybe. And it had a porch on it.

Finchum 	Did it have indoor plumbing?

Ramsey 	No, we didn’t.

Finchum 	Electricity?

Ramsey 	No, we didn’t. We had lamps.

Finchum 	Lamps, okay. 

Ramsey 	Woodstove, you know, that you cook on. One of them that you had to burn wood in and we heated by wood. That was way back. I can’t hardly remember, (laughs) but I can remember that.

Finchum 	What were holidays like during those early, early years? 

Ramsey 	Well, you know, honest to goodness I just can’t remember it. They were good, I know they were.

Finchum 	Was church an important part of your…

Ramsey 	Yes, church was a very important part of my growing up.

Finchum 	Sunday morning, Sunday night…

Ramsey 	Sunday morning, Sunday night, yes.

Finchum 	Baptist or…

Ramsey 	Baptist—well at first we started out being Methodists, and as I got older my mother, we went to the Baptist church.

Finchum 	So when it came time for first grade you went to Attucks?

Ramsey 	Yes.

Finchum 	Do you remember much about the first grade?

Ramsey 	No, I don’t remember much about the first grade, the second, or the third. The one I can really start remembering I think I was about in the sixth grade. 

Finchum 	Do you remember who your teacher was?

Ramsey 	Well that’s why I said in the first grade I don’t remember who my teacher…

Finchum 	No, by the sixth grade.

Ramsey 	Oh, it was Miss Hardrick—I had several teachers. Miss Hardrick, Miss Armstead, Louis Ryan, S.A Blye, he was the principal, Miss Clay, Miss Holly. Them’s about as much as I can remember.

Finchum	Did you have a favorite subject?

Ramsey 	No, not any. (Laughter) I don’t know, I wasn’t too much interested in school. I guess I was passed, you know, but I really didn’t.

Finchum 	And you went through the eighth grade?

Ramsey 	Through the eighth. I had to quit in the eighth.

Finchum 	Had to quit or…

Ramsey 	I had to quit because I got pregnant. Then I wanted to go back and the principal wouldn’t let me.

Finchum 	Did you get your GED [General Education Development] later? 

Ramsey 	Never have.

Finchum 	Never too late.

Ramsey 	I never have got it yet, you know. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Well, can you describe the school to me, if you went in the front door, where rooms were?

Ramsey 	Yeah, the first grade was right there on the south side. The second grade was there on the north as you go in. The third was on the south, fourth was—was it upstairs? I think it was—no, I think it was still down. The principal’s office was on the left, in Attucks, as you go in the front door like you say. Then we had classes upstairs, I think was the fifth and sixth, maybe seventh and eighth and the ninth.

Finchum 	Did it have a…

Ramsey 	It went to the twelfth grade but, you know, like I said that’s been a while ago. Some of it I kind of forgot, but I do know we had that many classes down there. It went through the twelfth grade.

Finchum 	Do you remember how many were in your particular grade?

Ramsey 	No, I really don’t. I’ve forgotten how many was in my grade. Kind of forgot who my classmates were. I know one lady was named Louise, she was a Phillip when she passed away. I think Bernadine Hicks, I think she was in my class. That’s about all I can remember that was in my class, you know.

Finchum 	Probably twelve or less.

Ramsey 	Might’ve been more than that really.

Finchum 	Really?

Ramsey 	Might’ve been twelve, thirteen, or fourteen.

Finchum 	How would you get to school?

Ramsey 	Walk. We walked from the north end down here to the south end.

Finchum 	Is that a little bit of a piece?

Ramsey 	Yeah, that’s a good ways from the north end to the south end. We always walked across—we said ‘cross the tracks’ as we called it, you know.

Finchum 	Did you actually cross the tracks?

Ramsey 	Yeah, we did. And the highway, too.

Finchum 	As a group walking together?

Ramsey 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Would you take your lunch?

Ramsey 	Yeah, we’d take our lunch.

Finchum 	You remember what was…

Ramsey 	No, not really. We’d always take our lunch.

Finchum 	Didn’t have a cafeteria?

Ramsey 	No. No, we didn’t. We didn’t know what a cafeteria was when I went to school.

Finchum 	That time period, a lot of them didn’t. 

Ramsey 	We didn’t know what to ride a bus was to school. We walked in the rain, cold, and the snow. We didn’t have no snow days or nothing like that.

Finchum 	What time would school start?

Ramsey 	Was it eight? Around eight, eight-thirty. 

Finchum 	Would they do an opening ceremony thing? Like “The Pledge of Allegiance” and say a prayer?

Ramsey 	Yeah, we done that and said a prayer. Yeah we did, that I can remember.

Finchum 	Did they have special programs like, I don’t know, plays and musicals? That type of thing?

Ramsey 	Yes, back then they did, too. Had real good basketball teams.

Finchum 	Would you go to the games?

Ramsey 	Yes. 

Finchum 	What were some of the rivals?

Ramsey 	Oh, we played Bartlesville, Nowata, Pawhuska, Wagoner. Those I do remember.

Finchum 	All of those are a little bit of a ways from here. How would the players get to the games?

Ramsey 	They’d drive—they’d ride buses.

Finchum 	Okay.

Ramsey 	One or two times Attucks won the championship and had a chance to go to the nationals, national basketball, in Nashville, Tennessee, but I don’t think we ever—they ever got to go. But they won it. 

Finchum 	They were good.

Ramsey 	They were really good. Had some good basketball teams here in Vinita.

Finchum 	What was the mascot?

Ramsey 	Now that I don’t—I don’t remember who the mascot was.

Finchum 	Are they the Tigers or the…

Ramsey 	Oh, they were the Attucks Warriors.

Finchum 	Warriors, okay. And what were the colors?

Ramsey 	White and blue.

Finchum 	They have a pep squad?

Ramsey 	Yeah. 

Finchum 	Were you involved in any of that?

Ramsey 	I don’t think I was. I might’ve been, but I’d go to the games, you know. I don’t think I would—I don’t think I ever was a pep squad. I’d go and cheer them on, you know. I might’ve been too, but I got to tell you Lord that’s been a many years ago. (Laughs) But I kind of think I was in a pep squad.

Finchum 	A lot of people probably joined in on that to cheer them on.

Ramsey 	Yeah, they did.

Finchum 	Was the school an important part of the community?

Ramsey 	Yeah, very important part. 

Finchum 	Did the teachers interact with the parents and stuff after school?

Ramsey 	Sometimes.

Finchum 	Did they?

Ramsey 	Sometimes.

Finchum 	They’d go to the same church or things like that?

Ramsey 	Yeah, a lot of us went to the same church.

Finchum 	Have you lived in Vinita your entire life?

Ramsey 	My entire life. I was born and raised right here.

Finchum 	And you’ll stay right here?

Ramsey 	Till the Lord calls me home. Till the good Lord calls me home, but I got children. I got some children living in Atlanta, Georgia, and I’ll go down there and visit. Some in Texas, I’ve got one in Texas. And I do do a lot of going. Kind of with the church and just with the family, you know. That’s about the size of it. 

Finchum 	Always glad to get back here?

Ramsey 	Always. You know the saying, “There’s no place like home”? And there isn’t, you know. 

Finchum 	Is there anything special about Vinita that makes it home?

Ramsey 	Well cause, I guess, I was born and raised here.

Finchum 	And your parents?

Ramsey 	And my parents raised me here. I just—even after I got married I just never did want to venture off from Vinita, I guess, you know. So this is where I’ve been my entire life. But I—you know, I can’t knock Vinita. This is where I made my living. The Lord blessed me, too. I used to work at Eastern State.

Finchum 	That was going to be my next question.

Ramsey 	Oh, (laughter) okay.

Finchum 	So let’s back up. When did you get married?

Ramsey 	Around 19—was it 1947? Me and my husband was together fifty-five years, so would that be 1947? He passed away in 2002, I think, so it’d be close around ’47, I think, when I married him.

Finchum 	What was the secret to keeping that marriage going?

Ramsey 	The good Lord. You know, I mean that’s all I can say. We loved each other.

Finchum 	And you had how many children? I forgot.

Ramsey 	I birthed eight. I adopted two, but they was mine too. 

Finchum 	You were going to tell us about when you went to work at Eastern State.

Ramsey 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Talk a little bit about that.

Ramsey 	Well, my husband was working out there, and I went out there one day, you know. I really got scared to get out because this patient was standing out there with an axe, you know. I said, “I’m not getting out here.” So I just…finally I think he knew I was out there and he came and got me and took me into the kitchen where he worked. He worked in the bakery. Then I put in my application and they hired me. I enjoyed working at Eastern State. I met a lot of people and met the patients. Really cared for the patients, you know. 

Finchum 	What was your job?

Ramsey 	Well, first I worked in food service. I’d serve the food, set the food up, get it ready to serve it. Then I transferred from there and went to housekeeping and I worked in housekeeping for some time. I come out with a total—I retired from there with a total of twenty-seven years. 

Finchum 	That’s pretty good in one place.

Ramsey 	In one place.

Finchum 	I don’t know anything about that hospital. Was there more than one building or…

Ramsey 	Oh yeah, it was several buildings I think. About twelve, I think it was about twelve buildings.

Finchum 	That’s a big place then.

Ramsey 	It was really a big place. That was about the biggest thing going on in Vinita.

Finchum 	Biggest employer?

Ramsey 	Yeah, was Eastern State.

Finchum 	Was it mostly adults or were there children too?

Ramsey 	Mostly adults. Mostly adults.

Finchum 	Did they have their own dairy and farm and all that?

Ramsey 	Yeah, they had a big farm and raised their own chickens. But finally they sold it you know, yeah and cows and all that. It was something. It was amazing, really.

Finchum 	Kind of a little town of its own?

Ramsey 	Kind of a little town of its own.

Finchum 	And your husband worked in the bakery?

Ramsey 	He was the head baker.

Finchum 	Did he bake at home?

Ramsey 	Yeah.

Finchum 	Would he bake for you?

Ramsey 	He sure did. As a matter of fact, he cooked for me. (Laughter) He did, he just really did.

Finchum 	He liked kitchen work.

Ramsey 	Yes.

Finchum 	Well, with that many children, you needed a little help in the kitchen.

Ramsey 	Well, he done quite a lot. I’m not going to say that on the TV. He practically did it all. I would help him, you know. We had a real good life together. Then he also was a minister. Pastored in Nowata for twenty-four long years. 

Finchum 	Baptist or…

Ramsey 	Baptist. Till he passed.

Finchum 	Being a minister’s wife took some getting used to or not?

Ramsey 	Yeah, very much so for me. (Laughs) But I enjoyed it after I got used to it, you know, going and meeting different people, and I still like to meet people and talk. But Attucks, like I said, that’s awful that I can’t even remember my first grade teacher. That’s just terrible, but I can’t my first, second, third, fourth. Attucks was a nice—it was a nice school. 

Finchum 	You said they started about eight, did it finish about three-thirty or four?

Ramsey 	Yes, about three-thirty. Probably four though, really, because I don’t think we got out as early as kids do nowadays. I think we stayed to about four o’clock. 

Finchum 	Or longer?

Ramsey 	No, I don’t think we stayed no longer than four. About four o’clock.

Finchum 	And then by the time you got home it was late.

Ramsey 	Kind of late, because we didn’t have daylight savings like we do now, you know. 

Finchum 	Had to do your homework by an oil lamp?

Ramsey 	An oil lamp, by a coal oil lamp. Used to have to take newspaper and clean the globes. That’s how we kept our lights. 

Finchum 	Did you have refrigeration or an icebox?

Ramsey 	We had an icebox, you know. You had to buy the block ice and stuff. That’s the kind of icebox we had.

Finchum 	And what were some things you might do for fun?

Ramsey 	You know what…

Finchum 	Surely you had a little!

Ramsey 	Well mostly we made mud pies and stuff like that, you know. Play in the mud, that’s what we’d do for fun. Play hide and go to seek. You ever heard of hide and go seek?

Finchum 	Hide and go seek, yes.

Ramsey 	Played that.

Finchum 	And kick the can, I remember kick the can.

Ramsey 	I don’t remember kicking the can, (laughs) but that’s some of the enjoyment we had. Like I said, going to church and—that was a big part of my life. My father and mother, they didn’t make us, they’d take us to church, you know. But that’s about all I can tell you about Attucks.

Finchum 	How has Vinita, the town, changed through the years? Has it changed much?

Ramsey 	Not too much. Not too much really.

Finchum 	Was there a theater when you grew up?

Ramsey 	We used to have a theater here. We had quite a few stores downtown, too, when I grew up. But now the population—Vinita’s just probably shut all of the little stores like Ben Franklin’s, and you know. Oh, we had a Ben Franklin’s here and a McLellan’s store here. Used to have a Cook United here. See all that’s gone now.

Finchum 	And is Eastern State?

Ramsey 	No, it’s the Department of Correction now.

Finchum 	Okay, and Route 66 comes through.

Ramsey 	Yeah, Route 66 still comes through, you know.

Finchum 	Would you travel many places? Like to Boley or Tulsa when you were in school?

Ramsey 	No, I didn’t.

Finchum 	Who was the disciplinarian in school? Who gave the paddling?

Ramsey 	Well, probably all the teachers that I named off, was my teachers: Fox, Ryan, Miss Hardrick, Miss Armstead. They would do their own paddling.

Finchum 	Was it with a paddle?

Ramsey 	With a paddle, I mean a big, thick, paddle. Yes, it sure was. And I got quite a few of them, because I was kind of smart-mouthed with the teachers. I was, and that’s just the truth, you know. If they’d say something to me I didn’t particularly like, I’d just tell them about it. 

Finchum 	And would you get…

Ramsey 	They’d say, “Oh—”, I said, “If you’re going to whoop me, go ahead and whoop me and get through with me.” That’s what I used to tell Louis Ryan, and probably Blye, too. 

Finchum 	And would you get another one when you got home?

Ramsey 	No, because I wouldn’t always tell it. (Laughs) I didn’t always tell it.

Finchum 	With siblings in the school, maybe they told on you.

Ramsey 	They might have did, but I didn’t—I might’ve did get a whooping, because I know got a few from my momma and daddy, you know.

Finchum 	The teachers wouldn’t call them and tell them?

Ramsey 	No, I don’t think so. If they did I don’t remember. 

Finchum 	You have a best friend from those days?

Ramsey 	I had several. One of them was named, we went to the same school, Lula May Bowlin, and Bernadine Hicks, and Louise Hardrick. There was several of my good friends.

Finchum 	Did they stay in Vinita?

Ramsey 	They did. They passed on now. Louise and Lula May’s passed. But Bernadine, she’s still living. She lives in Wichita. A lot of them left from here after they graduated and finished school.

Finchum 	Opportunities elsewhere.

Ramsey 	Yeah. Found better places, they said, than Vinita. 

Finchum 	Vinita’s pretty, though.

Ramsey 	Yeah, it’s a pretty place, you know.

Finchum 	Got green trees.

Ramsey 	And like I tell you, I’m not going nowhere, not now to stay. I may go off and visit, you know, but I come back to Vinita.

Finchum 	Do you go to the Attucks’ reunions when they have them?

Ramsey 	Yeah.

Finchum 	What do you think is the draw for people to come back for that? Why do they…

Ramsey 	Well, I guess because they remember Attucks and I guess to see others that come. I said I’m guessing that’s why they come back.

Finchum 	Did you have home ec. while you were there?

Ramsey 	Yeah I took Miss—oh, what did I say her name was? She taught me home ec—Miss Clay! I think I might have had another one before Miss Clay, but she was my home ec teacher. 

Finchum 	Teach you to sew? Sewing and cooking?

Ramsey 	Yes, she taught it to us, sewing and cooking, but I don’t sew. I don’t do too much cooking. (Laughs) That’s the truth, but I can now. I can’t sew, I’m being truthful, but I can cook. But I just—my husband just done it all for me, and after he passed I still don’t do it. When my son don’t cook I go to McDonald’s, or Braum’s, somewhere, if I got the money. Mostly just keep stuff to where I don’t have to cook. At my age I just don’t do too much of nothing.

Finchum 	Did you mother sew?

Ramsey 	Yes, she could sew. She used to make them big old quilts. You know how you make—have you ever seen them make them quilts?

Finchum 	Yes.

Ramsey 	My mother used to make them quilts. Yeah, she could sew, but I couldn’t, I can’t.

Finchum 	Did she use flour sacks?

Ramsey 	Yeah, flour sacks and old britches, you know jeans and all that. She used all that to make her quilts, them big old heavy quilts.

Finchum 	Did you need them to keep warm in the winter?

Ramsey 	In the winter.

Finchum 	The house was heated pretty good?

Ramsey 	Pretty good. Yeah, that woodstove—them woodstoves is pretty good back in those days, you know. 

Finchum 	Did they struggle through the Depression? I mean, you being the baby, but did they…

Ramsey 	Kind of.

Finchum 	Have some rough times there?

Ramsey 	Yeah, they did.

Finchum 	Did any of your siblings have to go to war?

Ramsey 	Yeah, I had two brothers go to war.

Finchum 	Did they come back?

Ramsey 	God blessed them to come back. Sure did. 

Finchum 	Did all of them go to Attucks? Your brothers and sisters, all of them…

Ramsey 	Yes. That’s where they went, to Attucks.

Finchum 	What did you think when they decided to integrate and move kids away from Attucks?

Ramsey 	Well at first I didn’t—I really didn’t kind of like it. You know, just being truthful with you.

Finchum 	Sure.

Ramsey 	They took all our kids up in this part of town, you know. They didn’t need too many down there south. They left a few at Southeast for a while, then they finally just closed it down. First, I wasn’t too hot on it, I wasn’t too enthused about it. I had some children that went to school when they integrated, practically all of mine, after. Some of them went to Attucks. I had about three, I think, went to Attucks, maybe four, and the rest of them was integrated.

Finchum 	Did they do that okay? Or did they have—come home and say, “Oh they were mean to us”?

Ramsey 	Well, some of them kind of did, because one of them got a watch stole from her at the school. The principal said that was very low of her to think her classmate would do that, but she seen them and they didn’t do nothing to them about it. That kind of upset me, too, you know.

Finchum 	Yeah, it would have. Sure.

Ramsey 	I say it’s getting better. It could still be a whole lot better.

Finchum 	Did they have to ride the school bus to get to Vinita High?

Ramsey 	Yeah, they had to ride the bus. I still got grandkids and great-grandkids that’s doing it, ride the bus you know. But it would be alright, I mean but treat us all the same. You know, because God’s got no special person. He treats us all the same and I think that’s the way we need to be treated. That’s my opinion and that’s the way I feel about it.

Finchum 	Well, have establishments in Vinita treated you pretty well through the years or were there times when they didn’t?

Ramsey 	They’ve treated me pretty well.

Finchum 	When you went to the theater could you sit anywhere you wanted to?

Ramsey 	No, not when I went. We had to sit upstairs and look down, but I think it’s changed now. We can sit down anywhere we want to now.

Finchum 	Do they even have a theater now?

Ramsey 	Yeah. 

Finchum 	Does it?

Ramsey 	Used to have to go in the back at the cafes, but thank God we don’t have to do that now.

Finchum 	Your grandparents, you said, were raised in Oklahoma. Had they…

Ramsey 	My grandparents?

Finchum 	Yeah.

Ramsey 	I said my parents, because I really didn’t know about my grandparents.

Finchum 	Okay.

Ramsey 	I never lived to see them or nothing. 

Finchum 	Were they from Oklahoma?

Ramsey 	Yeah. My great-grandfather on my mother’s side was a full-blood Cherokee Indian. One of my great-grandfathers on my mother’s side. I really haven’t heard too much about my father’s side, but he’s got Indian in him, too. I mean, he had Indian in him, my father.

Finchum 	Is that pretty common up in this part of the state? Was it Cherokee, mostly Cherokee?

Ramsey 	Pretty common up in Vinita.

Finchum 	I’m learning this as I go.

Ramsey 	It is, it’s pretty common. That’s about all I can tell you unless you ask something else, (laughter) but about my family history and about Attucks and about Vinita.

Finchum 	After you retired what did you do?

Ramsey 	Nothing.

Finchum 	Okay. (Laughter)

Ramsey 	Oh yeah! I worked a little bit at Wal-Mart. Now I worked about nine or ten months at Wal-Mart as a door greeter. I just do a lot of…I got a friend named Edith Hicks and she and I do a lot of going to Wal-Mart and downtown, you know. That’s about all we do, and go to church. 

Finchum 	Keeping the roads hot.

Ramsey 	Keeping them—that’s what they say, me and her don’t ever stay still, but we do! (Laughter) She’s getting ready to go on a big vacation tomorrow. She’s going to Washington, DC.

Finchum 	She could take you along.

Ramsey 	Well, I don’t know if I’d make that long journey or not. When I go to Georgia, especially ride in the car, my feet all be swollen. I got arthritis, you didn’t call me up here to tell you all about that, arthritis in my leg. I just don’t think I could’ve made that long trip.

Finchum 	Driving is a long way.

Ramsey 	Right, and ain’t no telling how long it’s going to take them to get to Washington, you know. 

Finchum 	A little while.

Ramsey 	Yeah. 

Finchum 	If there’s nothing else you want to tell me…

Ramsey 	I don’t have nothing else to tell you. (Laughs)

Finchum 	Well, then we will shut it off then.

Ramsey 	Alrighty.

Finchum 	Thank you very much.

Ramsey 	Yeah, I hope I’ve been some help to you, though.


Finchum	Yes, it’s been good.

------- End of interview -------
