 Story_ID: 96045 Speaker 1: Roslyn Maria Abrams, Skadden, Arps. Speaker 2: No, your date of birth. Speaker 1: Nine, seven, forty-eight [9/7/48]. Speaker 2: At-- Speaker 1: Skadden, Arps. Speaker 2: And today's date? Speaker 1: March 17th, 2014. Speaker 2: St. Patty's Day. And your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm retired. Speaker 2: No, you're not. Speaker 1: I'm a renaissance woman, that's my occupation. Speaker 2: (Unclear) true. Speaker 1: I'm--oh, my--okay, actually, I am still a journalist. I am still writing, yes. Story_ID: 96046 Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask five "People" magazine-ish questions we ask everyone--your favorite food? Speaker 2: Plural, foods. You name it, I love it--steak, chicken, of course, hamburgers, French fries. Before I die I'll become a vegan, but for now, I am very much into artery clogging food. Speaker 1: Okay, (laughing) favorite--favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It takes a giant to bend. Speaker 1: That's a first. We don't have that one. I like that one. Okay, usually people say takes a village or whatever--it takes a village to raise a child. Okay. Story_ID: 96047 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family background. So if we could start out with your mother. Can you talk about her--what you know--give her name, and her year of birth at least, and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: Esther Clarissa Caldwell Abrams. She was born April 16th, 1923. And what I know about her growing up, she was very, very poor, and she lived next to the railroad tracks. And at night she used to talk to the moon about her hopes and dreams. And she was a dreamer. She only had a high school education. She was alive during the time that there was discrimination. It was sort of covert in the North. It was overt in the South where my father [Herbert Abrams] came from. And there were many jobs that she tried for that she didn't get. She wanted to go to college, but she never had the money. And she married my father, and all she wanted was a bunch of kids and a house of her own. Well, after she got married and had three children, she wanted piano lessons for us, ballet lessons for us, baton twirling, elocution, singing, tap dancing. I had all of those because my mother dreamt for us. She said you may need this one day. In my case, lo and behold I did. You know, I developed a personality; I learned how to talk. She wanted her daughters to be debutantes. And when--my father had a 5th grade education. My mother had a high school education. Between the two of them, they made very little money. But somehow she managed to get the doctors' kids and the dentists' parents interested in starting a debutante ball in Lansing, Michigan. And lo and behold, all the factory workers' kids did their bows with the doctors and lawyers' children because my mom was just out there. She said if you dream it baby, you can become it. And while that is cliched, and while she lived through her children, we have all had great lives because she was a dreamer. Speaker 1: So did she talk about growing up at all? And do you know the family background on her side any further back? Speaker 2: I know that her mother, my maternal grandmother, Mary Dell Shoemake (ph.) Caldwell, was part Seminole Indian, and part German, okay. That much I do know. And I--the biggest part of my--oh, and my grandmother never worked. She stayed at home and took care of kids during the Depression. And they would get things like sugar, and butter, and cheese from the federal government. And so my mother growing up ate a lot of fudge because they'd throw a little chocolate in. She ate a lot of cheese because it was free. And she just said while she had shoes and clothes, they were ragtag. And as soon as she got her first job, she went to a clothing store so that she could get nice clothes at a discount. That was very important to her. My grandmother sent all of her boys into the military. All my uncles served their country. All the daughters did well in terms of marrying, sending their kids to college, and there's just a lot to be said for that. My mother's greatest claim to fame, to hear her tell it, after her children is the fact that Malcolm X lived next door to her, and--Malcolm Little at the time. And she said we just never knew that he was gonna be a great guy. He wasn't a firebrand then. He was just a cute black guy who was just like the rest of us. Speaker 1: So did your mother--where did she grow--she grow up? Speaker 2: Lansing, Michigan. Speaker 1: In Lansing, Michigan. Speaker 2: Born and raised. Story_ID: 96048 Speaker 1: Okay so, with--so your roots as far as you know are in Lansing, Michigan. And are there any Southern roots in that? Speaker 2: My father [Herbert Abrams] was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, and his background is a la--it's impossible to trace. I know who my maternal grandfather is, Ted Caldwell, and, and I know all of his relative 'cause they're in Cairo, Illinois. On my father's side of the family, on his birth certificate it lists Pearl Davenport as his mother, who was my grandmother, and the man that's listed as his father is D.L. Abram, A-B-R-A-M. My father's name is Herbert Abrams, but he was born not Herbert, but Hubert. He said he has no recollection of when they changed it. And he didn't see his birth certificate 'til he was sixty. And his mother never in her whole life told him who D.L. was. She said I'm ashamed of it; I have married Charles Duggans now; he raised you; and as far as I'm concerned, that's your grandfather. And it really hung up my father. He said I just wanna know who he is, what he looked like. Do you have a picture of him? She said when we left New Orleans [Louisiana], we had to leave very, very quickly because you had witnessed a murder--that's another story--and I wanted to get you out of there before you got hurt. And she went to (unclear), Michigan; she settled down, and married a wonderful man named Charles Duggans who raised my father. And I always saw him as my real grandfather and didn't know any different until he died. And when you asked, well, if this is the only man Pearl was married to when she married him in you know 1948, what about daddy? And you know, people just sort of look at each other, and Pearl's very tightlipped about this. And she carried D.L.'s name, address, and everything else to her grave, if you can believe that. Speaker 1: That's, that's very common in the black community. They just didn't talk. But Abrams still stayed the name-- Speaker 2: Well, it was--it's--on his birth certificate it's Hubert Abram. Somebody, somebody changed Hubert to Herbert at some point. He doesn't remember. Somebody put an S on it, (laughter) and then when he married my mother, she said what's your middle name? He said I don't have one. She said well, on the marriage certificate put K for Kent. So he just wrote in Herbert Kent Abrams. And from the time he was twenty-one until his death that was his name, but on his birth certificate it is something completely different. But you could get away with that back then. Now your social security would be screwed up, you know. Story_ID: 96049 Speaker 1: So when--so how many siblings in your family? Speaker 2: Two, brother and a sister. Speaker 1: Okay, so can you give their names in birth order? Speaker 2: My oldest, who has now passed away, is Lucille Annette Abrams, wonderful woman, loved her to pieces. And I have a brother who's ten years younger than me. He was born in 1958, Dennis Arnett Abrams. Speaker 1: Okay, and so it was you and Lucille for awhile, huh? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and then he came. He was a surprise baby. Speaker 2: To my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams], my father [Herbert Abrams]--he was a menopause baby actually. He's lucky he made it. Story_ID: 96050 Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory growing up? Speaker 2: Kindergarten, holding my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams]'s hand being afraid to go into kindergarten, and then getting in there and seeing that house with a little stove and the kitchen table with the chairs. I don't know if kindergartens have that, but they were universal when I was growing up. You had these little playhouses. In Michigan you couldn't always go outdoors because the winters could be ferocious. So in the kindergarten classroom was this makeshift little house with a door you could go in. And it had all the furnishings, and it had little pretend windows. And when I saw that, I said I am home; this is going to be fun. That truly is my earliest recollection. Some people can go back to three months old, not me. I was five. Speaker 1: You know that--I've never heard of that little--the, the little-- Speaker 2: They were universal in Michigan. And if you were my age you'd know. But later on schools changed. Because certainly by the time I had kids, they were gone. Speaker 1: Now what, what-- Speaker 2: Let me correct, by the time I adopted--I had children, yes, I had them, but I adopted my daughters. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 96051 Speaker 1: So, now what, what is life like in the Abrams' household? Can we discuss--talk about that? What, what is it like? And where are you living in Lansing [Michigan]? Speaker 2: 824 Middle Street, Lansing, Michigan. The house is still there. I was working on a project about my life for an award that I received, so I had to go back. And I had no idea it was only 1100 square feet. It happens to be for sale now--1100 square feet with four--five people living there. My parents divorced when I was ten, but it was me, my brother, sister, my mother [Clarissa Caldwell Abrams], and father [Herbert Abrams] in a two-bedroom, 1100 square feet living room, dining room, kitchen, a basement that we were scared to go down in, 'cause it was bad. Life in the Abrams' household from five to ten was very, very normal. We went to school; my mother stayed home and cooked; my father worked in the factory and made good money. Michigan is a union state. Everybody wanted GM cars. They made Oldsmobiles in Lansing, so we were sittin' pretty. And this was during the time piano lessons, tap lessons, everything. When I was ten my parents split up, and there was a real change because, while my father was willing to pay child support, he had to start a life on his own. So we had to pull back on some of the extracurricular activities. My mother had to get a job. She got a job with the, the black doctor in town. She had three kids. She wanted to make sure we had all the medical care that we needed. I had to learn how to cook. My sister had to learn how to clean, and we both had to take care of my baby brother. He is warped now because my sister and I--he never should have been left in our care, but that's another story. We love him nonetheless. But it became a real--I, I wanna say childhood ended. But I, I had responsibilities that other kids didn't have. I mean I had to scrub the floor in the kitchen, keep your bedroom clean, learn how to wash, dry, and iron clothes, get to school. Annette got good grades. I was always an underachiever. But it was full of love and fun. And my father never missed any birthdays, Christmas, Thanksgiving--he always took pictures and brought dessert. So if, if the bottom line is was I loved? It was more than that. I was the favorite of my mother and my father. But my life changed and made me a better person after the divorce, made me stronger. My mother was not a woman with figures or worldly--we ended up losing the house, because she didn't understand the importance of paying taxes. But what I carried away from that is not only do you pay your taxes, but you must always be able, no matter who you're married to or how much money you make, to keep your home going. You know, always be able to take care of your kids and your home. Story_ID: 96052 Speaker 1: So what--let's talk about that age, five to ten. Can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights--cars. If you lived in Michigan, you lived in Detroit, Flint, Lansing, those suburban areas as well, or any place where they were making cars because you could make so much money as an unskilled person. And I was--you recognized the cars that were made three block from your house. And I'll say Fisher Body, and you'll say, what is Fisher Body? Well, if you had a car with a body by Fisher, it was one of the finest car bodies around. And we knew all the cars that had a body by Fisher. I lived in the middle of all these factories. They were so close, you could run three blocks and you'd run into one factory; you could go ten blocks and run into another one. There were schools interspersed around. Cars controlled everything, and they made Michigan a very wealthy state, had one of the best education systems during the heyday of cars, it--a good time was had by all if you could work. So the sights were the cars. The smells were my grandmother's cookin'. She lived exactly one block away from us. And in the summertime if the windows were open and she was making her favorite cake, which we call sweetbread, you could smell it a half a block away. And I might be walking to my grandmother's, but if I--and, and you could do this; you could smell the vanilla; you could--you could almost smell the butter cooking in the stove. I would get into a run--Nana Mama, Nana Mama, can I have a piece of hotcake? And she'd say no, let me ice it. I said I don't want any icing; I just want it straight out of the oven. And to this day, I can smell that cake. She made 'em just about every other day 'cause we all loved them. Sights, smell, and what was the other one? Speaker 1: Sounds. Speaker 2: Oh, the music! I had a very hip aunt named Aunt Margie. She was beautiful. She was really one of the most beautiful women in Lansing, Michigan, and they said I favor her, so there (laughter). She was hip, and hot, and she--I got a lot of my personality from her. If she wore a pink dress out someplace special, she would die her hair pink. If she wore a white dress, she would die her hair white. And hers was the kind of hair that would stay in her head. Average black woman put those kind of chemicals, it's gonna be in the bowl. Margery (ph.) could pull this off--different kinds of hair, different kinds of clothes, and her music, Dakota Staton, Ella Fitzgerald, Nat King Cole, Frank Sinatra. Every time you went to her house, you could smell her because she always smelled good. She had an assortment of wonderful husbands. And the music--my mother didn't play music that much, but my aunt--and I spent a lot of time--my grandmother lived with my aunt. The black singers of that age, I could sing as a result, in her house, and the music was nonstop. You would hear me singing "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy." And I don't know if the McGuire Sisters or the Andrews Sisters, but it was one of her favorite songs; it was one of mine. So in terms of the sounds it was the music that I grew up with. And after ten, of course, I commandeered my own radio, and I was able to find Motown and--but when I was younger, it was all Aunt Margery's music. Story_ID: 96053 Speaker 1: So why did your parents split up? Speaker 2: They fought a lot. My father [Herbert Abrams] played around on my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams], including with people who lived right across the street from the house. And my mother, for all of her insecurities, said you will not dishonor me in front of my children 'cause I have girls here. And if I let you get away with this, they might think that there is some man somewhere who can do that to them. You have to go. Daddy went, but like he always took care of his kids. He put me through college. He put all--he gave us all money for college. And graduations he was there. He gave my--when I got married, you know, he said I want to give the rehearsal dinner. But that is the honest to God reason, 'cause he was a good provider; he was a great father, but he was a serious dog player 'cause he was very handsome. But I love him, and for all that, I adored the man. Speaker 1: Right. So that--so she really stood her ground then? Speaker 2: It was more than stand your ground. My mother was the strongest woman I ever knew growing up, the strong--she--if somebody did something to us, or if she thought somebody did something to us, she went to the police to get help. My sister was an acrobat and a toe dancer. And she didn't make the cheerleading squad in junior high school. And my mother marched up there and she said, okay, I don't know what's going on here, but my daughter has more training than anybody else on this squad. She is an all-A student. And the rest of these girls are not all-A students. You have to justify in writing why she's not out there. And they couldn't. Annette was on the cheerleading squad. She fought for her kids. Speaker 1: There's nothing like a, a parent who does that. Speaker 2: That's why I'm so secure. If you grow up with that kind of love and that kind of support from your mother and your father, there is nothing out here that can bring you down. Oh, you can get your butt kicked, and you know, but you can always get up again. Story_ID: 96054 Speaker 1: So you went to elementary--so where's church? Before I get to elementary school, where's church in the mix? Are we a churchgoing family? Speaker 2: My mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] was churchgoing. Speaker 1: And what, what denomination? Speaker 2: She took--okay, God forgive me. My sister was nervous. And my mother started out at the Pentecostal church. And when the women started speaking in tongue and jumping up and down and screaming, my sister got hysterical as a little kid. Speaker 1: That was frightening to her. Speaker 2: It was frightening to her. It was really frightening to her, not to me. I found it entertaining. But we ended up becoming Catholics. That was what my sister wanted to do. She said that she wanted to be a Catholic, and I just sort of followed along behind Annette, so years of catechism, then we were confirmed; we were Catholics. And then I find out that you can go to hell for heavy petting, dirty thoughts. And it was like what is this, you know? Annette, what have you gotten me into? I am hell bound for sure. And so I didn't--you gotta remember, the Catholic Church back then didn't recognize the real age of the earth. You know, the things that we were taught in science class didn't jive. And we were--I was smart enough to go: I can believe in God, but the Bible, mmm, not so much. Well, Catholicism didn't allow for wavering, so I never--you know, I'd get on my knees regularly, but I just didn't buy into--and back then it was a white man on a fan. And I just--so that was--but I do believe in a higher power. I'm very spiritual. Speaker 1: I'm like that too. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 96055 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you--so, there what--were you going to Catholic--were you going to church every Sunday or not? Speaker 2: Okay, we did-- Speaker 1: And you didn't go to Catholic schools either, right? Speaker 2: I did go to Catholic school for three days. We were--we were on vacation in Minnesota visiting one of my mother's brothers, Uncle Dewey. And my--we went somewhere in a cave as a--an attraction, and my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] fell down the stairs and had to be hospitalized. And so my dad [Herbert Abrams] left and came back to work. And they didn't know when she would be able to go home, and she--they wouldn't send us home with nobody to take care of us. So they enrolled us in Catholic school until my mother got better and could come home. And the third day in I did something that this nun took a ruler and whacked my knuckles. And I went home saying--and I'm sure I embellished--mama, the nun beat me up or something. But she did hit me with this ruler, and my mother said I gotta get out of the hospital. I gotta get home. I will not let my children--nobody--no corporal punishment for my kids, even though she would switch me to the point where I had welts, but that's what parents did then. But that was her purview, not--so I didn't last long in Catholic school. Speaker 1: So would you have to go out and, and get your, your switches yourself? Speaker 2: She made me pick my switches. And the big joke is I would pick pussy willows, 'cause we had this willow tree. And she would get to whacking on me, and pussy willows would be flying everywhere. And I--and she said if you run, it'll never end, and I stood there and took it like a fool. But that's just the way it was back then. Story_ID: 96056 Speaker 1: So what--so let me ask you--so you went to--I have you going to Main Street Elementary School. So that--so you went to Catholic school for-- Speaker 2: Just for three days only because my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] was injured, and relatives who were staying there their kids went to that Catholic school. But we only ended up--mama got out of the hospital, got well. We were home within two weeks, but she didn't let me go back to that Catholic school. Speaker 1: So you, you went to Main Street Elementary School, okay. Speaker 2: K through 6th. Speaker 1: And so how far away is that school from where you were living? Speaker 2: Three blocks. Speaker 1: Oh, so you were walking back and forth to school? Speaker 2: Yep. There was no busing. We walked to every school. Even the school that was eighteen blocks away we walked. Speaker 1: And then you said--so what is--what is the young Roz Abrams--what is she thinking in her head? I mean what--what's going on? You know you said that school did not necessarily have its attraction, that you were an underperformer. But what's going on in your head? What are you--what-- Speaker 2: I don't think much at that point in time. If I could play hopscotch--I wasn't an avid reader. My sister was an avid reader. She would read the Nancy Drew series and give me the synopsis. And I was--it was just--she was so good at this. She was a great storyteller. It was like I read it. I have a book called "This Is Me," which my mother hung on to, where you write your thoughts and ideas. And I looked back at it as a preparation for this interview. And at eight I wanted to be either a policewoman or a nurse, at eight. My handwriting was atrocious then. It is--it is atrocious now. It asked me did I ever want to get married, and the answer was yes. And it said do you want to have children, and I put a big question mark when I was eight. I don't know why, but that's what in the "This Is Me." There, there was no scarring stuff. You know, some kids had really rough childhoods. There was molestation--none of that. Story_ID: 96057 Speaker 1: My parents fought, but they weren't--I knew they weren't fighting me. I, I wish there had been peace and harmony. I took their divorce very, very hard. Speaker 2: So that was hard--that was a hard period. Speaker 1: Man, I cried more than my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams]. But Esther being the resourceful woman and the fact that then we were still in the Catholic Church, I got therapy for free through Catholic Social Services. You know, she saw me going down slow. Speaker 2: So your mother sought that out for you? Speaker 1: Yep, Esther. She was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) 'cause that, that, that didn't happen much in the black community. Speaker 1: It doesn't happen today in the black community. And my sister--she tried to get it for my older sister. And Annette was smarter, and she could bamboozle my mother, and it was to her detriment. She never dealt with the divorce; she never knew who she was; she struggled. She had an incredible amount of fame. She was like the first black woman to ever go to the Miss Michigan Pageant as part of the Miss America--you know thing. And she got so much notoriety as a result of that, and there was nobody around to--I mean we were just a family of factory workers living on the west side of Lansing. And I--and we've talked about this later on. I--she just often said, I kind of wish now--with the problems that I've struggled with and had to overcome, I kind of wish I had gone along a long time ago. Because by the time Annette got into therapy, she, she had just lived through an awful lot. Speaker 2: Yeah, those things--I mean that was very forward of your thinking, 'cause we're talking about 19--in the 1950s. Speaker 1: Fifties, yes. And I remember her name was Helen Gordon (ph.). Speaker 2: And so what did she talk to you about? Speaker 1: Uh, first of all she show me--this is the honest to God truth. She showed me inkblots, and I had never seen what inkblots were. I didn't know what a Rorschach was. And every time she showed me an inkblot, she says what does this look like? And I would say it looks like a chicken back. She said what? I said haven't you ever seen a chicken back that's cut off? Looks like a chicken back. And she'd show me another one. I said it looks like a turkey neck. Everything was related to meat and foods. And I came home and I told my mother about it. Mama didn't even know what I was talking about. And she later confided in her sister. She said they were asking Roz all these questions, and they showed her all these inkblots. And she said I hope Ms. Gordon doesn't think Roz is crazy (laughter). But she didn't think I was crazy. But everything on the inkblot sign was related to meat or food. Speaker 2: But do you--that did help you. Did it help to talk to someone? Speaker 1: It--I, I was with her for four years. And you just can't imagine what ten to fourteen--when--I wasn't especially cute. I was heavyset. I liked school. There was never any bullying. But we were in a, a different kind of a home. Mother was not on the hou--head of the household, but people didn't get divorced back then. She lost her complete social standing. And my grandmother started taking care of us all the time because she worked at the doctor's office in the daytime. And thanks to a wonderful woman named Helen Glass, whose husband was a bartender at a white country club, they could go and check coats for a quarter a coat. And that paid for our shoes and our underwear. And then she'd come home and get in the bed, and get up at like 11:00 to go to the doctor's office. Nobody had that kind of a lifestyle except the Abrams kids. Very few women worked back then. Speaker 2: No, that's why I was gonna--I was gonna comment on that. 'Cause divorce was like taboo. Now it's common, and it--and it's (laughter) more, more common than it's not. Story_ID: 96068 Speaker 1: So I want--so you go--what year do you start, 'cause these are cute little pictures I--where are these pictures from? They're adorable. I mean what are-- Speaker 2: My father [Herbert Abrams]-- Speaker 1: --and the-- Speaker 2: --was a photographer. I have a thousand of them, and pictures of everybody that I grew up with. And he was there that--you know in addition to working at Oldsmobile--he didn't make enough money to do all the things my mom wanted, so he became a photographer in the black community. And his children ended up being the subjects of so much. Wait 'til you see the ones that I brought with me today to just to really give you some flavor of the kinds of photographs my dad took. Speaker 1: So 'cause there's one of you in the-- Speaker 2: I won some-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --some beauty con--mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] put her kids in beauty pageants. She thought at two it would give me poise. She wanted her children to be better than she was; that was it. She said I have so many limitations--and the world has changed because of the Civil Rights Movement--and I just want you to be able to compete. Speaker 1: So a very aspirational--that was--that's the difference between now and then. Story_ID: 96069 Speaker 1: That's what's difference between now and then. So you, you--what other family memories do you wanna share sort of, you know, durng that time and you know, after? So ten, that--that's a period of readjustment. And in that time period, you go to J. W. Sexton High School, right--'cause that's where you go. And na--now these are local schools? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --local schools. Speaker 2: And within walking distance, walked to every school. So what's the question? Speaker 1: Now, well, what other things--can you share other family memory--bam--memories? As--would it be--you know you did mention the trip that you took to--was it Minnesota I think? Speaker 2: It was a family vacation. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Minneapolis, Minnesota. Speaker 1: And then I was wondering are there other family vacations? Are there holidays that you would like to--you know a specific holiday is--are there-- Speaker 2: Yes, holidays, specifically Christmas. Not having a lot of money, but my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] would buy for us throughout the year. So for Christmas we got all of or underwear for six months, all of our school clothes six months, coats, boots. There would be twenty-five gifts under the tree for me, twenty-five for my sister, twenty-five for my brother, because my mother bought all year round so that she could save money. And so she would buy us--she'd find socks on sale, and they'd be a box of socks. She'd find bras on sale; there'd be a box of bras. She knew our shoe sizes; she knew our boot sizes. She would buy scarves, gloves, and she would wrap them all individually. And when you walked into our home, it looked like FAO Schwarz, because she would wrap them, hide them. We had huge Christmas dinners. My father [Herbert Abrams] was always there taking picture. I got pictures of Christmas, oh my goodness. I'm just sorry I didn't bring 'em. I didn't know I'd be talking about it. Christmas was a huge event; Thanksgiving was a huge event. Our families came together, aunts, uncles, nieces, cousins at my grandmother's house. They cooked for days, for days, for days. And then we'd have this big meal, and then you know, we'd get the itis and all fall out and go to sleep and--but it was family, and it was support, and it was love. And people would get together and gossip--ooh, did you know so and so was foolin' around with so and so while her husband was in the [U.S.] Army? And you just caught up on all the gossip. And that's what I miss most about my adult life. I've lived in so many different places that there was no way I could do that for my family. And I dragged my poor husband [Kenneth Showers] with me, so there was no way he could maintain it. And that's just real important for kids today. Story_ID: 96070 Speaker 1: So you had a real community, I mean a lot of family around 'cause your grand--you said your grandmother and your aunt were just a, a, a block-- Speaker 2: A block and a short block, not a New York block, a Michigan block. You could be there if you skipped in two minutes, and if you cut through backyards, you could do it in one. Speaker 1: You know, isn't there--one of the first Motown groups, weren't they from Lansing, Michigan? I thought--or maybe-- Speaker 2: A small town groups--singing groups, what? Speaker 1: Singing groups like the lu--the, the--that the--oh, well, anyway, I thought they--that maybe they moved there. Okay, so--and Lansing is how far from Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Ninety miles. Speaker 1: So was there much--did you spend any time in Detroit, or was that like another world away? Speaker 2: Mama [Esther Caldwell Abrams] took us to the Fisher Theater. She would save up for tickets so that we could stage plays. Mama wanted us to eat in Macy's because they had a lot of silverware on the table. And back then people wore gloves to lunch, and you dressed up, and you wore heels. And she would drive all the way to Detroit so that we could eat at Macy's and figure out--oh, this is the salad fork, this is the seafood fork, this is the--once again, she, she was relentless. She didn't know, but she would hear other women talking about this is what they're doing with their daughters and their sons. And she said I'mma find a way to do this for mine. Speaker 1: So you--how many lesson--you said you took dan-- Speaker 2: I took tap, I took ballet, I took singing lessons. I had a lisp on the letter S until I was like in the 4th grade, and she sent me--in school she made sure that I got a speech therapist. I studied speech therapy in undergraduate school because she made me know how important it is to speak clearly and to digitdida (ph.). I took baton; I--she forced me--we all had to learn how to swim, but she wanted me to be a synchronized swimmer. There was no way anybody was gonna hire my big butt to be kicking my legs up in the air. But, the synchronized swimming coach said, I want you--we have this water show every year. I want you to be my Mistress of Ceremonies for the water show. You've got a lot of personality. This might make you some money later on. Doing that, I got hired by the telephone company many, many, many years later both in New York, and Chesapeake, and Potomac, and Washington. I learned how to talk to an audience, and that's how I made money to get myself through school. I mean mama started all these balls rolling. I don't know if she knew it would all kind of come together in some instances, but it did. Story_ID: 96071 Speaker 1: See now that, that--so in all those lessons, you're getting exposure to a lot of things. Now what were you good at? I mean obvious--this is what I'm trying to understand: you said that you were chubby, but yet you're very outgoing, and you seem to have a good sense of self. Did you ever struggle with your chubbiness at all? Speaker 2: I wanted to be thin. My sister was a beauty queen. I cannot tell you the men who would--the young men who would come, and they would come I swear with flowers, with chocolate; you know, they came in pretty cars to take her out. Now, were--I'm two and a half years younger than her. And this is what she was going through in high school, because she was in the Miss Lansing Pageant. And they wrote it up because black women just didn't do this in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So she was a celebrity. There was nobody knocking on the door for Roz. I was in college before I started seriously dating. And I was hanging with a group of women, Elaine, Valerie, Lannie (ph.), Carol, they all had boyfriends. I was just sort of there. And mama [Esther Caldwell Abrams] would always say, honey, your day will come; your day will come. And I remember one day saying, Mama, I am sixteen years old, and I have never had a date. Aren't you concerned? She said no, baby, your day will come. And I made her promise me. I said will there be somebody to marry me one day? She said yes, baby, and I believed her. And lo and behold there was somebody. But because my family went to extraordinary lengths, because Annette--and Roz was really an appendage, and Dennis was too young to even care, that's when my father started calling me princess. He started calling me a thoroughbred. I mean I'm puttin' all this together later. A thoroughbred could do anything. And they did it just because they didn't want me to wilt in this shadow of my sister. It was a conscious thing on their part. Speaker 1: That's a wonderful thing. It really is 'cause it could go the other way. Speaker 2: Most of the time it does. Story_ID: 96072 Speaker 1: So what, what is your interest then in, in high school? What are you--and it is assumed you're gonna go to college? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. Now do you want to start with the college story? I was turned down by every school that my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] and I applied to. Speaker 1: So what schools did you apply to? Speaker 2: Eastern Michigan [University, Ypsilanti], Western Michigan [University, Kalamazoo], Michigan State University, which is in East Lansing, Michigan, Olivet College [Olivet, Michigan]; those were the four. They all turned me down. What did Esther do? I was hysterical. I'm--I'm a failure. My mom will die--she put me in the car, and we drove--we drove to Kalamazoo, Michigan. And she said I wanna see the dean. And they said, you know, we know what you're here for, so will you talk to this guy. And she said nope, I gotta see the dean. And I was sitting there. And she said if you don't let my daughter go to school here, she's gonna be just like me. She won't have skills; she won't have a life, and she's smart if you just give her a chance. They gave me a chance. I graduated from there and went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to get a master's degree. Who'd a thunk it? She never stopped fighting for her children. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: There's nothing like a mother (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you could not--so you--why were you an underperformer you think? Speaker 2: Who knows. Speaker 1: Mo--people mature at different times. Speaker 2: Because once I exploded, look out. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Something happened, and my aunt said it happened when I was seventeen or eighteen. And she took us to thus rock and roll show at a place called the Lansing Civic Center. And she knew Jackie Wilson. And she took us backstage, and Jackie was fine, and he kissed me on the mouth. And I--my life changed after that. It was like--oh me, oh my. And seriously, they all said I started dressing better; I started combing my hair, as opposed to just gettin' up with the, the wolf wig. And I don't know. Once I got to college and was having fun, I started acting; I was in a play, "Purlie Victorious." I played Idella Landy. And that--when you can get out once again before people. I was studying speech therapy, and I was doing so well that the school--and you gotta remember the time. We had come through the Civil Rights Movement. They needed African-American men and women with as many skills as possible 'cause the world was really waitin' for us back then. I won a, a int--a scholarship or something--they didn't call it a scholarship--to study abroad--taking classes at the Royal Shakespeare Company; took classes at the London School of Economics. And I'm twenty-one years old. And once again, it's just when the opportunity presented itself, Esther had raised children who could walk through and hold their own. I never twirled a baton, but I had rhythm because of that baton--baton twirling. And it, it was just this crazy, crazy, crazy circle that she started and we--all of us were able to just keep going. Story_ID: 96073 Speaker 1: So once you got into Western Michigan [University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], you didn't have any problems at all academ-- Speaker 2: I went in on probation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They said her grades--she comes in on probation. She gets one semester to get all C's. We're not gonna. We're not gonna--and I did. And then--you know, as I got more and more into the school, I'm--I am not a genius, but I was just willing to work and read. Nobody was asking me out, or they were so few and far between I had a chance--plenty of time to study and to play bid whist (laughter). Speaker 1: And bid whist? Speaker 2: That was big then. Speaker 1: It was big. Speaker 2: That was big, big, big. Speaker 1: Bid--bid whist parties all--how long-- Speaker 2: All night long we would play. Speaker 1: How, how large was the, the black population at-- Speaker 2: Back then it was probably five percent. Speaker 1: Out of how many students? Speaker 2: Back then there--it was a state school, so there were 14,000. Now there are 45 to 50,000. I went back there to get an award and to give them some money, and I couldn't even find my way around. It's huge now. And there's a bust of me, believe it or not--because you give 'em money, you know. And it's not a bad likeness. Speaker 1: So, so what are--so you enjoyed that. I mean you, you major in sociology, right? Speaker 2: Sociology and speech. Speaker 1: And speech, okay. And, and you become active in theater. Now-- Speaker 2: And pledged Delta. Speaker 1: And you--okay, you pledged Delta. Speaker 2: I pledged Delta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was interesting. I love the sorority, but you know, fistfights almost broke out when it came time to cross the burning sands. Because it's like, you gonna do what to me? I don't think so. Speaker 1: Well, pledge was very ha--I don't know-- Speaker 2: Back then-- Speaker 1: I'm sure it was very hard. They did all kinds of things. Speaker 2: Yep, mercifully that has changed now, you know. Speaker 1: But what kinds of things were they doing? Speaker 2: Oh, girl, please. I love my sorority too much to get into that. Oh, how I love Delta. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, Delta is really also known as the educators, right? It's-- Speaker 2: And the--give back. Give to the community. And I do that to this day as a result of being a Delta. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you just had a big--was last--last year was the 100th right, anniversary? Okay. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was. Story_ID: 96074 Speaker 1: So what made you decide you--so you went from your--getting your bachelor's right into getting your master's? Speaker 2: Somebody at Western [Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] said this is what you should do, if you're interested in acting. U of M [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] has one of the finest acting schools. I took a lot of drama classes, electives at Western Michigan University. And it was like, uh, no, I'm gonna save the world; I want to be a sociologist. And then something happened that I just ended up in the drama school, and it was great. It was jus--it was fun, acting, directing. I couldn't get a job because, you know, I was not a movie star. I tried to get into Yale Drama School [New Haven, Connecticut], but I, I didn't have the background or the credentials. But mama said let's try it, you know. Nothing hurts a trial but a failure. Story_ID: 96075 Speaker 1: After grad school, I came back to Lansing [Michigan] and started working at a poverty program. It was called the Housing Assistance Foundation. If you were poor or a homeowner, we would come in with a crew of contractors, and do the, the really necessary things in your house to keep it safe, sound, and sanitary--do it for you so that you could just pay your rent or mortgage, and keep a roof over your head, you know, part of the American dream. And they came--while I was working there somebody came to do a story, a, a, a reporter. And I was enthralled. And then when I saw what they did in our offices, and, and they went out to several of the homes and saw the story on TV, it was like, how did they do that? How do you get from here to here? And I had the--I went into WJIM, asked to see the general manager, and said, you know, you sent so and so to do a story. I'm gainfully employed, but I really would like to see how this journalism business works. And he said where did you go to journalism school? I said, I didn't. He said, well, what are your credentials? And I told him. And he said, can you write? I said sure, you know, anybody can write. He said well, can you write news copy? Sure; and they hired me as an intern. Speaker 2: So, so that was really your start then, right? Speaker 1: Yes, WJIM as an intern, but it gets better. The anchorwoman, Diane Smith, bonded with me. And after I had been there for about seven months, one night she got sick and she was supposed to do a story, ride along with some cops for this new program on community policing. They called in an anchor to fill in for her, and she said let Roz do the story. And they let me do the story, and I did it, and I did it well. News comes out at 11. At about 10:30 I lost it. I got so frightened I went into the bathroom, and I think I puked up a kidney. I was so frightened I, I started sweating. I, I had--I would sit and watch her in the studio, but I had never been on television myself at this point. And I didn't think I could do it. I just got so, so, so, so frightened. But the news director was having none of it. He said you will get out there and you will do it, or you will leave here, and that's the end of this. And I was dreadful; I was shaking; I had puked all my makeup off; I sweated it off; my hair was nappy, but I did the story, and they gave me another chance. Speaker 2: So this was--is this 1972? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: That's what I have it-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --as being 1972. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is--I mean what is the racial composition of Lansing? Speaker 1: Now? I would have no idea. Speaker 2: Then--but then. What was--well, your anc-- Speaker 1: There were a lot-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --of black people there because factories. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You gotta remember a whole bunch of people migrated into the Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Detroit filled up, they overflowed into Lansing. Lansing filled up, there were--there was a very large black population, but I don't know what-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the percentages were. Speaker 2: Okay. So you--so what do you do at that point? So you work there. How long do you work there--contin--'cause you're interning. Speaker 1: No more than two years, because by '75 [1975] I was in Atlanta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 96076 Speaker 1: So that's what-I wanted to understand. How do you get to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I can't tell you that story. Speaker 1: May I-- Speaker 2: I can't you tell you--it involves a love affair. And the woman had to get out of town. And she didn't want to go by herself, so her lover said I'll send you anywhere. And she said I don't want to go by myself. And so I ended up being the person that she took to Atlanta with her. And that--I was--we were staying in the best hotels; we had cars driving us around; and I had--I said I'm going to this place called WSB. And I'mma pick up an application because it was--WSB was the number one television station; WSB Radio was the number one radio station. And I--you know, I was working it. She was rich and didn't have anything to worry about, but I was thinking. And that's how I got to Atlanta. And that's when I realized this is the city I want to come back to. It billed itself as the city too busy to hate, and a huge African-American population, and that was not lost on me 'cause I had begun the search for a husband. They had black people on television there, not one, not two. They had black anchors; they had black photographers. And I, I never saw that in Lansing; I never saw that in Lansing. After I left, a lot of things changed. But I said oh, this, this is the place for moi, and eventually I did go back. Speaker 1: And Atlan--when you first come there, I mean it's really two years before Maynard Jackson I think becomes mayor--one or two years. And I mean Atlanta is--as you said, it's, it's sort of--it's hopping. Speaker 2: Oh, my God, girl, you should have been there. You should have been there. And then the historic part--Maynard being the first black mayor--the first ba--Reggie somebody or other was the first black police chief. And, and what you saw was black politicians were just like all politicians. You had really good ones, Maynard. His police chief was not so good. The white business community, and you saw this, they were determined for Atlanta to be the jewel of the South. They wanted people--black people, white people to come from all over the world. They built this huge airport. They were thinking--they built the rapid rail system during the time that I was there. People partied. Atlanta was a dry county when I got there--or Fulton was a dry county. By the time I left, everybody was imbibing and happy, and it was a great time. Jimmy Carter ran for president. So you would work your shift and then you would go to the bars. Time correspondent, New York Times correspondent, all the big correspondents were there. And they didn't have to do all the stuff journalists have to do today. You work twelve hours and then you went to the watering hole. And you could sit down and ask them questions. I met Dan Rather for the first time in Atlanta, and they, they weren't snobs. They weren't stuck-up. He doesn't remember this, because I met him and got to know him here in New York. But--Frank Reynolds, they, they were all--they were just there. And I was a cub reporter. WSB Radio hired me. I wanted to go to television. They didn't have room. I went to the competitor next door, WXIA, got a job, had a great time, got my first anchor job, noon news. [Ted] Turner decides to open up CNN walking distance from house. Because I was in Atlanta, people knew me and you know, I got hired at CNN. And after that, the rest was history because news directors all over the country watched CNN, as well as a lot of people. Story_ID: 96077 Speaker 1: So you--so you--so who are the people professionally that you're meeting in Atlanta [Georgia]? I mean are there people like--is Jocelyn Dorsey [HM]--she comes in behind-- Speaker 2: I know Jocelyn Dorsey well. She was at WSB Television. She was a great reporter. Jocelyn was a great woman. Jocelyn was amazing, just simply amazing. And she had this Eritrean--Eritrean husband, who was the big PR guy from MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], and they were quite the power couple. They were good people. Speaker 1: So it was Jocelyn and then-- Speaker 2: Monica? Speaker 1: Monica-- Speaker 2: Monica Kaufman [HM]. Speaker 1: --Monica Kaufman, who--right. Speaker 2: Monica Kaufman-- Speaker 1: --who just retired-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --within recent-- Speaker 2: Monica was the reason that I got out of radio. She said strike while the iron's hot. We may not hire you, but the--either one of the other two stations would be glad to have you, Roz. And I followed her advice. Speaker 1: And then there's also--I don't know what Xernona was doing at that time, but Xernona Clayton [HM]. Speaker 2: She's--okay, right--I, I haven't seen or heard-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --from her in so many years. Speaker 1: I think she is. Speaker 2: Talk about an icon and a powerhouse, and she was at Turner [Broadcasting] when I was there. And she started these awards that have now gone into the thing that-- Speaker 1: The Trumpet Awards. Speaker 2: They started out as the Trumpet Awards, and they were great. And I still have those in my archives somewhere because she asked me to pre--be a presenter for a couple of years. But are they--didn't that morph into what CNN does with Anderson Cooper, the-- Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Oh, I thought that-- Speaker 1: No, it's totally separate. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So she--it's gone over to TV One, but, but--because I--you know with the change and Ted Turner getting out. So he gifted her money, and she set up a foundation as continuing to do the Trumpet Awards. Speaker 2: Well, they, they were--that was the awards ceremony for many, many, many years. It was--and she did an--a fantastic job. And she's also one of those iconic figures who, from a historic standpoint she paved the way. When we talk about standing on the shoulders of giants, Xernona, Belva Davis [HM], they did such a good job. They represented us so well until--and, and they also--you could look up to them. That's the way I need to behave. That's the way--and they opened the doors for a lot of us to get in. Speaker 1: Right. Well, they were--they're classy people. Speaker 2: Yes, they are. Speaker 1: And--but Xernona has her, her (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: The, the hair with the--she, she, she was known for that, but it worked. She was a beautiful woman. She didn't need to hide behind her hair. And as they say, it was blow hair to boot, so you know (laughter). Speaker 1: You mean nice hair. Speaker 2: Nice--well-- Speaker 1: What they call-- Speaker 2: --yes. Speaker 1: --nice hair. Speaker 2: And you know what-- Speaker 1: Blow, blow hair to boot. I haven't heard that. Speaker 2: Oh, girl, it would blow. It would blow. It would blow, yes. Story_ID: 96085 Speaker 1: Talking about--well, first of all you mentioned getting--mar--meeting the man of your dreams in Atlanta [Georgia]. So who is that? Speaker 2: His name was, he's passed way, Kenneth Richard Showers. And I just have to take a moment to sing the praises of supportive black men. Because back in the day--we got married in 1982. Back in the day, black men did not help to raise their children so that the wife could go off and make big bucks. Black men did not move when their wives moved. And Kenneth Richard Showers did it. We had a wonderful lifestyle. He later in his life told me that it was very difficult because people would push him aside if they wanted to talk to me. He was 6 foot 6 inches tall, so handsome. He wanted to coach young men. He wanted to do sports. He had played basketball all his life. And he said la--Latino men and black men just don't have enough role models. He said I would really like to get a job as a coach--he was an accountant by training--and, and improve the lives of black and Latino men. And as the lure to get him to go with me from Atlanta to San Francisco [California], I said you never have to work. You can get a job coaching, volunteering, anything, you know. And if, if this is your passion--'cause now we just don't have to worry about money. What happened was we ended up adopting our children there, so his dream was deferred for a little while. I get the offer to come to New York, and I put it out there again. I said, Kenny, if you'll move one more time--and if he had said no, I'd be in San Francisco today. If he had said no to Atlanta, I would be in Atlanta to this day. I love this man. He was a good and decent man. But I wasn't above, you know, trying to do a little manipulation 'cause I really wanted to get to New York. And I said if you get to New York, then you can do it. And he said no, we're not gonna go until I have some leads. I'm not gonna get here cold with these two adopted kids. And we found out that there was a college in Briarcliff Manor, New York called The King's College. It had a basketball team. We got a house in Briarcliff Manor. King's College was a half a mile away. He went in; the head coach hired him, and so he could be home when the girls came home to make sure they got dinner and did their studies and be back at night for practice. It really worked out well. He was happy; I was happy; everybody was happy. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Speaker 2: And I, I just--so often he was like--you know, I've told you about my family and how they made me secure, and they pushed me. This man was a man among men. And by the time I realized it--'cause we were just movin', and groovin', and having fun, and seeing the world, and partying, and buying nice clothes. By the time I realized what an extraordinary man he was, our marriage had started to--he had had--he had serious health issues. He'd had a stroke. They were saying you might not be able to coach. He, he became very depressed about that. Story_ID: 96086 Speaker 1: So anyway, he [Kenneth Richard Showers] got sick. He thought he was gonna have to give up coaching, and it really threw him off his game because he loved it. He was happier than he'd ever been in his life. And in his mind--he ended up having three strokes, one of which was pretty serious. And then he had TIAs [Transient Ischemic Attacks] I think they call them, those mini strokes, which only showed up when he had a major stroke. And they said well, he's had two TIAs. And he wouldn't go and talk to somebody about his depression, because in the black community men just don't do this. He said, you know I'm a man. I can cope on my own. He wanted us to move from New York. We had a home in Florida, which was supposed to be our retirement home. He was also from Florida, and he was very close to his family. I said, you know, I can't walk away. We have two daughters, neither of whom finished college. We got this house to pay for. We got the house down South to pay for. You know, we don't wanna use up all of the money that we have saved just--you know, just stay here. This has the best medical. In New York, best medic--medicine in the world here. But he said you know you're gone all the time, and I can't do what I use to do. And we were never able to get over that. But when you look at a woman who has done well, and isn't a substance abuser, is only mildly crazy, there's somebody back there other than her family. And for me, it was Kenneth Richard Showers. He had a major stroke three years ago. He has passed on. We remained best friends until the day he died. And at his funeral, I went up to the, the lovely young lady--he was gonna get married several months later--and I said I just wanna thank you for bringing him so much joy. And she said something to the affect, Roz, you're one of the coolest people I've ever met, because my oldest grandson used to go down there. And Kenny wasn't strong enough to take care of him. The girlfriend would, and so we knew each other. And I was crying a that funeral, not 'cause I lost my ex-husband. I lost the best male friend I ever had in my life outside my father and my brother. And that's the story of Kenneth Richard. Speaker 2: So you di--did you divorce or separate? Speaker 1: We, we separated, and everybody was trying to figure out what was going on. As long as we were separated, he could get my insurance, and he needed it. As long as we were separated, there were certain financial benefits for me and the money that I was bringing home. I knew that I would always keep a roof over his head. He asked me for my insurance. I said you got it toots. I mean it was that kind of a mutual respect for each other. Speaker 2: So 'cause he had been there for you all that time. Speaker 1: Oh, he had been there. Oh, girl, please. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At a time when men did not do this for their women. They just--they just didn't do it. He did. Speaker 2: So he allowed you to be out front and in a public image, 'cause it can't--yeah. Story_ID: 96087 Speaker 1: So, so I wanna--so let's talk about--so wait, you were at WS--S--SB-AM [WSB AM] for how long and then-- Speaker 2: Don't get me to lying. It wasn't--it wasn't long. Speaker 1: It wasn't long, okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't long. I just don't wanna say if it was three years and it was only two and a half. Speaker 1: So what made you wanna go to CNN? What had you heard about it 'cause-- Speaker 2: I didn't--Monica Kaufman [HM] came to me. I was in radio. She said you gotta do TV. You just--you--radio is wonderful. And she said you're doing great things at this station. But listen to me when I say this: you've got to do TV. So I went to XIA [WXIA], and I just--maybe I was there two years; maybe I was there three. And [Ted] Turner started building this thing, and he was hiring everybody, everybody and training them. It was a not--it was a right to work state. There were no unions. So if you wanted to be an engineer, you didn't have to come--be from the union in New York. He trained all the people, and he, he integrated--I mean he had everybody on camera, off camera. It was, you know, a, a beautiful, diverse culture there. Speaker 1: 'Cause his--he's, he's a--now was he around much during that time? He--he's sort of a renegade himself, right? Speaker 2: You know what? Ted Turner is the most brilliant man that I ever worked for. And yes, he would waltz through from time to time. And yes, there were many women that I worked with that had a crush on him. And it was like he, he was just so--talk about swagger, he was so fine, so cool, and so detached. But he did something that no one else had done in this cable news network in the South that a whole bunch of people were watching. And I have tremendous respect for this man. Speaker 1: So who were some of the people there at the time, you know, at the beginning? 'Cause I have--I was wondering, did you go there--we have two dates, either that you went there from--I don't know--'82 [1982] to '83 [1983]? Is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I would say more it was like '82 [1982] to '85 [1984], because I got-- Speaker 1: Four. Speaker 2: --married in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And my co-anchor gave me a shower and the cutest dog named Cain. And I left there in '84 [1984], so the end of '84 [1984]. I got married in August. Speaker 1: So who were some of the people you worked there--were--was-- Speaker 2: Reynelda Muse, she was--(unclear) she happened to be a fine black anchor. But here was also Kathleen Sullivan, Lois and Dave Hart [sic, Lois Hart and David Walker]. Katie Couric was a producer. The--Schonfeld--Reese Schonfeld was the, the big gun. I loved Reese. I loved his wife. They were good journalists. They were fair, strong, guiding hands. They had a big job to do. If memory serves, she was head of editing, Pat, and he just ran the whole thing. A wonderful man named Burt Reinhardt. Burt's no longer with us. They did an incredible thing, and I was a part of it, one of the first. Speaker 1: So why did you leave? Speaker 2: I got an offer to go to San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: Now was--did CNN pay well? Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: 'Cause you know it was new. Speaker 2: It, it was not only new, but you were living in the South. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You can't underestimate the standard of living. I was living well. I went from an apartment to a lovely condominium in Atlanta [Georgia]. Kenny [Kenneth Showers] and I lived there. And it was really, really, really, really nice. Speaker 1: Now where were--where were you staying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was on Lindberg Drive, and now it's part of the Lenox Hill area. It's really chichi, but it was--it was a very nice apartment. We had no money worries. We traveled; we--the, the big money--the, the first big boost was when I got to San Francisco. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the first big--but whatever we made, and I can't remember, in Atlanta we, we weren't hurtin' at all--we were in the Caribbean, visiting our parents, sending my mother to Italy so she could see the Pope before she died. Speaker 1: So your money--so your saying--but even in Atlanta you were doing fine. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now was Jocelyn [Dorsey, HM] at W--So-- Speaker 2: SB. Speaker 1: Huh--WSB. Did she come after you or before-- Speaker 2: She was there during my tenure. She left. I was in Atlanta eleven years doing radio, television, and Turner [Broadcasting]. And she left the business before I went CNN, and I don't know what she did after that. She was a big name; she was a power broker, but she left on her own terms. Story_ID: 96088 Speaker 1: So how many people of color between the--'cause you have ABC, NBC, CBS. Speaker 2: And that was it back then. Speaker 1: Okay, how many African Americans are on the air at that point when your-- Speaker 2: I don't remember any at the CBS station. Monica [Kaufman, HM] was a big name for ABC. And I was WXIA, and that was NBC, and I was the--I started out as the noon anchor. I'm positive I ended up getting the 5:00 show with a wonderful black guy named Joe Washington. And we were the first black anchor team. "Jet" magazine noted it. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's a big deal. I was gonna say, you know, these anchor teams have gone through a whole transition over the years. Speaker 2: They have, they have, but we used to get a lot of mail about the "N" word at noon, the __ at noon, because Joe and I were the first. [You want her to lean over a little bit?] Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Because Joe and I were the first, and it--he, he was great. He was a great journalist, he was. So there were two at XIA. Monica was the primary. I don't--there were no others. But by the time I left, everybody had a black anchor throughout the day. I mean, you know, it, it had come a long way in eleven years. Speaker 1: Because that--and you know, and sometimes I think it's going backwards or it's-- Speaker 2: It is. First of all, you don't have--Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] started looking into this a decade ago. You had all these blacks that told the story of the Civil Rights Movement. And then thirty years later, the number of blacks in newspapers, television, radio was just getting smaller and smaller and smaller. Speaker 1: So this--when we look at this, and I've often in the work we're right now, I see that there--you know, the late '60s [1960s] to the mid '80s [19780s] in some respects were very vibrant, you know, years where things were--there was a lot happening, a lot in business- Speaker 2: Women's Movement-- Speaker 1: --politics-- Speaker 2: --Vietnam War, black politicians really getting in there, trying to fight for mayoral positions in major cities. It was--it was a wonderful time to be young, gifted, and black. Story_ID: 96089 Speaker 1: So now what, what, what groups are you joining, and what are--before I go there, what are you learning about the news business and about being an anchor? And are you reporting or are you reading? Speaker 2: Okay, when you're a reporter, and that's what I was for the first half of my career, you go out, and you write the story, and you shoot the story, or you--with a photographer. Or in radio you recorded it, and it was you. And microwave was just coming in, so you did it from the field. Once you get inside and you're anchoring an hour or half an hour show, and everything has to be current, you can't do it all. So everybody is divvied up, and you have to stay on top of your story. In New York, they liked for you to do a story in the morning if you didn't have a show until afternoon. But if you were due in at ten, and the story didn't get started until noon or one, getting back in New York traffic made it very difficult. You could come back, have a story to do and not be able to see like what's going on in the world, what's coming up in your show. And you have to be prepared. You're selling the show. You really want to know, even if somebody else has written it for you. You have--you wanna put it in your -ese and Roz-ese. And if you--you have to know something so that if there's a mistake. And later on in my career, a lot of things got on the air because I wasn't vigilant enough; I didn't know enough about all the stories. And it's never the, the big things that line you up. It's never the who, what, when, where, how. It's somebody's age, or the street, or the number of somebody's priors, but you're not allowed to make those kinds of mistakes. That's not a small mistake. A mistake is a mistake. And you, you just end up beating yourself up for, for days, and weeks, and months to come because you're sitting in the chair; you're making the big money; you're supposed to know a whole lot about this stuff. And it's really hard when you see--we talk about one medicine, and we--and we're really--we give it a name, but actually we're referring to another medicine. And there just wasn't any time to check it, 'cause there's so much that's jammed into these shows. But if you care about informing the public, it'll keep you up at night forever. It is just--and there's just no small mistakes. You're not supposed to do it. Story_ID: 96090 Speaker 1: So in those days, like when you look back, so there's a lot of blacks in the newsroom. Now you also become I think the first black president of the Atlanta Press Club? Is it--am I right? Speaker 2: God, girl, that was so long ago. I know I was a member of the Atlanta Press Club. Speaker 1: No, vi--vice president of the Atlanta-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay-- Speaker 1: --vice president. Speaker 2: --yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --of the--and that's in 1977. Speaker 2: Yes, that's very true that I--that I remember. The older I get, some things just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --foggy. Speaker 1: Okay, and then when you were at WXIA, who was your co-anchor? Do you-- Speaker 2: Joe Washington, black guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Joe Washington, wonderful man. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what you were talking about. And then you go from there over to CNN? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And CNN--what is your role at CNN? Speaker 2: Anchor, and-- Speaker 1: Anchor. Speaker 2: --that's all you did there. All the reporters were around the world. And I worked with a guy who was a vintage New York journalist. His name was Bob Cain. He was much older than me. And talk about teaching me, this man was very secure; he happened to also like me; I got to meet his family; and he really carried me through. He had been an old radio anchor, had a great, wonderful, gravelly voice. He was brilliant. And when you sit next to somebody like that for two or three years you learn a lot. He was--oh. Speaker 1: So what did he teach you? Speaker 2: First of all, he taught me never let 'em see you sweat, that television is no place for meltdowns. And he said it's just--the medium just won't allow. So if you make a mistake, just keep on pushing. And I made a lot of reading mistakes. I got tongue-tied, but that was the perfect place to do it 'cause you were on the air for an hour, you left, and then you came back for another hour. And with that kind of a grind, and that's really what it was, you're never gonna anchor unless you're working for a cable news network, those kinds of hours. We were just starting out. And if somebody didn't show up, they might call you in at 8:00 to do somebody else's shift. But the training that I got, and being able to hear a little bit in my ear from the producer, and know what questions to ask. That's what I learned there, you know--no, no, don't tell me that; tell me how many injuries; tell me and only tell me what you know. If you're saying sources say, make sure you preface everything, otherwise I have to say CNN said, and it may not come from us. It may come from AP; it may come from the local station. That's, that's the stuff that you pick up that makes you good, and fluid. And people will just trust you, because it sounds like you really know what you're talking about, and that you care about them, and I did. Story_ID: 96091 Speaker 1: Now do you remember--now you were on air. You were radio when and--I mean Maynard Jackson won for the first time. Speaker 2: Honey, I knew Maynard Jackson. I mean at--all the reporters knew him. Because I believe he was a city council member before he got elected, so you interviewed him. And I remem--oh, he's, he's a great politician. I have tremendous respect, same with Andy Young [Andrew Young, HM], Hosea Williams, Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.]. This was the milieu that you socialized in, that you interviewed, and it was great. But I remember that when Maynard asked his wife, Valerie [Richardson Jackson, HM], to marry her, word was he took her to a park. And while she was in the swing, swinging--he was pushing her--he came around, and he said will you marry me? And I just thought that--I said I don't know much about this guy in terms of his internal workings, but he's brilliant, and he seems to be a nice guy, and he's a romantic. He gets my vote. But he went on to become one of the finest mayors in this country, and we lost him too early. Speaker 1: You know, everyone talks about him. I mean definitely when Chicago [Illinois] got our Mayor [Harold] Washington. You know, everybody was--and all the businesses that were done. The people mover that you had became Turner Construction, all that, the bond deals--he got African--American lawyers in bond deals. Speaker 2: He, he, he did it. He did it. Speaker 1: So there was a lot of that. Story_ID: 96092 Speaker 1: Now you--so, where you were taking us was you got an offer--so what--how do you get to--is it KRON? Speaker 2: KRON. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you get there? Speaker 2: It just--they offered me a job three months before my contract ended. And my agent said I want you to go out there. He said this isn't the best station. KGO was the number one station. He said, but the pay boost is going to be so substantial. And I want you to go out there; go through the interview. You may not get the job, but they have asked to talk to you, so I flew out. And they were trying to become a competitor for KGO. They were number three; KGO was number one, and I forget who was number two. But they were really--they said we think that you can bring a lot to the team. They had Bob Jimenez, who was an NBC anchor for years. They were teaming us together for the 5:00. And I forget who I worked with at eleven. Maybe it was that guy right there, Jim Paymar. I just can't remember. I've had a lot of anchormen sit beside me. And I went out there, and the city, I loved the city [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: It's a beautiful city. Speaker 2: And I was gonna be making more money. They said until you find a place to live for you and your husband, we're gonna put you up at Opera Plaza. I, I, I can't even begin to talk to you about the condominium that they paid for at Opera Plaza. I mean it was so chichi. It was walking distance from work, it was. And they said and we're gonna do this; and we're gonna do that; and you're gonna be able to travel; we've got the Democratic Convention coming up; we've got this; we've got that. And it was like where do I sign? As soon as I got back, I told my then agent, I, I really wanna go there. Speaker 1: Now who was your agent, and when did you get the agent? And can you talk about that as an industry, you know, like-- Speaker 2: It's changed too much. Speaker 1: It's changed-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: But let's talk about Tharenfield (ph.). Speaker 2: Okay, back then-- Speaker 1: Back then. Speaker 2: --if you wanted to get into the major markets, you had to have a major market representative. Because what they did was they put tapes of the twenty best people in the top five markets, and they sent them all to New York. And then they made other tapes where they would--New York being number one--then they sent 'em markets two through fifteen. That's what the agent did. And they were for two or three seconds of you, and they would say okay, send me him, send me her, send me this, send me that. And you would literally go and audition. When I was in San Francisco, I auditioned with Bob Jimenez, and they had to set up a fake studio. They didn't want anybody to know that they were looking for an anchorwoman replacement, so we went to some studio. And I did several shows--pretend shows with Bob and several pretend shows with somebody else. And then they liked me. Out of all the people that they had flown in they offered me the job, and I took it. Speaker 1: So how much did your salary go up? Speaker 2: We'll nev-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, percentage, percentage (unclear)--yeah, Speaker 2: Oh, whoa, whoa, whoa-- Speaker 1: --'cause I don't-- Speaker 2: -whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Speaker 1: 'Cause I don't know what it was-- Speaker 2: Because I can't remember--you've asked me what I was making at CNN. Speaker 1: But I mean percentage wise. Was it a 100 percent? Was it--'cause you sa-- Speaker 2: Might have been 200 percent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It might have been--if I could remember what I was making--but we weren't poor. But you gotta remember the--when I started making $50,000 dollars at WXIA, I walked in the door as, as a reporter. And then my salary when up from there when they set me in the chair at noon. It went up again when they sat me in the chair at five. And then I went out and did something very smart. I worked the community. I loved public speaking, and that gave you a high Q rating. That translates into dollars. Story_ID: 96093 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, is this commonly known among your peers, the things you're saying? Or is your agent ever advising, like this is what you need to do if you want to get, you know, where you wanna get? What is the agent's role is that--'cause I've always thought the agent was mainly used for contract negotiations. Speaker 2: That's very true. I happened to have had an agent who had a studio. And for people who were really green, you could go there and do mock newscasts. But by the time I got my agent, I had been in the business eleven years. I was in San Francisco [sic, Atlanta, Georgia] at WXIA when he came through. And he would have one person that he would talk to, saying why don't you tell her I'd like to talk to her, if she's not represented. And that's the way it was. And he would pick up people, and some were, were just too green. And then there were others like me, who I had come through--WSB was a great radio station. I did a lot of hard news. I did presidential politics; I did statewide politics; I'd cover school boards; I covered a lot of murders. There were plane crashes, the Southern flight. I had gotten so much experience there in writing, and thinking on your feet until I needed an agent just to give me the boost out of the local market, and he did. He was the one who got me at CNN. He did my contract at KRON. Speaker 1: So what was his name? Can't say that either? Speaker 2: No, no, we ended up he got mad at me, because I got another agent. And I don't wanna mention his name either. And he sued me, and he won money. And I don't begrudge him that. But here's where we parted company. He said I made you, and this is what you're doing to me. And it was the--whoa, whoa-- Speaker 1: No, wait a minute now, during what contract negotiation-- Speaker 2: When I left him right after he got me to New York. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: And he, he got me a very good contract. I was brought in to do the 5 o'clock News in the number market, but at the time I had even dreams. And they get eight percent--ten percent of your salary, and I was making very, very good money, and they just get it. Once they nail down that contract for three years, they just get the money. They don't have to deal with you. He said well, you can come in and work on teleprompter. I said, dear, I get to do shows every day. I don't need to rehearse. I'm in the number one market. And I didn't begrudge him the money, but rightly or wrongly, I made the decision to go with another agent. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: And that caused very bad blood. He took me to court. He won a, a, a nice payday. We--husband, husband I gave him the money. I don't believe in fighting these people. It's like if this is what you want, as long as there's enough for me and my family. But that's why I'm not gonna mention either of their names. Speaker 1: I got you, okay. But, so let's--I just want--I want this to be a--you know, because you know there are a lot of things--there are not a lot of you in the United States. There are not of black female anchors in the United States then or now. I mean, you know, the numbers--I don't know. Maybe they rotate--they stay same. I'm not sure. But when you get to K--KRON, and you say that you have--you know they--it's a nice place that you're staying. You know, the city is beautiful, which the Bay area is beautiful. At this point in time we're in 1982. So [President Ronald] Reagan is in office-- Speaker 2: And AIDS has hit the Bay area. Speaker 1: Okay. AIDS has hit the Bay area? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Story_ID: 96097 Speaker 1: They were just a force to be reckoned with. And-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the gay plague was reported in the news. They wanted to know why all these young, beautiful men were dying. Speaker 2: So that was the news of the day when you moved there [KRON TV, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and [President Ronald] Reagan was not--he was not mentioning it. He was not giving them any money. And they worked with the health department there; they worked with the Center for Disease Control [CDC]; they forced people to raise money and give them money so that they could find out. You gotta remember, we had never heard of a retrovirus, something that you could get in your body at eighteen, and it wouldn't rear its ugly head for ten years. The French were doing everything in this area. But in the United States, that was not the case except in San Francisco, California. Speaker 2: So now that's, that's an interest--so I, I mean I've seen the (unclear)--I don't think that's a (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh, watch "[And] The Band Played On." That is-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so true. That is exactly--they had to close the bathhouses, because that's where so much of this stuff was transmitted. Speaker 2: That's true, 'cause people would go to the bathhouses, that's right. Story_ID: 96098 Speaker 1: So let me ask, you--so who was the--who, who are--who are you--what did--how does KRN [sic, KRON] differ from CNN and WXIA in Atlanta [Georgia]? How does it differ, and who is running your newsroom, 'cause I know you get--you get paired with Jane--Joe--is it Jim Paymar that-- Speaker 2: Jim Paymar-- Speaker 1: Mar-- Speaker 2: --came after Bob Jimenez. Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, Bob Jimenez was my first. Speaker 1: Your first. Speaker 2: Jim Paymar was my second. Paymar was a cool guy, and his wife, Diane Masciale, and I were also friends. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--so how does it differ? And do you--you know, I was reading something about how a lot of times--and I think it may have even been referenced with you that they would bring someone in from outside beca--instead of switching them to--you know, instead of getting someone from another station because it might be cheaper or you know things like that. So you, you have to learn the community. You had learned Atlanta, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You, you--and I know that that's how you built your way up-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the--in the--in the area. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you have to be a good study with people and communities quickly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how did you learn? How did you--you know, 'cause how long does it take to learn a community, or learn about a community and become part of it? Speaker 2: If you have a gregarious personality, if you're willing to reach out, it's very easy. All the churches want you to speak; all the clubs want you to be a part of their fundraisers. The, the, the--what may have been the difference between me and others is that the Delta thing--yeah, you always do all this other stuff, but then you also write a check. And you can start with a small check. But organizations--you write checks to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peoples], the Police Athletic--it might only be a hundred dollars; it might be thousand dollars. But in addition to hosting their programs, in addition to working with their fundraisers, I felt an additional obligation to write a check. And that made such a difference because it was kind of like the word spread. Not only is she going to do this for us, but she's gonna give us $500 dollars too. Or, if they paid me--and we were not ever supposed to accept anything over $25 or $50--I gave it back to them. That--at, at the time I was doing it, it might have been a little unusual. But, once again, I was making enough money, and it didn't hurt me or my family, and it was a very nice tax write-off at the end of the year. And people always asked me to do things far more than I could ever do in the course of the year. Story_ID: 96099 Speaker 1: Now you joined--in 1980, KRN-TV was the most dominant station, right? Speaker 2: mm-mm, KGO--it's KRON. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: KGO was number one. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: And they hired me and--hoping to come up. Speaker 1: Right. And so what are the things that they do to try to all--also come up, right. 'Cause they had was it "Live on Four"? Were you part--you weren't part of "Live on Four?" Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You were part of-- Speaker 2: They--I-- Speaker 1: --the six. Speaker 2: I did the 5 and the 11 o'clock News. But they would do special programs. And they might do an hour program to help raise the profile of a really good community organization. And they'd give you a producer, and you'd go and spend a lot of time getting that hour together. And it was part of the public affairs. You had to do a certain amount of public affairs programming in order to keep your news license, 'cause that was a license to print money back in the day. That really truly--there were only so many commercials, and you could charge whatever you wanted. And you--even if you were number three, you were making money hand over fist, back in the day, before the Internet, before young people stopped watching, before newspapers began to crash. Speaker 1: Well, back in the day, I mean the--this is the time that there is nothing better than the news in that way. And you had captive audiences, 'cause it wasn't--I mean CNN--that's the beginning. CNN is the beginning-- Speaker 2: CNN was cable. You couldn't watch CNN-- Speaker 1: That's true; that's true; that's true. Speaker 2: --on your--you had to have cable. And back when CNN came on the air not everybody had cable. Speaker 1: No, no, no, they didn't, very few. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they weren't in the urban areas. So really, your local news an--anchors were almost stars. Speaker 2: We were one of the best shows in town. Speaker 1: Well, you were almost gods so, too. Speaker 2: I, I never really thought of it like that, but I knew some people in their arrogance, yeah. Yeah, they were really hard to live with. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Me, I just said I sure am lucky to be here. Speaker 1: So who also was there with you? Did the names like Bob McCarthy and Rita Cohen, are these people that were--or these are a different-- Speaker 2: They were at KGO. I know [Rita] Cohen-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--she-- Speaker 2: Rita Cohen-- Speaker 1: No, I have them at-- Speaker 2: Then they were not there while I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. This is-- Speaker 2: They were not there while I was there. Speaker 1: --there's movement around, okay. Speaker 2: Ysabel Duron was there while I was there. She was this wonderful Hispanic woman, and we used to hang together, but that the Cohen. I, I don't-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --even remember that name, but once again, that was a long time ago. Speaker 1: No, that's right, and people sort of come and go. Speaker 2: Belva Davis [HM] was there when I was there. Speaker 1: So let's talk about Belva, because you had mentioned her earlier. Speaker 2: Belva was an icon. Belva had been there from the beginning. She brought great glory--and I believe she started out at KGO, and she went to KRON, I believe. But she was at KRON the whole time I was there. And she was a reporter still when I got there, but then she went to public affairs. And she did a brilliant job in her public affairs programming. But once again, so many of the black men and women who got jobs in the [San Francisco] Bay area in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], they're standing on the shoulders of Belva Davis because she was the first; she did a great job; and she was--she was always willing to help you. Speaker 1: So give, give us--give--share a memory about Belva or your interaction with her. Speaker 2: I, I interacted with her on a regular basis because she was just in the newsroom. I didn't realize her iconic status until I left--until I left. And you know, so many people in New York say: oh, did you know Belva Davis? I said yeah, I know Belva. She was hard-working. I was not always hard-working. I believed that if you had to work a 10-hour day, then you had to get lunch at some point, and that you just had to go and close your eyes and get yourself together before you went on camera or else your hair would be on fire, and you'd just--you'd be breathing hard. And people would know, un-un. So I, I, I always fought for just a little time before the red light went on. Belva didn't need that. Belva was a fast, good writer. Belva had a history of the Civil Rights Movement that I could only dream of. She knew everything that had happened in Atlanta [Georgia], stuff that I didn't know. She knew the people in Mississippi. She knew the, the, the, the families of the little girls in the Birmingham church bombing. She--the breadth of her knowledge, you, you just sat at her feet and said talk to me. And she did in a very gracious way. Speaker 1: So you were there--so who else was there that was African American? Speaker 2: I don't think-- Speaker 1: The (unclear)--I'm serious. Speaker 2: It might have been me and Belva, and I'm trying to think was there a black man at that time. Because back then if you had a black female, you sort of forgot about black men. We were docile, or so they thought. You know, we were not gonna be militant, or so they thought. Honey, we were velvet hammers, and we knew what needed to be done. And we did it--we wanted to be good, but above all, when our time came and went--and the smart ones knew that nothing lasts forever. But whatever you did now, it should stand for something because the only reason you're here is because of all those people, black and white, who marched and died so that you could even knock on the door. And that made you try harder, to be better, to mentor, to--you know. Story_ID: 96100 Speaker 1: So now when you--why do you leave, because isn't there a contract dispute? Speaker 2: Well, yes and no. The, the real politics of the situation was a man by the name of Dennis Swanson--and if you don't know Dennis Swanson, he discovered Oprah. Dennis Swanson brought Oprah out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or wherever she was and said this is the next great talk show host. Oprah was young. He saw me at KRON. He was working for ABC at the time, and he thought this Roz Abrams, in time, might really become a threat for KGO, and I'm not gonna take that chance because KGO was making so much money, it was so important. He found out who my agent was. I'd only been there two and a half years, and I was happy. We had just adopted these two kids. Kenny [Kenneth Showers] had not started having medical problems yet. You know, he, he, he wasn't coaching, but he, he worked the Olympics. He did go down, and the Olympics were in Los Angeles [California], and he worked the Olympics. And we would have stayed, except my agent said I just got a call from a guy named Dennis Swanson, and I know him well. And he thinks you might do well in New York. And that's a place I always wanted to go. And I said well, I got these kids so I can't be a reporter. I gotta have some show that I do. Because when you're a reporter, it's just you have no control. You go where the news goes. And I had been a reporter long enough to do that. I said 'cause I'm happy here. And he said well, you're gonna make more money. I said this really isn't about money. I do want to get to New York, but you know. And he said well, just go and talk to the news director. And the news director was--I think his name was Bill Applegate. And he was just like an okay news director, but it was New York. And Kenny and I like flew out together, and they put us up at this chichi hotel. And he said, Roz, I don't know. He said, I don't even know if I can drive in this traffic. I said well, I know I can't. But the train system--they've already told me that if we live in Westchester County I can take the trains in. And you know, it was like he didn't want to do it, and I wasn't, you know, gung-ho, but then I saw the salary offer. And I'm not gonna say I'm not about money. But once again, it was like pinch me, slap--snap out of it! It was like you don't walk away from this kind of money. And back then it was year to year. My first contract was three years. And they renewed it every single year so that they could get rid of me if I wasn't cuttin' it. But one year, back in the day of that kind of money, you did it, 'cause you could always backtrack and go to a smaller market. Story_ID: 96101 Speaker 1: So you--tell me about the adoption of the girls before we-- Speaker 2: I was doing a show called--I think it was called "Saturday's Kids." And San Francisco [California] had huge numbers of kids over the age of five who never got adopted, and stayed in foster homes until they graduated, and then they were just tossed out. Denise and Melissa were two of the kids. We did it every--it aired every--Saturday? Yeah, I think it was "Saturday's Child." Back then every television station did it. But I was assigned when I got to San Francisco, because we had so many kids in foster in Atlanta [Georgia], in New York, in-- Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: I got out of the many, many, many, many, many, many kids Denise and Melissa, sisters--biological sisters. I won't get into their backgrounds, but I thought they were really cute. And I came home one day, and I said you know, how would you feel about adopting. And as usual, Kenneth [Showers] would say, Roz, what are you really saying? Because if this is something you've already decided, then we need to talk about this as something you've already decided. And I said well, I just met these two little girls. Watch the show. I said, they're so cute. And he said yeah, but you're, you're gonna be working ten hours a day, and I'm gonna be home, and I just think we ought to really talk about this. And then I called the Department of Family and Children Services [DCFS], took 'em out for lunch, and he fell in love. And he said boy, that little one's a real firecracker. That's Melissa. Denise was reserved and very, very quiet. As a matter, I don't think she spoke three words the first week she was in our house after the adoption went through. She was very, very quiet. They'd had a rough background. But we were led to believe that in a loving family--and you want to educate them--you can make 'em secure women who will be independent. And that was our--that was our only goal, because they were ten and twelve at the time. Speaker 1: So they were--they-- Speaker 2: They were ten and twelve. Speaker 1: So they were old. Speaker 2: By, by adoption standards. And they had been through several foster homes. And it was kind of like, you know, we can do this. Kenny and I, we can do this. We should have kept our butts in San Francisco, because uprooting the girls, and bringing them to New York, and putting them in Westchester County in Westchester County schools proved to be disastrous for my youngest. We ended up--once we got her into the private school that worked for her. But, you know, like all parents, you make mistakes, and you beat yourself up, and you say I'm sorry, but everybody's still okay today, you know. But Kenneth and I made a lot of mistakes, but we loved them. And-- Speaker 1: And you say "made a lot of mistakes." You showered them maybe 'cause were you thinking that if you gave them things, things would be better? Or-- Speaker 2: No, we just had the money. We knew that there were therapy. You know, these, these kids, they were making some incredible transitions. And we were just in a position to get them all the help that we needed. I don't think we showered them. Our house (laughter)--people come to that house today, and they said is this the house that you guys moved into? It was ridiculous. I didn't put any money into the house. I put it into the family, the kids, the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know vacations. And the house was just sort of there as a shelter. It was twenty years later before I actually decorated that house so that people wouldn't come in and go: an anchor woman lives here (laughter)? But the, the mistakes that we made were not in showering them. It was just not being able to see the problems that come-- Speaker 1: That were--that occur. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, if everything-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --was going fine and boom--what? Speaker 1: You didn't know that those things--you don't know the-- Speaker 2: Nobody said that--nobody was able to tell us about the bombs that would go off later. And we, we dealt with them as best we could. We were always able to, you know, get help, but we were totally in the dark (unclear). Speaker 1: So, but you had wanted to do that because you--did you not be--were you not able to have children or you--or was it this-- Speaker 2: Girl, my ovaries were perfectly fine. I--I'm one of those bleeding heart liberals who's always trying to save the world, and I ended up losing my butt in the process. And I won't say that I was like a hippie, but I've--I have this compassionate streak. And I really feel in my heart of hearts, and this is with all my flaws, all my screw-ups, that you have to try to make the world a better place. And after years and years of seeing all these kids who would never go to college, who people were taking them in just to get the stipends from the department of social services in their particular--I just said two of 'em, come hell or high water, are gonna have life and love for a little part of their lives. Speaker 1: Well, see, that's, that's ver--I mean because a lot of people don't do that. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, now I know why. It is--it is a tough road. Speaker 1: It's a-- Speaker 2: But do I have any regrets? No. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 96102 Speaker 1: So you, you quit your position, and I think you're replaced by Sylvia Chase at, at KRON. Now you--I want to ask you who else you know, though, in the Bay area while you're (simultaneous)--there. Speaker 2: Okay, throw me some names. Speaker 1: Well, I know a si--Bill Lester, William Lester-- Speaker 2: I knew a Lester Holt, but he was Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: No, that's Chicago. That--that's-- Speaker 2: Okay, Bill Lester. Speaker 1: No, no, this would be just people who you had met. There was Ruth--Ruth Love [HM], but I think she's in Chicago [Illinois] at that point. Speaker 2: Don't know a Ruth Love. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was-- Speaker 2: And our friends were regular friends. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, they were--we, we did not hang with the television crowd. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, there was Valerie--oh, my goodness. And she was a big name, beautiful girl--Valerie-- Speaker 1: How about Cole? Speaker 2: Valerie Coleman. Speaker 1: No, no, no, I'm talking-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --about Cole--they were good friends with Belva [Davis], Jim and Ada Cole. No? Speaker 2: Okay, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But if-- Speaker 1: You would-- Speaker 2: --if they say I took 'em to dinner, I took 'em to dinner. Speaker 1: Okay, no (laughter). Speaker 2: If she says I hit on her husband, she's a liar. But I don't remember. Story_ID: 96103 Speaker 1: So you come to--you come to--you come to New York, and you've wanted to be--New York is the place. If anyone's serious, New York is the, the market. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--we came and bought a house. And when we showed up for the clo--and I made the money. The house was going to somebody named Roz Abrams. We showed up at the closing--and they thought we were a nice Jewish family--when we should up at the closing, they refused to sell us the house. Two weeks before I'm supposed to start a job, the house gets pulled out from under us in Westchester County, New York. And so I had to go--I had gone back to work when the realtor called and said I'm so sorry, the deal has fallen through. Well, we had the credit. We had the what--I said what is this? And the people said they don't want to sell to you. And when you showed up at the closing, you know--he said now we can fight it, but you need a house for yourself and those kids. And so Kenny flew back and bought a house not very far from there that we are told--this is lore. I don't know, but that a year before there had been some heroin dealers living there. And they had gone to jail, and the house had been on the market, and nobody wanted it. I don't know if that's true. But all the doors locked funny. Like, you could lock the door and lock yourself in the basement. Usually you lock the basement door from the outside. But the, the doors had funny locks on them. Bedroom doors locked from the inside and the outside with keys. I mean we had a helluva time just getting--and it had a security system that was--it was we couldn't--the day we went in just to walk through the house because the people were coming to put in the furniture, I turned off the alarm. But there was another alarm for upstairs because they had sensors in the rugs, and the police came. And at that time we were the only black family in Parkland. And he said well, can you just show me something to prove that you're supposed to be here 'cause this house has been vacant. And I said yeah, you know, here's the papers from the closing. And he said fine, 'cause I don't know how to turn off your alarm. You're gonna have to call somebody to do it. But you know it's ringing outside the house, and you gotta do something. We've had some times. Speaker 1: So why did you choose Westchester? That's a-- Speaker 2: My agent--my agent said that's where you want to live. Speaker 1: Live. Speaker 2: And he said I'm telling you, with a husband that size, you can't put two girls and your husband in an apartment. He needs space. He needs high ceilings. He needs--and he was absolutely right, you know. Speaker 1: And, and then plus you were living--you know, California is more open lifestyle anyway too. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: But now, so what is that community like, 'cause you've lived in that community now a long time, right? Speaker 2: You know, I didn't live in that community for twenty years. I commuted to and from the city. My neighbors knew my husband and my children. They didn't know me. It was only after I retired that I sort of walked in and said where am I? What is this place? I did not know anybody, not to speak of any one family, the Wildes (ph.), that lived across the street. But there was a house next door to me on five acres of land with this big rod iron fence. And I knew their names, but I didn't know that they had two boys. And I spent a lot of time deciding if I was gonna stay here or move into the city after I retired. Speaker 1: And you decided to stay? Speaker 2: I decided to stay because for reasons I will not get into. I ended up raising a grandchild. My youngest daughter's oldest son came to live with me. And the Briarcliff school system was so good, was so good that I said I'll stay here until he graduates. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: And you know there are a lot of grandmothers raising kids these days. I just didn't think I'd be one of 'em; I really didn't. I planned as a single old lady to travel the world and act a fool. And lo and behold, I am raising a teenager. But he just graduated from high school. And so you know, I'm, I'm--I'mma start that dream deferred again, you know, acting a fool, drinking, liquor, and traveling the world. Speaker 1: Well, congratulations. So I wanna--so was the house--I mean do, do you like the house? And is this-- Speaker 2: It's too big for me now. At one time-- Speaker 1: No, but I mean that--but-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --did you like the house when you moved in brief-- Speaker 2: I didn't--I didn't--I never had time to do anything. I was scared to drive in the city. I had to get up and catch a six a.m. train to guarantee that I could get from Grand Central crosstown bus to 67th and Columbus. So I had to be on a 6:00 train to be at work by 8:30. And that was an express train, because you--I still had to get across town by cab. And if it was snowing, if it was raining, you know, that added--going from 42nd to 67th, that added time. I was never in my house. I--if I did the 5 o'clock News, I didn't get home 'til 7:00 or 7:30. And they may ask me to do a story for the 11:00. Weekends were the time. We hired people to clean the house and cook. Weekends were the time that I saw my family. That was when we could really be together. But you know what we were doing? This tutor, that piano teacher; somebody's going to arts camp; somebody's--you know, it was--I was--my life was a blur during those years. It was a blur. And many times I didn't know if I was coming or going. And what made it work was this man named Kenneth Richard [Showers]. Because I knew if I had to leave in the middle of the night or had to get up, he would be here. And it wasn't just somebody raising your kids; it was their father. And that gave me a lot of peace of mind. Speaker 1: So you know people--I don't think that they realize that--you know, the work that goes into, you know, anchoring news, you know, that. So I, I don't think they realize that. So-- Speaker 2: They think you're just reading it, that you don't write it, that you don't read newspapers, that you--but I don't care what they think, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's like psst, come on and do it if you think you can. Story_ID: 96104 Speaker 1: So when you--when you came, Ed Koch is mayor, right? He's the mayor of New York. And what I had read was that while Sue Simmons was at WNBC, you became the first black news anchor at WABC. Is that not true? Speaker 2: No, no, that's not true. There was Melba Tolliver. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And I don't think--she may not have anchored a 5:00 News, but she anchored a news show. It may have been weekends. Melba was a huge name. And there is even another one whose name escapes me, and it'll never come back to me. There were two high profile African-American women before I ever got there. I may have had the most high profile show because you know why? Guess who I preceded by two months? Speaker 1: Who. Speaker 2: Oprah Winfrey. We were on the--we were on the air for two months and the May book came. And Oprah was our lead-in, and we were instantly number one. "Live at Five," which had been number for God only knows how long became number two because of this amazing woman called Oprah. I'll tell you right now it had nothing to do with me. I had just gotten there. But I was smart enough to realize if we had this many more eyeballs, let me get out here and do all that I can to work the community and to become whatever I'm gonna be in my own right. Let people know I'm smart; I'm good at what I do, you know. But-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --Oprah made our whole station number one from sign on to sign off. That's the truth. Speaker 1: Because she came on here at what time? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four o'clock. See, in Chicago [Illinois] she was on in the morning. See-- Speaker 2: Oh no, she led into our 5:00 show. Speaker 1: That's right. So she wa--she was on in the afternoon, so that led you on and then-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --you know, right into the news. Now your news director you said was Bill Applegate and--you know, when you came in. So--but he got fired. Speaker 2: Oh, everybody gets fired. Hell, I've been fired. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter) okay. Speaker 2: Everybody gets fired. That's the test. Speaker 1: But though--but ri--but then was Roger Grimsby-- Speaker 2: No, Roger was the--Roger Grimsby and Bill Beutel. But Roger was frightening. Roger did not suffer fools lightly. They were the greatest local anchor team at one point in the history of television. I had never set foot in New York, but I knew about Bill Beutel and Roger Grimsby. Bill Beutel was the gentleman wordsmith. Roger Grimsby was a great journalist, but he was scary. He was scary. And so when I went into this station, and I, I got this plum job--and there had been a woman who'd been struggling with the 5:00 News, and I--once again I can't remember her name. And suddenly I just walk in and sit down, and Oprah takes care of everything. And then they asked me to start filling in on the 11:00. So there was times when I had to sit next to Grimsby, and those were not pleasant times. He did not like me. He saw me as an interloper. He--I took jobs away from people that he had worked with for years. He was not kind to me, but I wasn't some eighteen-year-old blushin'--you know. It's like I gave as good as I got, and in New York, that's what you had to do. You know, I couldn't be some wallflower taking what people were--Esther [Caldwell Abrams] would have died. Esther did not raise me for that. So you could get in my chest and talk about me, but I will go round for round. And if we get into the, the bad words, I'll take you down, 'cause you're not gonna be expecting anything to come out of this lovely little mouth. But I can take care of myself, you know, and never lay a glove on you. Speaker 1: So what, what kinds of things did he do or say? Speaker 2: He would talk about you and not say--and very loud in the newsroom. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: What is she wearing today? And I was never a clothes person. I--they bought my clothes. People used to laugh at the coats that I wore. I, I always invest in money. I had a car in Atlanta [Georgia] that I brought from Michigan, and the floor had rusted out because of all the salt. And I just simply put mats over it. You could lift up the mat and see the pavement going by, but the engine was till good, and the body was still good. It was like, why should I buy a new car? In New York, I wore what they called a marshmallow coat, because it was cold and marshmallow coats were warm. Well, all the other stylish anchors wore Chesterfield coats or fur-trimmed coats. I was a messy eater. You know, you were always eatin' on the run, and I could throw that marshmallow coat in the washing machine and I'd be fine. Well, a lot of people laughed at that coat, including Grimsby. But I didn't care 'cause he wasn't paying my rent, and he wasn't watching my CDs grow. And you know, it was just--it was just okay. But I never, to my knowledge, did those kinds of things once he was gone and I was like doing exceedingly well. It, it was unnecessary, but that's who he was. And I certainly wasn't the only person. And you have to give the devil his due. He was a damn fine journalist. But of the two, Bill Beutel was my heart, you know. Speaker 1: And Bill Beutel--so you worked for Gris--with Grimsby. Speaker 2: I filled in. My thing was the 5 o'clock News, but when I got there, they were still doing the 11 o'clock, this powerhouse team. It ended very shortly thereafter, and they put Kaity Tong in. But they were--we were number one. I mean it, it was the, the legendary team. And I would have to fill in if somebody were sick. Story_ID: 96105 Speaker 1: You said "I was a messy eater." Speaker 2: You were slammin' food down. And if you had on some lovely coat, you'd have a big old grease spot. And that marshmallow coat was black. Nothing showed up--nothing showed, but it was warm. Speaker 1: But, but-- Speaker 2: It was warm. Speaker 1: --you said they dressed you at that point. Speaker 2: They would buy your clothes for air. But in most of the markets, if you weren't an anchor, you bought your own clothes. And certainly in radio I bought my own clothes, and I just was not a spiffy dresser. I was more interested in getting there and having time to think about what I had to do than pressing my hair in bathroom, which a lot of--you had to do this because your standup, and you wanted to look good, or you sweated off all your make-up, you know. I would rather have that time to do a better sentence, you know, make the story better. But I didn't always look good because of that. Story_ID: 96106 Speaker 1: So, so you first--when you first got here, you worked with whom? That's what I'm wondering on the 5 o'clock News. Who was your-- Speaker 2: John Marler. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: John Marler was the first guy I worked with. We did the five together. Can I--wait, I came here and worked for weeks--a couple of weeks--on the weekend news, okay. And the reason that I kind of forget that is because they deliberately held me back until Oprah [Winfrey] came. They wanted my show with Oprah, but I was able to move a couple of weeks in advance. So John Marler and I did the weekends together. And then when Oprah came, we went right to the 5:00 show. Speaker 1: And then you worked with him how long before? 'Cause we're talk-- Speaker 2: After John Marler there was Greg Hurst. He's that wonderful guy. He's now in Texas. And after Greg Hurst, there was Rob--Rob--can't remember his last name. And he's still in the business. But these guys were all much younger than me. I mean, I was old. I was mature. I was mature. And I think all of my anchors have been youn--my male anchors have been younger than me, except for Joe Washington. We were the same age. Speaker 1: And so, and Joe Washington--you had worked--no, you--no, I'm thinking about--so--Kenny Plot--So what about Ernie Anas-- Speaker 2: Oh, what am I saying? Okay, see, this--let's, let's go back. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I'm trying to-- Speaker 2: Ernie [Anastos] and I were the 5:00 anchor team. And I'm, I'm getting my history wrong. John Marler and I worked weekends together. I moved up after a few weeks with Ernie, but then Ernie left. He left Oprah, left everything, went to CBS. And they teamed John Marler and I together. That's how that worked, weekends with Marler; when Oprah was coming, they teamed me with Ernie. We had a good two or three-year run, and then he was offered a lot of money to go to CBS. He left and Marler and I are paired together again. That's how that worked. Speaker 1: I see. (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Does it make sense? Speaker 1: Yeah, it does. Now, the managing was--now Kenny Plotnik, now who--what role did he play? Speaker 2: He was assistant news director for most of his tenure. And I liked Kenny. He--news directors came; news directors left, but eventually he became the news director. He went--he got the upgrade, and he shepherded ABC through some really tough times. I had left. Several people had left, and he kept them number one. He did a fine job. He's gone now. He left on his own terms. But there was no problem between me and Kenny. I don't--what good would it ever do me to fall out with a news director. Now sometimes I have to tell them: wait, you're talking to me like I'm your wife or your child and I'm not. So just remember this is a professional situation. But--'cause in the heat of the--'cause you make mistakes, and it's on TV, and it's going out to all these hundreds of thousands of people, people can just like go off on you. But it's like wait a minute, let's let cooler heads prevail. I was always able to--it takes a giant to bend. If I disagreed with them, I was willing to be flexible. There was just no sense in making a news director an enemy when most of the time you get along. Speaker 1: But the news directors are the ones who really control the newsroom-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the assignments. I mean they, they wield a lot of power (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They certainly do. And I think, and I'm not sure, but I think that during my early years in New York, being a black woman and an untried entity, and nobody knew who I was or what I was capable of, I was just sort of under their radar. The 11:00 shows were the big shows. The 6:00 shows were the big shows of the day. They were the traditional moneymakers. Five o'clock shows didn't make money until Oprah came and had been there a couple of years. And they were able to charge people so much more because we had so many more eyeballs. And then suddenly Five o'clocks became very lucrative, just like now your morning shows are incredibly lucrative. Gosh, did that answer your question? I, I get lost sometimes. Speaker 1: No, no, I think that that was helpful because, you know, I was just saying the news director, you know, wields a lot of power. And then you were talking about the structure of the news. Speaker 2: And, and they wield a lot of power, but if, if they're not watching you, they just feel this show is gonna go because it's got a good producer, it's got Ernie Anastos. It's like whoever she is, she's so new here. Give her a chance to do whatever it is she's gonna do. You know, let's just give her some time. Story_ID: 96107 Speaker 1: And I, I didn't have problems because--it was only later when the show was making a whole lot of money. And I was expanding. I was just putting on weight, 'cause I was eatin' good and living well, that people really began to say uh-oh, you know, what's, what's happening here? Do we talk to her about her weight? Do we--we, we don't want to get sued. Do we talk to her about, you know, that hair? She has got to do something with that hair because I'd wear a headband. All that came when we had been number one, and we were number one by a huge margin. Don't wear those earrings; don't wear this. You know, you gotta get back in time to make your hair look good. You look like you're wearing draperies, Roz--dit, dit, dit, dit, dit. That came much later. They weren't even paying attention to me during my early years. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. So when they--when they said that, how did you react? Speaker 1: They were right (laughter). They were right in what they said, but I didn't know how to be glam, and report a story, and do it an hour show. And you have teases throughout the day. And you have to stay on top of the news because if it's a breaking story, you have to know what the heck's going on. Nobody can feed you all that information in your ear. You at least had to go: we got a big fire on the Upper Eastside. And it's all those really expensive condominium. You have to know the lay of the land; you have to know who's there. We've got a fi--a fire on a 125th Street that's two doors down from the famed Apollo Theater. You have to know the lay of the land. You have to bring the history with you, and it takes years. It takes years to get it. Speaker 2: So what--did you make the change? That's what I'm asking. You know, did you--when they told you, you know, your-- Speaker 1: They hired a makeup artist, and that did a--that went a long way toward making me look better. Speaker 2: So was that negotiated through your agent? Speaker 1: No, they hired this beautiful woman from ABC to do the six. And she said I'm not coming to your station, and I'm doing my own makeup; this is unheard of. But she had worked at network. And one thing I learned about ABC, the people who ran it became multi, multi, multimillionaires because they, they saved money in the areas where they could save money. They had stations where they only painted the front of the station every five years because nobody saw the back. And in many ways I sort of incorporated that in my own young life, because you're gonna make big money forever, so you, you do it while you can. You're asking me did I change? No, they changed me. I didn't know how to do makeup. I do now. I, I was afraid to get perms, because if you get enough of 'em, your hair is going to fall out, you know. And so I would try and press it, but then I'd get--put the hot comb too close to your face, and they you got a big old white mark where the skin has burned away. I mean people just don't realize how it's glam and yet it's not glam back when I was doing it. Speaker 2: Well, it's glam, but it's a lot of work. And, and then you're expected to perform. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and you're expected to be able to do it all with ease-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and grace, and I couldn't. Story_ID: 96108 Speaker 1: So, Roz, what I find--and I--you know, I will want to go into the stories, but what I find about your storytelling of your career is where are those sort of the blowups? I know you talked about gr--grs--Gr, Grigsby--not Grigsby-- Speaker 2: [Roger] Grimsby. But that wasn't a blowup. I-- Speaker 1: But I--but I don't see--it seems like you're sort of moving along, you know. Things are going-- Speaker 2: I, I wasn't used to the head anchorman laughing at my clothes. But did it affect me doing my job at 5:00? No. And when I sat next to him was I able to deal with him because of all of my experience? Yes. I had some like fifteen years of experience on air before I ever sat down next to Grimsby. If I'd had two years, it would have been a whole different story. I mean I was prepared when I got to New York. It didn't mean that I didn't make mistakes, but I was just able to hold my own with--without going to blows. Speaker 1: Now you said that, though, that Chickie Boo--Booka-- Speaker 2: Chickie Bucco. Speaker 1: --that she really played a role in, in your development and learning about leadership and all of that, so why--who, who is in your kitchen cabinet? Is she your main kitchen cabinet or-- Speaker 2: She is still my mentor. Chickie helped me prepare for this interview. She said make sure that there are things that you want to impart. You get those out there. She is still working. She's seventy years old. She's president of sales for Katz Communications--president of television sales. She's teaching me how to play canasta. She has been president of everything from AWRT to Women in Media, to--and, and president of the national chapters, not just the local. We're going to Las Vegas [Nevada] together. She's going for a conference, but I just like Vegas. We are best friends. And she took me as this novice anchor. She saw something in me, and she shepherded me around to, to these very high profile organizations and said use her. She's a very good mistress of ceremonies; she gives money; she does this. And if nobody takes you by the hand, then you don't get there in the--to the degree that I got there. And she, she never let me go. When I was on top of game she was saying okay, I want you to speak on behalf of your union and what the crisis is for women in unions. Is it good, bad? Is it better here than--so I'd have to research, but I would put together really good speeches. She was always including me, to make sure that minority women were represented in conferences all over the country. That's what mentors do. So consequently, after I'd been New York ten, fifteen years, I was winning awards that Barbara Walters was winning. I was winning awards that Diane Sawyer was winning because people knew me in the highest levels in, in women's organizations in New York. And I'm trying to do the same thing with my latest mentee, Casey Raymond (ph.), the first mentor--mentee-- I had. You know, you don't get there by yourself, you just don't. Speaker 1: Were your backgrounds--what were--what, what, what made the connection between you and she? Speaker 2: I know she-- Speaker 1: And how-- Speaker 2: --reached out to me, but I don't know what she saw. Speaker 1: Okay, and you don't know--so she reached out to you. You didn't--you didn't meet at a--an event-- Speaker 2: Un-un, she asked me to come and speak at a minority--get-together for minority women wanting to get into the business. And I don't even remember the organization, but they wanted to know how I got there. And I had to preface it. I was at the tail end of the Civil Rights Movement, and a lot of doors just opened. It's different now. And I was able to draw parallels and say but this is how you do it. That was the first thing. And I guess I handled myself pretty well because she was constantly asking me when she was president of organizations. She would make sure that I went to their national meetings just to see what went on, just to be there, just to meet the women. And I've made lifelong friendships. And part of the reason my retirement is so rich is because I'm still doing journalism because of the friendships that I made thanks to Chickie. Story_ID: 96109 Speaker 1: So what parts of--so let--let's--I want to understand your--the stories that still stand--stay--you know, stick out with you. You talked about the AIDS crisis and KR--you know, when you were in San Francisco [California]. But what are the news stories in, you know, this long career that you've here? What are the news stories that stick out to you? You talked about the 19--I don't know if you talk about the 1984 convention. You talked about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], when watching a woman [Geraldine Ferraro] be nominated vice president, and nobody knew it was coming, at least I didn't. And I just said, my God, this could happen. A woman--because I'm a feminist. You gotta remember I was covering Gloria Steinem when she was saying you have to have equal pay for equal work, and I took that to heart. And I said when I ever get in the position to be really good, I'm not gonna sit next to somebody who makes hundreds of thousands of dollars more than I do. Now that's easier said than done. And most of the time I would tell my agent don't sell me cheap. You know, I may not get it the first year; I may not--but if we got a four-year contract, I need to be there at the end of the four years just so that I can look at myself in the mirror and say Roz, it's okay. And he goes oh, you are so full of it, but he did it. He did it on my behalf and at my behest. So much of the time because I was a feminist, I was always fighting to get women for sound bites. You gotta remember, back in the '70s [1970s] it was male everything unless you were talking about women's issues. And I would spend so much time in Atlanta [Georgia] trying to find a woman to give me a sound bite because it was critical, it was important, and they were out there. It's just that nobody at that point in time was willing to talk to a woman about MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], because all the people doing MARTA, the top people were men. But there were women in positions of power, and you just had to find them. So the stories were the stories, but I was always looking to bring--if I could, bring women into them, especially if it was a long going four-year, five-year story. I did a whole lot of crime. I have seen a lot of dead bodies, and that--that's stays with you. When you see people who have been--I walked into an apartment--they said Roz, there's something going down on Auburn Avenue, da, da, da, da. I'm in radio. I run in, and there is a woman with a butcher knife through her--and it's so deep in the door that it's holding her up. And they haven't covered her; they haven't taken her down; I was not prepared. Speaker 1: There--a dam burst at a school called Toccoa Falls. They called me at 4:00 in the morning. They said Roz, get up, go to Toccoa Falls. All we know is that there is a dam that burst. And by the time I got there, the dormitory--it was a very, very small Christian school. The dormitory, which was identified as a dormitory four stories high, the bottom two stories were filled with silt and sand from floor to ceiling. And you knew that in every single one of those rooms there were two roommates who never saw it coming. And I remember it like--they'd, they'd give you details, and luckily I was still in radio. But I can remember as I was giving these radio reports with my hands shaking, because there was death, and it was the death of young people, and there were mothers and fathers who started to arrive, and there was screaming. All of that affects you. It doesn't just roll off. It, it sort of sits somewhere. Speaker 2: And then you'll be doing an interview on AIDS in San Francisco, and you're talking to a kid from Norway who came to San Francisco as a hippie. And he was sleeping in a field to raise money for the cause of AIDS. And he didn't have the money. There were ten of them sleeping in a field, and a tractor came through, didn't know these kids were sleeping there, ran over all of them, left them all with major spinal cord injuries. And you're talking to this guy and your--and suddenly you just lose it. You just go how could this happen to this kid? And you were talking to him because he said I have no regrets. I'm still raising money for AIDS in my wheelchair. Story_ID: 96110 Speaker 1: You just don't walk away from stuff--9/11, you just don't walk away from 9/11 and what it did to your city. And I was like with the morgue, and-- Speaker 2: You mean you were at the morgue? Speaker 1: I did--I was like--everybody had assignments because the morgue is where--after they finally put the fire out, after they finally were able to get down into that rubble--and I think it took 'em four months to get the fire out. That jet fuel burned at Ground Zero, and that stench was there for months. Once they were able to get to the bodies that were blown to other buildings and get down there, they started the process of identifying them by DNA. Everybody came and brought combs and hair. And that was one of my beats, to find out how many people have we identified. And they had these huge refrigerated trucks for as far as the eye could see. And the minute you got within a half a block, even though they refrigerator--have you ever smelled death? Decomposing bodies just left have, have this really bad stench. But when you have thousands of pieces of people in refrigerated whatever, every time you open the door some of that death stench comes out. And you would go down there, and it would just--it was--it was awful. And they were trying to identify people with a finger. They were trying to identify toes. They were try--it was--it was the most horrific--and people were working day and night, and it still took 'em years. But I spent so much time down there that it was--it, it--that stuff stays with you. It just stays with you. Speaker 2: Well, it would be hard for it not to. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because unless you've been in war or something, you know, people--especially in the United States we haven't seen that kind of-- Speaker 1: Girl-- Speaker 2: --devastation before. Speaker 1: I've been to Ukraine. I'm looking at Ukraine on TV. They sent me to Chernobyl, to the 10th anniversary. But we--Kiev was where we were based. And back--Steven Spielberg took his money, and on the 10th anniversary was flying children whose parents had been exposed to radiation, and consequently, their--were having real problems. He was flying them to Israel where they could get help. If they wanted to stay in Israel, okay. But he was bringing parents and kids out to get help at the Israeli hospitals, so that your kid would live and not die from radiation poisoning. And we went to--there's a famous amusement park where you see the--just the Ferris wheel that has now decayed. They completely moved everybody out. And to go there--the sarcophagus was leaking radiation. But that was the biggest nuclear disaster in the world that turned me against nuclear power, because I, I live near a reactor up in Westchester. Things can go wrong. And once you see it, once you see all these babies that were born with thyroids that are just completely destroyed, it changes you. It just simply changes you. Speaker 2: Any other stories that stay with you on the political front? Speaker 1: Went to Haiti when Jean-Bertrand Aristide--there was a coup. The power comes on from four to six in morning, so you better get up--and the power sends the water through the showers. You better get up and get your shower, 'cause the lights go out the water goes off. You get everything you need. And we had to go to Petionville to do an interview. And the Tonton Macoute was still running around there in those cowboy hats, and they didn't care who you were or what you were supposed to be. And this was during my crazy phase where I didn't think I'd get hurt. I went to base camp at Mt. Everest during my crazy phase. And so we got up one morning. We got our showers. We, we said we'll take a cab to Petionville. Well, they said we're not taking you there because the rich people live there. They're not letting you in. But we wanted to find out if you're rich, and you were a supporter of Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] and Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier], how do you feel about Jean-Bertrand Aristide. We ended up walking with no guns. We couldn't get an escort. We couldn't get anything. We ended up walking, and we were verbally--you know, what the hell you doing here. You know you look like Americans. You shouldn't be here. And I just said come on (unclear), come on Barbara, come on Greg, come on we gotta do this. Speaker 2: Now who was traveling with you? Speaker 1: A producer named Barbara Johnson, wonderful woman, great photographer named Greg Jones. And we put him in a cowboy hat--he was very tall--so that he could look like the Tonton Macoute, and hopefully nobody would bother us. But we could have been hurt very badly, but you don't even think about it. You're there to find out what the supporters of Papa Doc Duvalier are going to do now that democracy might be on the way. Would I do it today? Oh, hell no. Would I go to base camp today? I don't think so. You know, that was one of the hardest things I ever did. I was smoking at 18,000 feet and couldn't understand why I was breathing hard, but I was young. I was young, and that's what has made my life so rich. When I leave this planet, honey, I'm going with a smile, 'cause I have seen and done a whole lot of really cool stuff. Story_ID: 96111 Speaker 1: So what, what about--is there an assignment that you got that you really did not like? I mean which-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a lot of assignments--I didn't like covering school board meetings, because most of the time nothing happened and they went on forever, but education is so important. I didn't like crime because I felt that that was filler, that if you had two minutes to fill, you could put in a murder and something else, and you could fill with it. But it didn't make--in a city like New York where you know, crime was crime, it, it, it just didn't seem like it was necessary, you know, but I did it. I didn't like it, but I did it. I loved feature stories. You know, everybody talks about hard news, hard news. No, I love feature stories that talk about kids who got to the Spelling Bee, or doctors without borders, or you know--those are really important for young people to see. Speaker 1: Now weren't you doing most of those features as part of your weekly magazine show-- Speaker 2: "New York Views," yep. Speaker 1: --views. Speaker 2: Yep, and I loved it. I did that show for more than 10 years. Speaker 1: Now did--you would--you had--did you have a producing team as part of that show? Speaker 2: There was a whole--there was a whole team for the show. That show was very well done. It won a lot of awards. It was--it was great. And that also served to up my visibility and my Q [rating] because I came on five days a week doing hard news, and then I had Saturdays in the community. And pretty soon people began to call me and say will you do my story for "New York Views"? And that's always good, you know. And I could just refer it to Nancy Kennedy or any other member of the staff. Speaker 1: Okay, to, to, to, to pursue and do the work on. Speaker 2: Yeah, to make sure it got set up. Speaker 1: And to make this-- Speaker 2: I'd go and do the interviews and you know-- Speaker 1: And you would do--and they would do the rest. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Story_ID: 96112 Speaker 1: I want to--I want to talk about [David N.] Dinkins [HM] becoming mayor. Speaker 2: Oh, I love David Dinkins. But when I first got here, they used me to set up David Dinkins. And, and I mean David had some scandal in his background. The first time he ran--what was it? He--they found a legal pad with some things written on it. I, I wish I had--because it ended up being on the front page of the newspapers, 'cause I asked him the gotcha question during debate. And I didn't realize at the time--they told me. They said Roz, we want a woman to ask this question. It, it--it'll be less combative. But it, it had to do with he denied that he ever wrote instructions for someone on this legal pad. It was something like that. The top page was torn off. But you know how you can--if you write heavy enough, it's gonna be on the next one--the next page. You could like take a pencil. And he said that he didn't do it, that you're just finding this legal pad. And they traced the legal pad back, and it was--whatever the gotcha question was regarding this, they, they asked me to do it. And while I asked it in the very dignified way, a lot of people in the black community got very angry--ah. You know, let the black woman drive the dagger home. I'm not even sure I realized the full import or implications of that, but it caused me a lot of problems, simply because I was black. And it's kind of like with [President] Barack [Obama, HM]. If you're trying to get to a position of power, you don't have to be the one to ask the question that's gonna make him look bad. Well, if you're a journalist, you ask the question. It doesn't make any difference if it's your father. But most people didn't understand that. And all these years later, David, his wife, they're wonderful people. But that hurt me in the eyes of some very powerful black people. Speaker 1: So, those, those powerful black people would be like Percy Sutton, and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and the head of the "Amsterdam News." Speaker 2: Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum]--Elinor [Tatum, HM]-- Speaker 1: Dau-- Speaker 2: --his daughter and I knew each other, so I was pretty cool with Bill. But they all knew that in this huge debate that everybody watched, I asked the setup question. Like when Katie Couric asked her what magazines do you read, well, this was--he, he didn't have time in two minutes to answer the question first of all, about whatever this was. It was--but it had to be asked. It had to be asked. Speaker 1: And was this while he was running for office? Speaker 2: This was while he was running. This was the mayoral debate. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This was the mayoral debate. Speaker 1: This when--when he first started to run. Speaker 2: And he, he, he won because he was good, and he--but a, a lot of black people said oh, look at this bitch; who does she think she is without understanding that--the only thing they said to me was we don't want to be combative, but this is gonna be one of the toughest questions of the night, and we would like to have you ask it. Well, they had a whole nother agenda, and I was kind of naive. I still was able to write the question myself. You know, it wasn't like they said this is--I was able to write the questions and--but it was one of the tough ones. And a lot of black people said you just shouldn't do that to David, you know, you black. Let him--let, let somebody else ask it. Story_ID: 96113 Speaker 1: --me harshly, and they had a right to do it, but I would do the same thing again. Somebody had to ask that question, and I was the one who was in the [New York] Daily News and the Post the next day for asking it. I don't believe that all publicity is good, but it put me on the lips and tongues of people that would ordinarily never have, you know--you know, they may have been saying did you see that cow? But at least they watched the debate. They knew I worked for Channel 7. It had benefits. And I love David Dinkins [HM], always have, always will. Speaker 2: So his, his mayoralty, though, was criticized ultimately and still is criticized. Speaker 1: Look at Barack [Obama, HM]. Look at what they're up against as the first. Some of it is justified; some of it is not. The long lens of history is going to tell us how well David Dinkins did. Look at Rudy Giuliani. I mean to me, he got over because of 9/11. If you'd put the microscope on his mayoralty with his wife, and him cleaning up the streets, and getting the squeegees off, and do--he just--he was kind of like all over the place. And I think the long lens of history, once you take away 9/11, you're gonna see his as a flawed--it is not easy. Look at [Michael] Bloomberg, billionaire. They took him to task over everything from don't tell me which sodas I can drink to stop and frisk. It's, it's the long lens of history that will tell us how good these men were or how bad they were. Because if [President] Bill Clinton can come back from Monica [Lewinsky] and be the most revered person in the Democratic Party, it just--it just shows to go ya, as mama would say--it's, it's time that determines what works and what doesn't. And if you got time, you--there's always time to turn it around, you know. So yes, his pres--his mayoralty was criticized, but I thought he was a good mayor. I think to this day he was a good mayor, 'cause I know how hard it is to govern a city. He, he was no Chris Christie. I mean, you talk about--and, and politics is fraught with double dealing, underhanded--everybody does it, but some do it more than others. And I don't think David Dinkins did it more than others. I truly in my heart of hearts--I think he was a good mayor. Story_ID: 96114 Speaker 1: And then what other news stories in the--in the '90s [1990s] that, that were sort of critical? What other-- Speaker 2: The covering the, the blackout in 2000 [sic, 2003] and whatever. Speaker 1: Yeah, the blackout. Speaker 2: That was--that was--that was such a throwback to a time--we're not used to not having power in Manhattan [New York City, New York], no streetlights, no--how do you get home first of all? None of the streetlights were working. You had to drive very slow. Speaker 1: Talk, talk about what happened and then what-- Speaker 2: Part of the Northeast went out, not us. Part of the Northeast went out so we knew it was coming. We were covering that aspect. We were preparing to do our shows about this swath in the Northeast when we were suddenly plunged into darkness. And even though we have backup generators, it took a very long time to get Channel 7 back on the air, a very--we were hours off the air because it takes so much power. And 9/11 taught us you don't put your microwaves on top of buildings that can be brought down because that can destroy your signal. We were off the air unless you had cable. But we never thought about the basics of electricity, how much electricity it takes to keep a television station running. You have to have enough lights to write by, hundreds of computers on every floor, air conditioning, heating. And we were--we were off the air for a long time. But when we went out to do the stories, there were people sitting out on their stoops just like they used to do in the summer a long time ago when they didn't have air conditioning and they didn't have TV. And people were like dancing in the streets, and they--you're not supposed to take liquor outside of bars, but you know, the police were just doing policing. You could go and, and sit outside and drink a beer and talk to people. We connected. We connected as a city in, in ways that I have never seen before. So on one level it was sweltering. Hospitals were tremendously affected, and the city learned from that. But it was--it was a throwback to a time--I really liked being out talking to people who were on the stoops. And if they had an old person there, like oh, I remember when we used to do this back in the '40s [1940s], oh yeah, da, da, da, before there was television to keep us inside and--it was--it, it was a little frightening because you say if it goes down again, it's bad. But it wasn't for that long a time. And you saw this city, and people with candles, and people talking to each other in a way they didn't before. Speaker 1: So you really--what you're also describing--well, that's 2001. Prego (ph.) to that--well, what you're also describing is a lot of community that-- Speaker 2: Well, that's how New York is, communities--I mean the, the communities where people live there all their lives, and their parents die, and they stay in their parents' home. It's changing now in Manhattan, and I--it--because there's so much--it costs so much to live in Manhattan now. Harlem [Manhattan, New York City, New York] has, has been gentrified. But when I started here in the mid '80s [1980s], it was--it was nothing but communities with a certain type of people that did things a certain way and traditions, you know, the Jewish communities, the Haitian communities, Harlem, Spanish Harlem. They were like beautiful little worlds, and I was not used to most of these communities. I was prepared for living with a lot of black folk because of Atlanta, but I'd never really been in a large Jewish community. I'd never been to a seder. I--and I was like a sponge. I wanted to learn. I wanted to learn about Haitian foods and Haitian culture. I wanted to learn about Jewish food and the religion. And so this was a great place to be a sponge, and I was. Speaker 1: You became part of New York, and New York became part of you. Speaker 2: It did and I am so much better for it. I can't live anywhere else. Can you imagine me going back to Lansing, Michigan? Oh my God, never--that's not an option. I can't even go back and be comfortable in Atlanta [Georgia] anymore. Story_ID: 96115 Speaker 1: That's where my family is. They, they all moved to Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause I liked it so well. Speaker 2: When you say everybody who? Speaker 1: My brother is taking care of my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams], who has Alzheimer's. I have cousins down there. And the people in Lansing [Michigan] are dying off. I mean I just lost my--my mother had six other sibs, and now she's the only one left. Speaker 2: I see. Now your father [Herbert Abrams] died in 2002. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And he--even though he had remained--'cause you've, you've given a lot of his sayings during the interview, so-- Speaker 1: Takes a giant to bend. And boy, if you can compromise, you can survive in this world. Life can be beautiful. We laughed at him, but now after meditating and realizing if I see it as beauty or even parts of it, it's real. It's true as you think, it is, whether you're living in squalor or living in a palace. If you're happy, it works. I mean it just does. Speaker 2: So he had a lot of impact on you even--I guess if you're spouting off--you're just spouting off his sayings like-- Speaker 1: You don't know Herb Abrams--5th grade education. When my sister went off to college, he said I am not gonna let my kids be smarter than me. And so he bought a second set of Encyclopedia Britannicas, and set out to read them. Ten years later he might have been up to the Gs. But I would come home from college--no, I was out of college--and he would say Roz, come here. I would be at his house with his new wife, and I had spent a lot time there. She was wonderful. He said talk to me about syllogistic reasoning. I said what? He said I was reading the other day about, you know, you can't always have empirical this or that, that you can reason. You can get from A to B, B to C, C to D, D to E and come up with a pretty plausible explanation for this. And I said daddy, I don't even know what you're talking about. Oh, you with the college degree. That was just--he would pick something, learn everything about it, hit you with it, and you would just sort of look at him and go syllogistic reasoning. I took a speech class once, or I took a, a philosophy class once, but I--and he was determined that he was--he was not gonna let his kids show him up, not that we wanted to, not that we--but that's just how this man operated, and he did that 'til the day he died. He was always testing, challenging, but that's what I loved about him. Speaker 2: So--'cause I was just thinking. So do you remember--so his--he had--so he got remarried to-- Speaker 1: To Barbara. Speaker 2: To, to--okay. And they had a long-term relationship? Speaker 1: Long term, thirty-four years I think she said. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause I had talked to her about trying to find out--okay, who was this Mr. Abram? And she goes: Roz, we'll never know; we'll never know. Charlie is gonna be the one who raised your father. Deal with it--Charlie Duggans. Speaker 2: Okay, Charlie Duggans, okay. Story_ID: 96116 Speaker 1: So you know, you could always--you never know what genealogy what-- Speaker 2: I'm gonna do it. I'm going to do it. Speaker 1: You never--you never know. Speaker 2: Just a little swab and $600, and hell, I may be related to [President] George Washington. I mean you never-- Speaker 1: No, no, I'm not talking about--I'm talking about some genealogical research. You may be able to find something that-- Speaker 2: Do you know what ha--what happens--because he did it--when he got very sick he went back to--just a little back story on my father [Herbert Abrams]. When he was nine he went to a beer garden to get some beer for a nickel. And the beer garden owner--'cause blacks couldn't go in the front door. They had a side door, and you would take your container, and they would give you a nickel's worth or a dime's worth. And something happened. And altercation between the owner of the beer garden and a black man. And the guy blew the guy's brains out. He falls to the ground. My dad is standing there as a little kid. And he says if you say anything, I will kill you. He runs home and says to his mother I saw this, this, that, and the other. It was in the newspaper the next day. And that's what took him out of the South because my grandmother really believed my dad was in danger. And that's why it took her six months--she moved out of the apartment that they were in so that daddy would not see this man again, and he couldn't hurt him. And it took her six months to get the money and the everything to get to Albion, Michigan. And that's where she met and married Charlie [Duggans]. Charlie bought daddy nice clothes. He took care of him. But that's a part--when he went back, he went to where this beer garden was. He was also very sick. He had lung cancer--or he had lung problems at this point in time, and he wasn't sure what it was. And when he went back to the New Orleans [Louisiana] of his birth, he tried to find--he went to Charity Hospital. He pulled the records. He asked them how can I find out da, da, da? And they said well, you got a problem because your mother spent time on an Indian reservation. And if you think the records for black people are bad, try to find out someone who spent time on an Indian reservation. Her birth certificate says she was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, but she claims that she spent time in Florida, like eight years in Florida with her mother who was Native America. And then her mother went to--back to New Orleans. And--I mean it--but there's no records to show any of this. It's not on my grandmother's death certificate. There's a name, but it doesn't say Indian. My mother's mother it says Seminole Indiana and black as her, you know, genealogy. But it's just--it's the--it's pieces; it's just pieces. Speaker 1: Snatches of history. Speaker 2: Yes. And there was no Bible that was passed down with everything in it, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, snatches. I talk about that, that with my family, little things that sort-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of appear. But they're-- Speaker 2: Right, you can't-- Speaker 1: --little ghost in and out, and you can't tell a total chronology on my mother's side--(unclear). Speaker 2: And I wish that we could. I went to Israel several years ago. And I don't know if it's true, but I was with this woman who says I can trace my genealogy back to King David. And she said if you want to go with me, Israel is the perfect place. But she said I can. And I just said good golly, Ms. Molly, I can't trace mine back two generations. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But anyway. Speaker 1: Right, but you know, this, this whole search--I mean this is what this project-I say(unclear)--I was in search of myself. Story_ID: 96117 Speaker 1: You start co--co-anchoring with--is it Deanna? Speaker 2: Diana. Speaker 1: Diana Williams. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Now that was--though you had had male anchors, right, up to that point? Speaker 2: And they were trying to mix it up a little bit, and Diana was a very fine anchor. But about a year before I had started to lose the fire in my belly. I used to not mind the commute, coming home ninety minutes at night. It started out as a forty minute commute home. But as the city grew--'cause I was there so many years, and then I just--I wanted something different. I can't say I wanted more. I wanted something different. And working with Diana was not different enough. I had worked with her for years. She did I think the 6:00 show; I did the five. But it, it wasn't exciting. We knew each other. We weren't doing anything different. It was just two women as opposed to a man and a woman. And I think I was just ready to go. They offered me another contract, and I said I don't know. I, I just--I gotta do something. I gotta--I'm doing the same thing over and over and over again, and that's not leaving me fulfilled. Speaker 1: And it was nothing about money, because you ended up going to-- Speaker 2: I ended up going to CBS. Speaker 1: CBS. Speaker 2: And I mean there was more money there, but CBS wasn't a good fit for me. CBS did not renew my contract. And it's really funny. It was at the height of--you know 2008 I had a five-year contract, so I had three years left. And people were losing their jobs, mortgages were crumbling. You sat and you watched the stock market-- Speaker 1: No, you're talking about what date--what year is this? Speaker 2: Okay, I, I left ABC and signed a five-year-- Speaker 1: Five-year. Speaker 2: --deal, but it could have been a six-year deal if they wanted to, but they didn't want to. But they still had to pay me-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for those five years. Speaker 1: So, so you're saying-- Speaker 2: The (unclear) of 2007 I was--they had let me go, and I was getting the biggest paychecks of my life being at home. And nobody believes this. They say weren't you like devastated? Didn't you like cry? I said I don't think you understand that for seventeen years I went to work and did everything I could. I partied at night. I left no stone unturned. No, I was not upset. What, what the--by the grace of God that was the biggest contract I ever signed in my life, and I was gonna get paid for the next three years. If I wanted to go back I could have, but I didn't. I, I had a bucket list, and I had the money to finance it, and I did. I really did. Speaker 1: So you--so you signed--in 2003 you signed a five-year contract with a one-year extension. Then the financial meltdown happens. Speaker 2: And we also had a change of management at CBS. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All the people who hired me had been let go, and that's--this doesn't come as a surprise. All the people who hired me there was not one of them there when they called me in and said Roz, we're just not gonna renew your contract. And it was like okay. Speaker 1: So who did they replace you with? Speaker 2: I don't even know her--I know her first name is Christine, and she's beautiful, and--but I, I don't remember her last name. People don't watch--okay, I don't watch local news anymore 'cause I can get everything on my laptop for every show. When that building exploded a couple of days ago and killed all those people, I didn't know about it from watching television. I get alerts on my laptop, and you get everything. And you get as much or as little as you want, and then you go on. That--everything has changed as far as TV is concerned. Speaker 1: Well, things, things actually had started to change before that, you know, with-- Speaker 2: But I'm old, and if it changes for me, then that era is gone-- Speaker 1: Gone. That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --if I'm now there. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right. Because it had started to change even with the changing media-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, with the newspapers, 'cause news at one point, it was--there had been all these predictions that there would only--that all the three networks would just be one network. And at one point, I think CNN was in Chicago [Illinois]. They were providing newsfeeds to the local news. Speaker 2: They were. Everybody was providing. All the ABC stations got feeds from all the other ABC stations. So if you have a slow news day, you could pick a story out of Missouri or San Francisco [California], or--and also back in the day, you had bureaus, London [England], Rome [Italy], couple in Germany, couple in France. I mean all of that imploded on my watch. And I--and I think that that's part of the reason why I wasn't able to get up for it anymore. It became--the bean counters came in and said we just really have to watch costs because we don't have that many eyeballs now. People are going here and there, and it made perfect sense. Chickie [Bucco]--I understood more about the business of television, because both Chickie and her husband, George, were selling television time. And they were able to say my God, it went from this to this. Is it ever gonna come back? And so I was just sitting back watching it. And I thought, man oh man, nothing lasts forever; it doesn't. Speaker 1: (Laughter) There you go-- Speaker 2: So get out while you can. Get while the getting's good, and it was good for me. Story_ID: 96118 Speaker 1: Okay, but what do you do then when you, you leave then? What happens-- Speaker 2: I was still being invited to awards show. I worked very, very hard in this market. I was not afraid to write checks for worthy causes. And what I didn't know is that people don't forget that. They don't forget. They still wanted Roz. They were still asking me to head up their--the big events. They were still--and at first I didn't want to 'cause I said oh, it's just kind of more of the same. But it was very different when you weren't rushing, when you can spend the day--I could join other boards, Women in Film, 'cause I've always been interested in film. So I got on the board of Women in Film, and they have the big awards ceremony. And it, it just--it doesn't stop, or at least it didn't stop for me. In November--I mean December--I just got this huge journalism award. And that obviously--and this isn't arrogance. It's obviously I did a good job when I was doing it every day. And people, they, they just want to say a tip of hat to you, Roz. You know it took us a long time, but you, you served us well. And that's why I know not only did I make the right decision, but I--in, in spite of all the mistakes, I did a lot of stuff right. And now I know it because I've been away, and there are still people asking me to write articles; there are still people asking me to, to be a part of journalism. I judge the Gracies [Gracie Awards] every year. Gracies, that's the--to me the most prestigious award given to projects, whether they're entertainment or news that are by, for, and about women. And I've done it now for nine years, and it's, it's still there. I still know what's good in news and of course, entertainment. Speaker 1: So what--what I'm wondering, though, is when you decide you're leaving, and you know, your--the last day at work, I read that there was not a--you know, you gave a goodbye speech at-- Speaker 2: Which, which day, the--Channel 7 [WABC TV] or Channel 2 [WCBS TV], 'cause my last day-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --at Channel 7-- Speaker 1: Channel 7-- Speaker 2: Channel 7 was ah, they gave--people thought I had died, because they tuned into the 11:00 news, and they did like a retrospective of my time there. And if they missed the top part of it--that's what you do when people die. You do their career. I, I love Channel 7; I served them well. I cried because I had a little too much champagne, and then I still had to go on TV. But that's, that's all part of the memory. That's all part of the--you know. It--I loved Channel 7. Channel 7 gave me a life. Channel 7 gave me some incredible memories. But at some point it just wasn't enough. I went to CBS 2. That didn't work out so well, but I loved it. I loved every day there. It's just I've been a very lucky lady. Speaker 1: Right, the, the, the industry was changing. But-- Speaker 2: Had changed. Speaker 1: Had changed. Story_ID: 96119 Speaker 1: Had changed. But what I'm wondering is do you have--is it taking--did you take time to decompress after all that time, because you--I mean because-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I did. I took two years-- Speaker 1: Now your marriage had, had-- Speaker 2: The marriage had ended. Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: Kenneth [Showers] and I were still good friends, but I didn't want to move to Florida. He--his health issues were overwhelming us. And we had this house that was close to his parents. And he said you know, you're disrespecting me. This is the only thing I've ever asked of you, and it was. But somebody had to pay those two mortgages. Somebody had to take care of those two girls, and he was incapacitated. He could not coach anymore. It was too stressful. They said you'll, you'll give yourself another stroke. You just can't do that anymore. You're lucky. You've had three, and you're still functioning. Be happy. And he said well, you know, Roz isn't here. When he was working and I was working it was fine. But when I was working and he was at home, Denise had left the nest and was living with Jaime, her boyfriend at the time, and I-- Speaker 1: That's your youngest? Speaker 2: No, she was my oldest. Speaker 1: Oldest, okay. Speaker 2: And I so understood, but I couldn't. We would have gone through a lot of money to maintain a lifestyle. And if I continued to work, we would have something to live off of, you know, once these big bills were paid, once the kids were through school, once--you know, it's just what parents go through and do. And I was lucky enough to always have a good job. But he wanted something different, and there's a lot of guilt on my part, 'cause that was the only thing he ever asked of me. And I kept justifying it by saying but how are we gonna live? He said it doesn't make any difference; we'll live. And I was just too pragmatic. I said honey, you know, please, just give me five more years or give me one more contract. And he moved, and that--he didn't take care of himself. I was flying to Georgia--I mean to Florida--once a month, twice a month just to be with him, to make sure that he was okay, that he was seeing the doctors, but that took too much out of me. And finally after about four years--plus the pressure. Everybody wanted to know--well, are you guys living together? Are you divorced? And I go, you know, shut--this is none of your business. This is me and my family. You have no idea, the liberties that people take just because you come into your homes every night on television. And Kenny was such a private person. He didn't want the world to know that he kept having strokes. He was very embarrassed by the fact that he, he knew he couldn't coach anymore, 'cause he was a really good coach. And it was just really hard during those years. And finally, I said please come back to New York. I can't--I can't take care of you down there. This isn't a marriage. He said honey, I'm not coming back to New York. I mean we really talked to each other like that. And I said okay, then I'm gonna file for divorce. I'm not angry. He said I'm not angry either. And the killer, the p-number was he never--know how usually when people make money and the wife makes more, he asked for nothing. He said I want your insurance. I'll take care of the house in Florida, but he couldn't work. He said I'll take care of the house in Florida, but he couldn't' work. I paid off that house. I said you'll always have a roof over your head. I gave him my insurance. As long as we were married, he could get topnotch medical care through my union. And I'm like proud to say this. It didn't stop me from doing anything--anybody that I wanted to date, any place I wanted to go, and the same was true for him. But it takes a giant to bend. And I owed that man, and that was one way that I could give it back. I couldn't just walk away. And I was praying all the time that he would come back, but he didn't. But I made the last years of his life not only good, but healthy, nice home, near his family. I mean I did--I was able to return the favor in some form or fashion. And that's why I love talking about it, because if, if, if you don't give all your money to lawyers when you divorce, you can have a whole lot left to help yourself and help each other. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: And we didn't give it to the lawyers. Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 96120 Speaker 1: So your, your decompression time--so what are you--what you--how long does it take you to sort of decompress? Speaker 2: Took me two years. Speaker 1: Two years. Speaker 2: Two years. I tried to learn how to cook. I will never learn how to cook. I hired a chef, bought $5,000 worth of pots and pans. And for five grand you really didn't get that many pots and pans. And when the chef was here helping me chop and do it, it was delicious. When the chef wasn't there, it was nasty. Some people have the ability to cook. I don't. During that time I learned how to entertain--five small people dinner party, then ten, then I would--served on several boards, theater boards, other boards like bring 'em into my home. I love entertaining, where you hire people, you know, to bring the food, run the bar, they clean up when they go, and you get to be a hostess. That is fun; that is fun. And I also decided to try acting again. I started taking acting classes, dramatic writing classes, first in Westchester and now in New York. And it's not that I'm good. It's just that it's so darn much fun, and there are so many angles, like we're writing this thing, "Life With Roz." And we're gonna pool our money and shoot part of it and try and sell it. If it doesn't sell, gosh, has it been fun! It has been so much fun. Story_ID: 96121 Speaker 1: So Roz, what do you want to do with the rest of your life? What are you thinking? Speaker 2: I want to be healthy. I mean it's so cliche, but if you get breast cancer you gotta slow down and deal with it. You get cervical cancer you gotta slow down and deal with it, so I take care--my mammograms and my pap tests. And my--I really take care of myself. And I have to get the flu shot every year, and now they got--shingles has come back. Anybody who's had chicken pox--girl, if you've ever had it, get your shingles shot 'cause you don't want shingles, trust me. I take good care of myself so that I can just wake up every day and go to my Zumba classes, and talk to--see my family members. My mom has Alzheimer's, but she knows my voice. And I just--I don't have big dreams, you know, but I have the dream of always being able to write a check for some cause. I get a real thrill out of giving money, and I've got money to give quite frankly. And it's just a question of--one year Women's Fear got it. The year before that this new end organization got it. I've given ten scholarships to the CUNY Graduate School of Journalism, and I'm proud of that. And that has all been since I retired. I was giving even more when I was working. I want to be able to always do that, and it looks like I will. And that's just it. I want to be able to put on makeup and not have people go: what happened to her? I want to--I want to look good for as long as I can. I don't want to marry again, but I want a companion. And I have a feeling he's gonna have to be younger than me, 'cause men my age (laughter) they move really slow, and I'm kind of still got a little pepper in my step. And that--that's about it. I wanna enjoy grandchildren and family 'cause for so many years I was gone. I was doing journalism because it required so much. But now that I have time I do more of the things I want to do. Story_ID: 96122 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Remember when I had told you--see, I, I think legacies are--I'm, I'm going to--I will have educated people. I will have taken care of my family. I will have--but when I'm in the ground I know that I'm gonna leave quite a bit of money for, for this hunger program because people are hungry in this country today. And there's just gonna be money there, and I've already set it up. The kids are gonna get big chunks. As a matter of fact I'm--if I live to be seventy-five, they're gonna start drawing down then. I don't care about a legacy. I want my legacy to be in front of me every single day. If I do something nice, I wanna be here to hear the thank you. If I do something wrong, I wanna be cognizant enough to say I'm sorry. Fourteen billion years this universe has been around. Who cares once you're in the ground? 'Cause fourteen billion years will go by and it's like: if I can just stay in the moment, do some good now, that's enough for me. Does that make sense? Story_ID: 96123 Speaker 1: What do you--what do you wanna be remembered for, then that's a different--that's a different type of question. You didn't answer that. Speaker 2: Ultimately, what is the greatest of the greats? What is Caesar remembered for? What will--it'll be taught in high school, the greatest of the greats. If you--for Roz Abrams, if the kid, the African girl who got one of my scholarships wants to invoke my name at some point in the not too distant future that's fine, but if she doesn't that's fine too. I see this as all so fluid and passing, and nothing lasts forever until I don't care if I'm remembered for anything. It won't make any difference to me. I care now, this moment. I want you to think I did a good job in this interview. If, if generations in the future look in--look at me and go: what a jerk! That's okay. I gave it my best at the time I did it. I really don't have any--this is going to end, all of it. The cities will crumble. I mean if, if you study physics you know. So it's only today. And a lot of people have what they want. I'm, I'm doing it now while I can say oh, Roz, you did good or let me see if I can do that again. I don't care about tomorrow, 'cause tomorrow's not promised. And if I'm gone, I can't influence in any way, and I mean that. That is the honest to God truth, and I haven't always felt that way. Story_ID: 96124 Speaker 1: Roz, one last question. Our community--because you came out of a strong black community. And you know, in Atlanta [Georgia] you described a strong black community. What hopes and concerns do you have for our community? Speaker 2: We've got to make sure that all the black people who are educated in my generation--and I'm talking about Lansing, Michigan because of the car business, and the money, and the grade school system--that has got to endure. But I'm also gonna spread it out and say all people. This, when I was growing up, was the greatest country you could ever imagine. During my lifetime, Brown v. the Board of Education [1954], the women's lib [women's liberation movement], we were able to--en masse--on college campuses--say we don't like this war in Vietnam. We were able to go against the government, something that was unheard of for my mother and father. And I think if this country is gonna be strong, you have to have an educated citizenry. Too many of us believe the earth was created in seven days. And that sort of sets the tone for your knowledge and learning. We have to be smart. We have to be thinking like those people thought. We're gonna put a man on the moon 'cause John Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] says this is something we should do. I don't want us to be the world's policemen. I want us to take care of our older citizens, teach our children, and stand up and say Rush Limbaugh cannot set your agenda. You either like me or dislike me based up on me. But you can't let people who make $700 million dollars, spewing hatred, and anger set your agenda. I grew up in a world that was Republicans and Democrats got along on the big stuff, and I'm gonna die in a world and it will be just like polar opposites. If the nation is to survive, all her citizens have to be educated, black, white, Latino, Asian, all of us. And we have to flexible. If we're gonna be giants, we have to be able to bend. And it's constantly reaching across the table, reaching out. I am going to listen to you regardless of your philosophy as long as you respect me. You can be diametrically opposed for everything I stand for, but I will listen to and respect you for it. And we now live in a world where it's not just about black people. It is about all people. I want black people educated, but I want all people educated. Our children, they're not like us. They and my grandchildren, who don't even have knowledge of the Civil Rights Movement other than what they read in books, they, they will be lost unless we teach all of our grandchildren where we have come as a nation. And we don't do enough of that, 'cause we're too busy squabbling. As far as African Americans are concerned, that's me, and I love me. But what does it benefit a woman to be educated and go into a world where there are uneducated people. You know, it's, it's got to be about everybody now. The vision and the progress necessary, it has to be shared by everybody. It really truly does. Story_ID: 96125 Speaker 1: This is my ex-husband and best friend, Kenneth Richard Showers. I hadn't even married him then. We had just moved into this lovely con--condominium on Lindberg Drive in Atlanta, Georgia. It's Christmastime, and he probably decorated the tree 'cause I was working all the time. But he's a handsome devil, and he did a lot in my life to keep me moving forward and up the chain in my chosen profession. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This me with Queen Latifah as a kid. I knew her then as a Dana. I did a show called "Making A Difference," and she was one of my guests. She was just starting out, and she's a really cool lady. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Approximately 1992, 'cause that's when I was doing--'92 [1992] to '94 [1994] I was doing "Making A Difference." Speaker 2: That's young Roslyn and her sister, Annette. Speaker 1: You have to go left to right or right to left. Speaker 2: Oh, my, my sister is on the left, standing, and I'm on the horse. And I told you my father [Herbert Abrams] was a photographer. And everywhere we went he took pictures of us, and this was just an event. I was nine; she was eleven. Speaker 1: And her name is spelled L? Speaker 2: She went by Annette Abrams, but her first name is Lucille, Lucille Annette Abrams, but everybody knew her as Annette. Speaker 1: That's me at about one years old. Look at those cheeks, or should I say look at those jowls. That's what they were. Speaker 2: We talked about David Dinkins [HM]. And whoever that is in the middle, she's a famous tennis player whose name escapes me. It might be Monica Seles. But this is David Dinna--David Dinkins played a lot of tennis. He's the reason we have a tennis center. And this was some tennis event, and he was there. I was working. Speaker 1: So how many--how many events would you do in a week? Speaker 2: For sure one, sometimes two. And then there were--if you did a run-- Speaker 1: This is just me in college. That's how I looked in college at Western Michigan University [Kalamazoo, Michigan], so I was like eighteen or nineteen. I mean I was--I was--I done by the time--I was like eight--yeah, eighteen or nineteen, because that dress I had in my freshman year. I remember it well. It was orange. Speaker 2: And of course that is the iconic Bill Cosby. And once-- Speaker 1: Do you know what this event was? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's part of that same tennis event with David Dinkins. And how do I know? I've got the same shirt on. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Approximate year, or did you already said it I guess-- Speaker 2: You know I'd be guessing. Speaker 1: But I got married in 1982 in Lansing [Michigan]. And a lady volunteered to make me--make my wedding suit, and she did, a lady in Atlanta [Georgia]. And it was really beautiful. It was a suit with a train. It was made of out of moire silk, and I mean--and it was probably a thousand dollar dress, and she charged me maybe $300 dollars. It was fabulous, but she was a designer and she wanted credit. Speaker 2: That's me and Regis [Philbin] much later. This was taken around 2002 or 2003, my last couple of years at ABC. And the event was, every year you had to meet with the sponsors, and all the talent met with all the sponsors. And that's the name of that tune. Speaker 1: That's my father, Herbert Abrams, love him madly. That's him as an older man. He was cool, and I miss him dearly. That was taken in the 1990s. That was taken in the 1990s. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE BY MALE): Did he take that himself, or did somebody take it? Speaker 1: You know what, I think he did take that himself. He could set the camera, and would get in it and-- Speaker 2: This, this is me very shortly after I adopted my daughters. That's Melissa, my baby, ten years old. And to my right is Denise; she was twelve. And we're--that was taken--you'll see the News Center 4 in the background. They came into the station, and I don't know why they have on those costumes. Maybe it was Halloween. But we were in the station, and one of the people just took the picture. That's Kenny in the background. And you know, that's one of the few pictures that I have in San Francisco [California] during the time of the adoption. Speaker 1: Denise and Melissa. Denise has the fan open. Me--no, Melissa has the fan open. We were at Disneyworld. When you work for Disney you go to Disneyworld a lot. That was taken around 1995, but they love that picture. And they wanted me--they didn't want baby pictures shown. And they like that. Well, it just reminds them of a time when we went on vacations and before life got hard for them. Speaker 2: My cotillion. My father--as I made my bow to society. Speaker 1: What year approximately? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966]. It was the year I was a senior, 1966. Speaker 1: These were the girls I took ballet with. And I am about eight years old then, so that would have been 1956. And all the girls are black, because in 1956 in Lansing, Michigan black girls and white girls could not take ballet classes together. So you found, you know--and you could go to the best ballet schools, but you, you had to--it wasn't integrated. Speaker 2: Oh, so you had to take different--oh. Speaker 1: The black kids--even in 1958 in the North, black girls and white girls did not take ballet classes together in Lansing, Michigan. Speaker 2: This was just--it's a high school picture in 1966. They did this for outstanding high school students. It was called Teen Salute. And my mother [Esther Caldwell Abrams] never threw away anything. And that was in the, the "State Journal." And they did a teen a month, and I was--you know, I just thought I'd throw that in. Speaker 1: Now this is an interesting picture, because I just want you to show me--I just want to show--will you look at that hair? This was about 1982 in--'cause I was at 11 Alive, 1982. I was single with Leonard Nimoy doing that noon show with Joe Washington. And I was doing an interview segment at 11 Alive. Speaker 2: And this is? Speaker 1: Leonard Nimoy, Spock. Speaker 2: I was four years old. My father was a photographer, and he took pictures of us in all kinds of--and you can also get a chance to see the house, that big old wore out chair. But that was daddy just taking pictures of me and my sister, you know--you know. Is that it? Speaker 1: Oh, a more contemporary picture of my brother, Dennis, my mother, and me in--I'm in the middle--I'm in the middle, and that was taken in the 9--the late 1990s, 1998, 1999. Speaker 2: This was taken even earlier. This was taken probably around 1990, 'cause my sister was still healthy then. Dennis looks real young, and he's thin there--yeah, about 1990. That's daddy on the end, me in the middle, my sister on the right, and my brother, Dennis, in front. And wherever we were happy. Speaker 1: My sister was a dancer, and we had gone to Detroit [Michigan] in 1964. That was the year she did Ziggy's Review. And whenever she danced my parents showed up. So that's my Aunt Margery (ph.) on the end; that's my mom in the middle-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: --Mama, Annette, and daddy, and that's Aunt Margie on the far left--my Aunt Margery, my mother's sister. Speaker 2: What's her last name? Speaker 1: She had several, Margery Veronica Morrow Sandford Matuire (ph.) Archibald. Speaker 2: She had--that's the one--she the one who was married a lot of times? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes she was. She was a grand old gal with the pink hair and the blond hair. Speaker 2: This is 2009. I just did a program for KIDS, K-I-D-S, and they sent me a picture. And I was still dying my hair then. Speaker 1: This is just a magazine article, and I just--I was four, and my sister was six. And they put us in a trunk on stage, and we kept peaking out of the trunk. And we were messing up the, the ballet dancers in front of us, because I'd pop up. And then we ended up getting in the papers because of it, "Attic Antics." Speaker 2: Last year this is just one of the many programs that I did for a United Nations organization. And at the end they said will you pose in front of this sculpture, which was being donated. It was last year. Speaker 1: On the top that's my sister. I am probably two. My sister is four. And that's just the Michigan winter, and this and--the old Buick that my parents used to drive. Underneath is me, on top, our babysitter, Joyce, in the middle and my sister. And I was two there. Oh, it's just taken far away that's why I look so small. And this is the same--oh, that's Evelyn. My sister is on top squinting. Evelyn is the white girl in the middle who was just a very good friend who used to come and play. And I'm just sort of sitting there looking--is it time to eat yet? Speaker 2: And I put this in there because I was never a glamour queen, but I sure did start looking better. That was me in high school. And I had just won a big forensic competition. I was always, you know, a good debater and a--and once again, we got written up 1966, my senior year. Speaker 1: This was an article that was done at CNN and the--and headline reads: Alum who overcame speech disorder is now with CNN. It was done by my, my college, Western Michigan University. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is my mentee, Chickie Bucco. Oh, sideways And this was taken in 9--2008 at the Gracie Awards, and I had won a Gracie that year..