 Story_ID: 326940 Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating, my name is Evelyn Pounds, and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you state and spell your complete name for us? Speaker 2: Jacqueline Veronica Williams Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins]. Speaker 1: All right. And, would you-- Speaker 2: Spell it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E is Jacqueline. Veronica, V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, Biggins, B-I-G-G-I-N-S. Speaker 1: All right. And, would you state your date of birth-- Speaker 2: Ten October (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and location? Speaker 2: October 19, 1946. My [paternal] grandmother's [Lucille Moore McDonald] house in Belmont, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And, today's date? Speaker 2: What is today--oh, today is February 14, 2006. Speaker 1: And, the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's, well, 303 Peachtree Street, Suite 4300, Heidrick & Struggles' [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.] executive offices [in Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 326941 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you the--about five People magazine-ish type questions, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Popcorn and peanuts (laughter), you know, whatever the given day is (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Why, did you think it was vegetables or something like that? No (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Your favorite co-- Speaker 2: Is that a food, popcorn and peanuts? Speaker 1: It would be considered a food. Speaker 2: Okay, good. Speaker 1: It's a corn, corn (laughter). Speaker 2: Good. Good. Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Probably, spring, you know. Speaker 1: And, your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I like the color of the ocean. And, I love the color black 'cause I wear it most times. Except for today, when you told me not to (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite vacation spot? Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, I like--I mean, I am a beach person. I love the beach. Speaker 1: And, your favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one? Speaker 2: I'm sure I do. I'm sure I have many things, I just can't think of what it is at this moment. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'll think about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: Oh, I know what it is. People tell me I say this all the time, be clear. Story_ID: 326942 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother. What was her name, or what is her name, and where was she born? The date of birth, if you remember that. Would you state and spell her name for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I do have, I have it all written down, if you want me to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --refer to my notes. But, her, my mother's name and this would be, you want her maiden name? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name is Jacqueline Veronica McDonald [Jacqueline McDonald Williams]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where was she born? Speaker 2: In Belmont, North Carolina. And, my mother's date of birth, and can I just--you want me to reference? Speaker 1: Oh, you can. If not, that's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I do have that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, did she tell you any stories about when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother grew up in Belmont, North Carolina. Her parents [Lucille Moore McDonald and James Thomas McDonald] were from that area and married in Belmont. They basically lived on the same street that, you know, until my grand- until my grandparents died, they were in the same house from the time, you know, from beginning 'til the end. And, she went to, you know, elementary school, high school there. My--it's interesting, deep Catholic family. Probably a little, you know, when you thing about Catholicism in the African American community, I mean, it is a little different. But, I mean, lots of stories. My mother's, all right let me get this right, my mother's father's father, Sam McDonald, actually came to that whole--to Belmont, North Carolina to the Belmont Abbey and was reared by the nuns there. And, it's my understanding that they brought him from Charleston, South Carolina. So, people said, "Well, he must have been a child of one of the nuns." However, he was very dark and therefore that's probably not true, you know. Speaker 1: That's interesting. That is interesting. Now, tell us a little bit about your mother, her personality, what type of person she is. Speaker 2: My--very caring person. My mother--well she--would I call my mother strict? She had rules, and we were all very clear about the rules in our household, without a doubt. My mother went on to be a teacher. I think she always wanted to be a teacher; loved history, and loved for you to have a sense of history. So, I mean, that, those were all very important to her. My mother has always enjoyed crafts and being creative, and sews; taught me how to sew. You know, loves fabric, I think, you at age, my mother doesn't tell her age, but I'm gonna tell it anyway. At age eighty-three, she still probably collects fabrics and sews and enjoys doing that. She is the one who, you know, does flower arrangements, those kinds of things. Story_ID: 326943 Speaker 1: Tell us about your father. What is his name and when was he born? Speaker 2: Andrew Williams. And, I do have his date of birth, which I can make sure I give to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My, but, my father died in 1977. He died of cancer. Very tall, he was in engineering. My father taught engineering at North Carolina A&T University [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] in Greensboro, North Carolina. And, he moved the family after he and my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] were married in 1944. They were married--maybe they were married Christmas 1943. And, they moved, and then he went to war. He fought in, you know, World War II [WWII]. I've got great postcards that my father sent to my mother from the war, describing his experiences in Japan and other places; Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], you know, other places like that. And, when he returned, he went to school at North Carolina A&T. And, he, and he graduated from there in the, in the mechanical engineering area. He went on to become--first an instructor there. He went on to the University of Illinois for, for advanced graduate work in this field of engineering. And, then became, you know, a professor of the mechanical engineering department at North Carolina A&T. The mechanical lab there that was established, which is a building on the A&T's campus, is named for my father. He went on to do--he founded and got patents on several instruments, medical devices. One that basically, every hospital in the United States carried at one point. That had to do with, if you had a stroke, this instrument--so don't, I don't, I'm--(laughter) believe me I'm the total opposite of my father so I can't explain all the mechanicals of this to you. But, it took blood off the brain. And, it helped stroke victims not, you know, the brain evidently is destroyed because of the blood staying on your brain too long. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, this helped take blood off the brain. He also worked on a pin for the knee, which was, you know, during the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era. He did, you know, he solved mechanical problems for Burlington Mills [Burlington Mills Corporation; Burlington Industries, Inc.], which developed, you know, which produce fabrics. So, he--that, that was his, his field. And, did a lot of things in what--robotics which now is, you know, kind of a, you know, everybody knows about robotics. But, you know, when my father was doing it back, you know, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], it was, it was pretty new. It was all very new. Story_ID: 326944 Speaker 1: He led a very interesting life. Speaker 2: He did. He did. We lived in Indonesia when I was, and you know, this is really jumping the gun. But, when I was in the fifth and sixth grade, or sixth and sev- fifth and sixth grade or sixth and seventh, I'll get the dates right in a minute. My father [Andrew Williams] was invited there by the United States government to go and teach in the university there. So, the entire family moved to Indonesia and lived for two years. Speaker 1: Two years? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yes. That, that was very interesting. He lived a full life. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: He most certainly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He and my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] traveled extensively. We always got to spend the month of August with my grandparents. We used to protest, but we had a great time. So, we stayed between--both grandparents lived very close to each other. And, we'd go down there and they would always travel the month of August. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he have any stories that shared with you about--? Speaker 2: Well, you know, and I'll tell you-- Speaker 1: I know about the war [World War II, WWII], yes, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. But, you know, actually, my father didn't talk about the war a lot. I mean, he was in the [U.S.] Navy and he was on a, you know, naval aircraft carrier. And, put my older brother [Joseph Williams] in the Navy later, you know, told it'll help, you know, help him grow up a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, he did tell--my father was a tennis player. And, and he was a, I mean, he was a dedicated tennis player. And, I always wondered why he got in, why, I mean-- Speaker 1: How did he-- Speaker 2: How in the world? Because, my grand- my grandparents [Eliza Johnson Williams and Kelly Williams] on his side--my mother [sic. grandmother] was a maid for the wealthy mill family there in Gastonia, North Carolina. And, his father was a janitor for the same, for the same family, but at the mill itself. So, how in the world did you learn to play tennis and get interested in engineering? Because in this, you know, one of the stories he told, the, the house where they lived, they had tennis court. And, my father would go to work with my grandmother. Sometimes, he would--my father had asthma, he was sick a lot. And, my grandmother, you know, when he couldn't go to school, would just take him to work with her. And, while there, he learned, he learned to play tennis with this young fellow who was the same age as he. And, this young fellow evidently kept saying he was gonna be an engineer. And, my dad said he figured he was smarter than this kid because he knew a lot more about math. And, thought, "Well, you know, I can do that, too." So, he got interested in engineering. Story_ID: 326945 Speaker 1: Well, was your father [Andrew Williams] an only child? Speaker 2: No, no. No, no. But, see he was sick because of the asthma. Speaker 1: So, he was close to his mother [Eliza Johnson Williams] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, he was close to his mother and my, you know, my grandmother would take him to work. But, no, he had, let me think, oh, I'll have to go back and count--the brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: But, he was definitely not an only child. Speaker 2: No, he was definitely not an only child by any stretch of the imagination. Speaker 1: So, he picked up tennis and he-- Speaker 2: He picked up tennis and that was the only one in his family. See that was the other reason I was so interested in, you know, why tennis? I mean, my father was, he al- I mean, he was just a heck of a tennis player. I mean, they would go to New York [New York] to the, to what's the big tennis tournament [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] that's still held there? My father went there. My father and another group of guys in North Carolina were one of the early folks who help raise money to support Arthur Ashe, when he as first getting started, you know, on the tennis circuit. He and another guy by the name of George Simkins [George Simkins, Jr.], deeply involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, did he actually tell any stories about meeting with Arthur Ashe, or--? Speaker 2: You know what, I must admit, I don't remember stories per se. But we would go to, and this is when we were young, we would go to these tennis tournaments where, you know, Arthur Ashe was the, you know, was playing and would be the youngest, you know, really young out there on the tennis courts. My brothers [Joseph Williams and Warren Williams] both were, were tennis players. And, I, you know, he tried his best, I'm not sure, but, yeah, I think I got stung by a bee once. And, I thought to myself, oh, no. Can't be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, that was the end of tennis (unclear) (laughter)? Speaker 2: --playing tennis, you know, you know, that was about the end of my, you know, even--but, I mean, they were--my, my younger brother still plays a lot of tennis. And, you know, it interesting, my older brother has a tennis court at his house and I think he built that tennis court because of my father. Speaker 1: That is-- Speaker 2: And, it was built after he died. After my father died, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you father really had a passion of-- Speaker 2: Oh, he had a great passion for tennis. Speaker 1: --passion for tennis. Speaker 2: I mean, this is, when you go back and, you know, when I plow through pictures of my dad, you can find lots of pictures in white shorts and, you know, tennis shirts, you know. Speaker 1: That is so interesting. Speaker 2: That's what he did. Story_ID: 326946 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] mother, and your mother's father. Speaker 2: Okay. Both from Belmont, North Carolina. And, I have their birth dates and I can give those to you. They, let me think, my grandmother's parents; her grandfather [sic. father], Sam Moore, her maiden name was Moore. Her name was Lucy Moore [Lucille Moore McDonald]. And, we always called her Nana, N-A-N-A, Nana. And, you know, she lived in one of the few brick houses in, in Belmont, North Carolina. Why? Because her father was the brick mason; brick mason and stone mason. If you go back, I'm not sure that they're still there, but the old mills--that used to be a mill town. I mean, lots of people worked for the mills and that. And, if you looked at some of the old mills, that cornerstone had my grandfather's name on it. Because he was the brick mason, stone mason-- Speaker 1: And, that was his signature (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for that area. Speaker 1: --that he left. Speaker 2: And, that was, that was his signature that he left there. But, her grandfather--no, her fa- my--all right, so, Lucy Moore was the daughter of Mary and Sam Moore. And, Sam Moore--no, I'm gonna get this right in a minute. Lucy Moore's mother was Viola Moore [Viola Fox Moore]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, her father--and, and Viola's husband was Sam, or, so, Viola and Sam Moore were, you know, her parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. And, I actually do have, you know, their parents-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, I can, her-- Speaker 1: And, you can go back? Speaker 2: Sam Moore's mother was Mary Moore and a slave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. And, then--and, you know, it's interesting, and then on Viola Moore side, if you look at her, she very much looks like an Indian [Native American]. And, then, when you go back and you discover someplace along the, in my family history, they have this thing about, and it would have been her mother being on the Cherokee Indian Trail of Tears. So, you know, I mean, there are some, you know, some interesting things in there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. So, we can approximate that your mother was born around the '20s [1920s], in the '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's, that's like early '20s [1920s], 19-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Do you--you want me to go ahead---- Speaker 1: Twenties [1920s]. Speaker 2: And, I can-- Speaker 1: And, '21 [1921]. Speaker 2: Can I go ahead and consult for this. I think it would be worth this. My, all right, my grand- great-grandfather, who would have been Sam Moore, died in 1947, and he was seventy-five when he died. My grandmother, his daughter, Lucy Moore, was born in 1897 and died in 1985. My grandfather, James Thomas McDonald, was born in 1898 and died June 6, 1990--1977. All right, now, let me tell you when--see I talked to my mother, my mother was born in 1923. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And, eighty-three now. And, my father [Andrew Williams] was born in 1923. My mother was born in April of '23 [1923], and my father was born in July in '23 [1923] and died in, in, on January 19, 1977. Speaker 1: So, '77 [1977]. So, he was like fifty-four-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He was very young. Speaker 1: Years old? He was young. Speaker 2: He was younger than I am. Yeah, very young. Speaker 1: Yes. He was very-- Speaker 2: From something he wouldn't die from today, so. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So, your mother's mother's name was? Speaker 2: Lucy-- Speaker 1: Lucy Moore. Speaker 2: --Moore. Speaker 1: And, she was born anywhere around 19--? Speaker 2: She was born in 18-- Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-- Speaker 2: --ninety-seven [1897]. Speaker 1: Okay. She was born in 1897. Speaker 2: December 26, 1897. And, so, she was, what, eighty-eight when she died. She went to a boarding school in Virginia. And, you think about that--that was very unusual. Speaker 1: That was extremely unusual. Speaker 2: For, you know, a young girl born in the South. But, also, it's, you know, when you look at my grandfather, her father, so my great-grandfather, Sam Moore, you know, as a brick mason, he did well. He did well. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she the only one to go to school or did--? Speaker 2: Well, she had, she had one sibling who was Mike Moore, Michael Moore [ph.]. Speaker 1: The son. Speaker 2: I don't know if he went to school or not. Speaker 1: Okay. But, he did send (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, he did go, well, he did go through high school. But he, I think he may have gone to high school there in Belmont. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But, she was sent away to boarding school? Speaker 2: She was sent away to a boarding school in Virginia. Speaker 1: In Virginia? Speaker 2: Yeah. She did--she never worked outside of the home. Speaker 1: Okay. That was, now that was interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: That, that was--and very unusual. Speaker 2: That is true. Speaker 1: And, he was a brick mason. Now, you said that his mother, Mary Moore-- Speaker 2: Mary Moore. Speaker 1: Sam Moore's mother? Speaker 2: Sam Moore's mother. Speaker 1: Was-- Speaker 2: Sam Moore was, all right, so, whatever seventy-five is from 1947, his mother, Mary Moore-- Speaker 1: Was the slave? Speaker 2: Was a slave. She had three children. She had Sam, Sarah [ph.], and John [ph.]. Story_ID: 326947 Speaker 1: Did any stories filter down from slavery from Mary Moore on your mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] side? Did any (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what, we need to interview my mother. Don't we (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause she had all these stories. Speaker 1: She has these stories, okay. Sometime they, they kind of just stick in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know what? And I should've asked her those questions-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: Because, my, my uncle, this is very interesting, and this was my Uncle Mike [Michael Moore (ph.)]. When I went, all right-- Speaker 1: This was your mother's brother? Speaker 2: My--all right. So, this would have been, let me get this right. All right, so, Uncle Mike had two children. His children, so this would have been one of Uncle Mike's children, was still alive when I went to the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And, he said to him, he said at a family reunion, he said, you know, "I can die in peace now. I've known my great uncle that was a slave, and I know my great niece who's at the White House." So, I mean, that, you know-- Speaker 1: That, that said a lot. Speaker 2: That said a lot, didn't it? Speaker 1: That went the full gamut. Yes, that's, that's true. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That's very true. Speaker 1: Well, that's all--that's very, very interesting. Speaker 2: But, you know what, and I do, it's interesting 'cause I did a lot of research and wrote quite a bit about, you know, this family and kind of where they came from. So, I wanna go back and just give you a little bit on--let me see if I can find this. Because just to give you some story, I mean, this is, you know, kinda of following the slavery thing and just some information that I got from my mother. And, this is, and you'll, you'll get the history here. Jude was the, an African as a slave mother of Henry. And, then Mrs. Beth McClarey [ph.] owned Jude McClarey [ph.]. Dr. Steven Fox [ph.], physician, bought Henry as a baby from Beth McClarey. Dr. Fox took the baby to Columbus, Georgia, and then Henry McClarey [ph.] is now, now becomes, Henry is now Henry Fox [ph.]. Because, you know, he, the slave then, I mean-- Speaker 1: It's their name. Speaker 2: They renamed him. Henry Fox was born in 1832 and his father was a white slave master. Mama Lou [ph.] was a Cherokee Indian [Native American]. She was driven along with other Indians from Nashville, Tennessee to Kentucky and Mama Lou related that the Indians owned slaves. So, that was a, I mean, this is a story coming, you know, from Mama Lou. Henry Fox met Mama Lou in North Georgia on an Indian reservation. And, my mother, my--I think this was my great aunt telling me this. She wore buckskin moccasins until she died. And she kept her hair in two neat braids at all times with colorful beads. And, she was born in 1832. Now-- Speaker 1: Now, which side of the family is this? Speaker 2: This is, this is on my mother's side. Speaker 1: This is still your mother's side? Speaker 2: This is my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right-- Speaker 1: And, this, this is prior to Mary Moore? Speaker 2: All right, yeah, I'm gonna, yeah, that you-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: I'm gonna tell you how all this-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1873, Viola Fox [Viola Fox Moore] was born to Mary Lou and Henry Fox in Gordon, Georgia. Mary Lou and Henry were freed by the Emancipation-- Speaker 1: Proclamation. Speaker 2: --Proclamation [Emancipation Proclamation]. Viola married Sam Moore. So, now, see you get to Viola and Sam, who were then my grandmother's [Lucille Moore McDonald] parents. So, you know, Viola was, Viola was born from--of Mary Lou and Henry Fox. Okay. Story_ID: 326948 Speaker 1: And Sam Moore, brick mason, moved to Mecklenburg County in North Carolina and they [Biggins' maternal great-grandparents, Sam Moore and Viola Fox Moore] produced two children. One of which was Lucy [Lucille Moore McDonald], my grandmother, and Mike Moore [Michael Moore (ph.)]. So, two children. And, then, let's see I go on here, Lucy Moore married Tom McDonald [James Thomas McDonald] in Mecklenburg County, which is, you know, where Belmont [North Carolina] sits. They had three children including my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams], who was born in, you know, I think I said 1923 and, and they attended, you know, separate but equal schools, quotes-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, quote-quote, you know. Speaker 2: Prior to Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She married my father [Andrew Williams]. You asked me when my mother was born. I think, did I tell you that in 1923? Speaker 2: Yes. In 1923. Okay. Speaker 1: And, then she married my father in--on December 24, 1943. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, you know, my mother, remember, is a Catholic. So, she runs off to marry my father. Speaker 2: Now, you father was not a Catholic. Speaker 1: Not a Catholic. Speaker 2: He was Baptist? Or, was he-- Speaker 1: He was, he was, yeah I guess--he was a Pres- he became a Presbyterian. I always knew him as Presbyterian. Speaker 2: All right. But, prior to that--? Speaker 1: But, I'd lay odds, it was probably a Baptist free, you know, free Baptist type of church. Speaker 2: Or Methodist, okay. All right. And-- Speaker 1: And, so, they ran off and got married and then came home and told my grandmother. And, my grandmother, we're talking major Catholics here, said, "You must be married in the church." So, my mother had to stay home. My father had to go home. And, then the day after Christmas, they were married again by the priest. Speaker 2: So, (laughter) did-- Speaker 1: 'Cause, this, this was not an official marriage until you got married by the priest. Speaker 2: Until you're married by the priest, right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: That's all very, very interesting. Now, Lucy Moore was a Catholic. This is your mother's mother? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: No. No, no. No, no. My mother's father's father-- Speaker 2: Was a Catholic-- Speaker 1: --was the one who started the whole-- Speaker 2: Catholicism-- Speaker 1: You know, Belmont it's very interesting to me personally, that there was such a deep black contingency of Catholics in Belmont. And, maybe it's because there was a cathedral; Belmont Abbey Cathedral [Belmont, North Carolina] that was there. They all attended Belmont Abbey Cathedral in the summertime, in August, when we were there. I mean, you were at church like at six o'clock or seven o'clock in the morning. You know, every Sunday. And, they had a pew for the McDonald family. You know, where everybody went and had a seat. The priest that baptized me in that church was part of, when my husband [Franklin Biggins] and I were married in the Catholic church [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal] in Greensboro, North Carolina, that priest came and was part of our marriage ceremony. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is still, this is going back to the ancestor of yours who was raised in the Abbey [Belmont Abbey, Belmont, North Carolina] by the nuns (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. By the nuns. Speaker 2: And, that's how Catholicism came upon that line. Speaker 1: And, that was, that was, and his name was Sam McDonald. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sam McDonald. Story_ID: 326949 Speaker 1: And it's in, all right, so, I'll tell you this other story. They--my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] said, in Belmont, North Carolina there was white Sam and black Sam. White Sam was my mother's grandfather [Sam Moore], and black Sam was my father's [Andrew Williams] grandfather. They were both named Sam. One was very light. One was very dark. Speaker 2: Okay. Even though he was white Sam, he was still black? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All Right. Speaker 1: But, I think when, I mean, when you see pictures of them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, when do it-- Speaker 1: --you start-- Speaker 2: You start to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --wonder, you know what I mean. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So, I can't speak to all-- Speaker 2: 'Cause he was very fair. Speaker 1: Very fair. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Very fair. Speaker 2: All right. Okay, good. Now, Belmont is in-- Speaker 1: North Carolina. Speaker 2: North Carolina. Now-- Speaker 1: Mecklenburg County [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: There were black Catholics. What was the mix, do you remember, of blacks and whites in the city, or in that county? Speaker 1: You know what, I don't-- Speaker 2: You said, (Unclear) County? Speaker 1: I don't, I don't know. But, that's, that's--but, thank you for asking that question because now I'm gonna go find out. Speaker 2: All right. Because it could be in South Louisiana, which is, well, you got Jor- I mean, you have South Carolina kind of separating the Florida, you know, and all that coming up the, that coast line, it was a lot of Catholics. Catholicism was really-- Speaker 1: And, remember that-- Speaker 2: --rich in that area? Speaker 1: That Sam Moore came from Charleston [South Carolina]. And, if you think about it, you know, I think there's a pretty deep Catholic orientation there. And, you know, brought there by the nuns. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Reared at, reared at the Abbey [Belmont Abbey, Belmont, North Carolina]. In fact, my aunt, who is probably ninety-nine now, has a house that literally sits on the Abbey pro- on the Abbey property. Speaker 2: That is so inter- okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it is interesting. Speaker 2: All right. That is very interesting. Speaker 1: I better go talk to her, too, and see what I can find out. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. You got me interested now (laughter). Speaker 2: All right. So, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, I have an article for when my--when Viola Fox Moore died at her home and, you know, Saturday evening, July 17th at 9:30 o'clock. She was-- Speaker 2: And, this was in the Belmont papers? Speaker 1: This was in the Belmont paper. She was the daughter of the late Henry [Henry Fox (ph.)]. And, this says, now, Viola Fox, now they say, Lohanson Fox [ph.] of Paw Creek, North Carolina, and was born in Gordon, Georgia. So, that all follows the information. So, funeral services were held Tuesday morning, July 20th at ten o'clock at the Belmont Abbey Cathedral [Belmont, North Carolina] with Father Gabriel [ph.], assistant pastor, celebrating the Requiem Mass. And, sermon by Father Charles [ph.], pastor. So, I mean, you know, this was, I mean, they, they go into, you know, who sang and, you know, the choir was there, and that Mildred Rankin sang 'Face to Face' by Herbert Johnson. It's that interesting? Herbert Johnson. Speaker 2: And, now who was Herbert Johnson? Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: He must have been a-- Speaker 1: If you go back-- Speaker 2: --soloist or something? Speaker 1: I mean, he's, he is--when you got back, there are a lot of song, gospel songs that were written by Herbert Johnson. Speaker 2: By Herbert Johnson? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, by Herbert Johnson. And, this one was called 'Face to Face.' And, they tell you which mortuaries were in charge of the funeral. And, he--she was married for fifty years. And, during that time had lived a model Christian life and required a host of friends. And, surviving are the husband, Mr. S.W. Moore, so that was Sam W. Moore; two children, Mrs. J.T. McDonald [James Thomas McDonald], so that would've been my grandmother; and Herman Moore, her brother; nine grandchildren, including my mother; a sister, a brother, all that lived in Paw Creek, North Carolina. And, she was interred in St. Benedict's Cemetery [St. Benedict Cemetery, Belmont, North Carolina]. So, all, I mean, I mean, when you tie--and you go back to my, my, you know, my parents. I mean, the lines back to that place are so deep that now, you know, I, as I sit here thinking about it, I just need to go and look at the church records. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because you have the burials that are there, too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got, I got, yeah. Speaker 2: You probably have the headstones and everything. Speaker 1: I got, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep. Speaker 2: That are still there. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: I got a picture of, this is my mother's mother holding my mother as a child, you know. I'mma frame all these things. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. And, this was in what year did we say that was? And, would you spell Belmont-- Speaker 1: All right, she would-- Speaker 2: --Belmont for us? Speaker 1: Belmont is B-E-L-M-O-N-T. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Now, so, she died-- Speaker 2: In 19--in--she was born in 1897, right? Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-seven [1897]. So, this was July 17th. Speaker 2: Was it in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: I'll have to go back and find out. But, you know, so you figure, you know, if she were--if she--how old was she? They were married for-- Speaker 2: Fifty years. Speaker 1: Fifty years. I, you know what, I'd have to go back and--all right, according to this, and I think I have this right. Speaker 2: That's right, like 1947. Speaker 1: That she was, she was born 1873. Speaker 2: Oh, this is the-- Speaker 1: And, my grand-- Speaker 2: A person-- Speaker 1: --father died, let's see, all right, so, she was born in 1873, and my grandmother, Lucy Moore McDonald [Lucille Moore McDonald] was born in 1897. And, I think Viola--I think my mother may have said to me that she was, you know, very young, very young-- Speaker 2: When she (unclear)-- Speaker 1: When she got married. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Very young. Story_ID: 326782 Speaker 1: Tell us about Sam Moore. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell us which Sam he is and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. All right. Speaker 1: What that--what he did, you know, where he--who is--how he's related to you, and what contribution he made to the community of Belmont [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Okay. Sam Washington Moore was his full name; was my mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] grandfather. So, this is, so, my grandmother Lucy Moore [Lucille Moore McDonald]; this is her father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sam, Samuel Washington Moore. And, this is an article that was in the Belmont Banner when he died and there was only one paper; so, the majority paper there. And, it said that, you know, the death of Samuel Washington Moore that Belmont recog- realized that he was a well-respected citizen, a leader of his race and a proficient builder. In his fifty years of contacting business, he built four local cotton mills, four or five high schools, and 75 percent of the homes in Belmont, North Carolina. Born in Mecklenburg County [North Carolina], they says it--they go on to say that he was a pioneer contractor that he was in charge of the construction of the buildings at the Belmont Abbey [Belmont, North Carolina] and the Sacred Heart College [Belmont, North Carolina], which was erected around 1904. So, you go back to the, you know, go back to that whole Catholic relationship to Belmont Abbey. A friend of his revealed that Sam Moore built the first brick house in the town. He said that, the handsome house on North Main Street was built for Albert Hand around 1907. The tall two-story, white column on the front of the house was built of solid bricks. So, if you think about this, back then, that, that's quite a bit. He was a constructor for the Climax Mill [Belmont, North Carolina], The Crescent Mill [Belmont, North Carolina], Sterling Mill [Sterling Spinning Mill, Belmont, North Carolina], and Ace Mill--I guess that's Acme Mill [Belmont, North Carolina]. At times as many as thirty men were working as--working for contractor Moore. So, quite a business. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was responsible for laying the first cement sidewalks in Belmont, which extended from the Aberfoyle Mill [Belmont, North Carolina] to the, to the mill office building across from the post office (laughter). According to this, and this is prior to his, his death, he gave up contracting to serve as a teacher of trades in the Gastonia, Gastonia's Highland School [Highland School of Technology, Gastonia, North Carolina] and the Lincoln Academy [Kings Mountain, North Carolina]. He was believed to be the oldest teacher of trades in North Carolina. He was still going strong at seventy years, so he must have been in really good shape. And, just as his wife [Viola Fox Moore], the Requiem Mass was held at the Belmont Abbey Cathedral [Belmont, North Carolina], and he was interred in St. Benedict's Cemetery [St. Benedict Cemetery, Belmont, North Carolina]. So, same as my grandmother. And, it goes on. Again, Father Gabriel [ph.] was part of his, his service. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, it, you know, talks about the other priests that-- Speaker 1: That were there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) were part of, part of that service. You know, really, you know, extraordinary, I think, you know. Speaker 1: He really made a great contribution, to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, the City of Belmont. Speaker 2: To Belmont, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Yes, he did. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I, you know, I wonder if that house is still there. And, I think I will go and find out since it gives the, you know, where exact where it was on Main Street--North Main Street. Speaker 1: And, take some pictures in front of it, too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. For this-- Speaker 2: I think I will do that. Speaker 1: For this generation. That is excellent. Speaker 2: And, he was a handsome man, too. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. We're gonna include him in our photo session. Speaker 2: I mean, he's a handsome man-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he is (laughter). Speaker 2: Come on, now (laughter). Story_ID: 326783 Speaker 1: Your father's [Andrew Williams] side of the family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, about his mother; tell us about his mother-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and his father. Speaker 2: All right. His mother, Liza Johnson Williams [Eliza Johnson Williams], born in South Carolina in, on October 28, 1898. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, his father, Kelly Williams, was born in York, South Carolina. I'm not sure of the year of his birth. I don't have that. But, you know, anyway, I can find out. But, in York, South Carolina, and he was ninety when he died. Speaker 1: When he died. Okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, lived a, lived a good life (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A very good life. Speaker 2: My grandmother was a maid for this, you know, wealth mill family there in Gastonia, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And, when you say mill, we mean like the fabric--? Speaker 2: Cotton mill, fab-- Speaker 1: Oh, the cotton mill. Speaker 2: Cotton mill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know they, you know, cotton mill. They produce thread and, you know, fabrics, you know. I think this is the thread that went on-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --to become fabric. And, even today, you know, it interesting North Carolina has this deep, you know, connection to the mill, you know, towels and sheets and things. And, my grandfather was a janitor at the mill itself. So, at the cotton mill, he was a janitor. Now, my grandfather raised hunting dogs. He was well known for these, for--I mean, the top hunting dogs in, in this area were raised by my grandfather. Now, I didn't know that, you know, having a good hunting dog was kind of, this was a business. Speaker 1: And, it was paramount to good hunting (laughter). Speaker 2: This, this, I mean, you know, this was paramount-- Speaker 1: Catching good game, huh? Speaker 2: And, evidently, I mean, he was well known. Many people came to him for, you know, to help to, you know, to, to buy his hunting dogs. He, you know, raised them, trained them, and then sold them; hunting dogs. Speaker 1: And, what was his name again? Speaker 2: Kelly Williams. Speaker 1: Kelly Williams. Speaker 2: Kelly Williams from York, South Carolina. My grandmother, Liza, actually grew up there in Gaston County [North Carolina]. All of her relatives and I've got great pictures of my grandmother. She was a--she belong to, what's the women's group, the Eastern Masons-- Speaker 1: Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star]. Speaker 2: Eastern Stars-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, on Sundays she'd, you know, white dress, you know, the, the handkerchief in the, you know, the, the pocket of her dress. And, and the church, now, it's very, I mean, think about this, you have my grandmother [Lucille Moore McDonald] on my mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] side, Catholic. Very, you know, when you went to church is was quiet, it was ceremony, it was, you know, Holy Communion, you know, real state. But, then, on my mother's side--on my father's side, I'm sorry, you know, this church was--my uncle was a member of the choir where they came in, you know, they did the step coming down the aisle, you know, the gospel songs, you know, just singing away. And, and people would get happy and faint and, you know, and it would scare me to death, I'm gonna tell you the truth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the true southern Baptist church (laughter). Speaker 2: It was a true southern church. And, I would just--I mean, I must admit there were times I was like scared because, you know, my grandmother said, oh, you know, "They were full of the Holy Ghost." And-- Speaker 1: Oh, this was almost Pentecostal. Speaker 2: Oh, it was very much, very much, very much Pentecostal. I mean, this was--and she was one of the, the people who kind of helped the ladies, you know, when they fell out and, you know. I would, I would be sitting-- Speaker 1: One of the ushers. Speaker 2: There sinking down-- Speaker 1: She was an usher. Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: In my chair 'cause I was so afraid of all these going ons. But, you know what, you always wanted to go because every Sunday after church, there was this big meal that everybody served and you-- Speaker 1: Did they call it Dinner on the Grounds (laughter)? Speaker 2: Dinner on the Ground, you know, lemonade out of the old crock pots and, you know, everybody cooked. We used to have great family reunions around all this stuff, so. Anyway, my, my--I may be leaping forward-- Speaker 1: That's quite all right. Speaker 2: But, my father then helped build and design and build the new church for my grandmother's congregation. My grandmother and grandfather's congregation. He was deeply involved in all of that. Story_ID: 326784 Speaker 1: My [paternal] grandmother [Eliza Johnson Williams], they had, I have to go back and count, I think it was six of them. All except maybe one attended college, and all of 'em got advanced degrees. And, I mean, you, when you really put it all in context, I mean, what do we complain about today, I mean, they sent all of these children to school on, you know, a maid salary and a janitor's salary and, you know. Speaker 2: And, this was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They took care of all of it. Speaker 2: And, did they, they attend schools in South Carolina? Speaker 1: They attended in North Carolina. Speaker 2: In North Carolina. They attended school in North Carolina? Speaker 1: I think to a person, they all went to A&T University [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], where my father [Andrew Williams] then went on to teach; become a professor there. Speaker 2: Amazing. Amazing. Speaker 1: But, I mean, they you know, my--they lived in the mill house, you know, the provided, you know. No telling how many times they paid for that house, right. You know owned by the mill. And, when I was, right before-- Speaker 2: Now, this was a separate house-- Speaker 1: This was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That the mill family-- Speaker 1: You know, you know who-- Speaker 2: The family who owned the mill--? Speaker 1: In North Carolina the mills owned--the mill owned houses for the wor- where the workers stayed. Speaker 2: So, this was on the property? Speaker 1: This, well, this--it was on property they owned. This is where the--some of the black folk stayed, though. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, you have to be clear. I mean, this wasn't a, this was where some of the black folks stayed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, right across from their house was a baseball field. So in the summer when we spent, you know, lots of time down there, the old Negro League played baseball on that, on that baseball field right across from my, from my, you know, father's parents' home. Speaker 2: So, we're talking '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, then they--so, my grandmother, who not only, you know, helped clean for other people, for this family, she also took in washing. And, she had a big black pot where, you know, they'd light that fire under that pot. I mean, I can remember when she got that first, you know, roller washing machine. But, the clothes were washed in this big black pot. Speaker 2: That's when washing was a community affair, yes. Speaker 1: That's when--thank you. And, starched, crisp to--I mean, what can I do well today? I know I can wash, and I know I can iron when I put--now, I don't do it. But, I can. I know I can. Speaker 2: Well, what type of iron did they use? Did she have the--? Speaker 1: One (unclear)--one of those old fashioned, you know, cold iron things, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, those cast iron? Speaker 1: Cast iron things that you--that you go back and forth. And matter of fact, later in life, she had a lot of trouble with her hands. And, you know, it probably came from, you know, that, that, that heavy iron. And, in fact, now that I think about it, I think my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] has that iron. I forgot about that. I think she does. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they used to have to wrap-- Speaker 1: It was to-- Speaker 2: --a cloth-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --around the-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --handle of that iron. Speaker 1: Because the whole thing would get so hot. Speaker 2: It would get so hot, yes. Speaker 1: But, on Saturdays, that pot was used for frying fish. Speaker 2: Now, I never heard of the, that, the other use for it. I know for washing in lye soap (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Frying fish-- Speaker 2: But, they made-- Speaker 1: --to sell to the people who came to the baseball games. So, they-- Speaker 2: They were entrepreneurs also. Speaker 1: --fried fish, and--um-hm, um-hm, fried fish and sold it to the people that came to the baseball games. Yep. Speaker 2: That was a very-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: --active household. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was. Speaker 2: That was a busy household. Speaker 1: It really was. And they had an outdoor, you know, toilet. Speaker 2: Hated those (laughter). Speaker 1: I hated those. And, I wanted to, you know, my--I did--my--my--I didn't grow up drinking coffee. I don't drink coffee today, and there's a reason why. Because, I, you know, I would beg my grandmother to serve me coffee. So, she gave me coffee mixed with some milk. My stomach--so, I spent a lot time having to make the walk (laughter), and I don't like coffee now. I mean, it just kind of ruins my--anyway, don't drink coffee anymore. Of course, I maybe--it was right around--anyway (laughter), but she was-- Speaker 2: Do you think she did that on purpose? Speaker 1: She may have. But, we always, there was always a garden. There was this fig tree. There was a plum tree. I have a fig tree today in my backyard. Speaker 2: Oh, you, okay. Speaker 1: Because, because I, and I think I planted it because of my grandmother, you know, plum tree, right there by the side of the house. Story_ID: 326785 Speaker 1: You know, later on, I guess it was actually before I left to go to college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], now that I think about it. Several--my father [Andrew Williams] built a new house for my [paternal] grandparents [Eliza Johnson Williams and Kelly Williams], you know, with indoor plumbing and, you know, it was, it was quite something when she made that move when they, I mean, she and my grandfather. My grandfather actually didn't get to live in the house that long 'cause he died not too long ago (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she wasn't reluctant about moving into it? She-- Speaker 1: No. Oh, no. Speaker 2: She liked it? Speaker 1: I mean, this was--are you kidding me? I mean, this--her son, this house--you know, had built this house for her. I mean, it was, it was a great day in her life, believe me. She--lots of people and--were invited for that, so. And, right next door was this, was Aunt Dawn [ph.], and her husband, Uncle Walter [ph.], who, you know, had lived next door to them before, you know, in the other, the mill house; they had lived next door to each other. They all moved together. Yeah, next door to each other. Speaker 2: So, the family was still together? Speaker 1: Yeah, the family was still together. Speaker 2: And, that was so important then. The family always stayed together. Speaker 1: My, my, my-- Speaker 2: And, made up the main, they were the main makeup of a community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All full-blood-- Speaker 1: My father's mother, again, ma- Liza, Mama Williams and my older daughter's [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins] middle name is for her. But, that--her--she, where she lived there in Gaston County [North Carolina], was like a little family compound with, you know, the houses, you know, and everybody right there together that--where she grew up. And, it's interesting even today that property remains with our, you know, direct relatives still there. And, this would be my, would be my grandmother's brothers' children still live there on that property. So, it's still in the family. Speaker 2: And, that's what so many children are missing out on today because everybody moves. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, nobody is stationary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. No, there's fam- there's family still there. Speaker 2: Right. And, the ties are kind of broken. But, when you have family, that blood tie-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, they still have the-- Speaker 2: --is-- Speaker 1: --the well water, which is the best water you will ever drink. Speaker 2: They still have a well? Speaker 1: They--when you turn on the faucet you get well water, today, on that property. Speaker 2: Is it an individual well, or is it a city well? Speaker 1: Unh-uh, it's an individual well. You get-- Speaker 2: But, they have it so that it comes up out of the faucet so you-- Speaker 1: Thank you. It's-- Speaker 2: Don't have to go to the well and-- Speaker 1: Thank you. It comes up out of the, somehow, you know, they, you know, the pond--it's ice cold-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's always-- Speaker 1: In the winter and the summer (laughter). Or, maybe I should say in the summer and the winter, you know, ice cold. We would take--my grandmother had one of those old galvanized tubs and boy, when it came time for bath time, it's nothing worst that her pouring that scald--scalding water over you. But, you always wanted to be the first, you know, forget being the second in that tub of water. You certainly didn't wanna be number two. But, you know, Saturday night was bath time 'cause you knew you were going to church on Sunday. Speaker 2: And, that was a--okay. The Sunday was always a big occasion? Speaker 1: That's right-- Speaker 2: That was always a big occasion (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Big occasion, big occasion. Story_ID: 326786 Speaker 1: Give me the names of your siblings in order of birth, including yourself. Speaker 2: Okay. My brother, Joseph Andrew Williams [Joseph Williams], and if you recall my father's name is Andrew Williams. My--me, Jacqueline Veronica [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins], and then my younger brother, Warren Keith [Warren Williams]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, when we first moved to Greensboro, North Carolina we lived in what, what I call the housing projects. But, it was--everybody says that wasn't actually housing projects, but I did think so. But, it was where they housed all of the professors that worked for A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. They didn't have a place to live. So, they housed everybody that worked at A&T; I knew all the faculty folks 'cause we all lived in these, the A&T housing projects together. And, I, and I remember living there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did they, what did they look like? Did they look like military housing, or did they look like the projects, or just describe them for us. Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I guess, I, you know, it was a great community, you know. It was, everybody took care of everybody. We all played together. We all convene even today. Speaker 1: Oh, you've stayed in contact (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. When my brother had his birthday, his sixtieth birthday party, half of the people there were people that we, we grow, you know, grew up there and then from there, you know, we moved to different neighborhoods; basically, still together. And, my brother who still lives in Greensboro, North Carolina has, you know, maintained--I see these folks--and basically, it was guys and me. I think I was about the only girl in the crew, I don't know why that was. But, it is true. And, we just, you know, there--I don't know there--it's-- Speaker 1: That was close knit. Speaker 2: It was and still is. You know, an interesting community, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The pre- the guy who went on to be president [Lewis C. Dowdy] of North Carolina A&T lived right there with us. His son and all of us, I mean, we see--we actually saw them at Christmastime, we were all at a party together. I mean, we see each other regularly, I mean, it's not--I mean, we've not lost contact. And, I, and I should thank my brother for that because my older brother has really been the one who's, you know, kind of, I mean, he maintains great relationships. And, then the rest of us (laughter) kind of follow suit and maintain relationships too. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Would you say he's more like your father, or like your mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] with keeping relationships together? Speaker 2: Yeah. That, that's a good question. I--both my mother and father both valued family. So, that, it was never an issue for us to understand the respect for grandparents and great-grandparents and spending time with them. Because they, you know, I mean they, they always did, I mean, we--it was like, you know, two plus hour drive to go from Greensboro to Belmont [North Carolina] and, and to Gastonia [North Carolina]. And, I guarantee you, we probably went once a month, you know, constantly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, even when we were living in Indonesia. So, that would have been what; the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I mean, there were, there was a set time when we would call our grandparents. And that, you know, because, you know, and you would make that, you know, you had to, you almost had to schedule a time because they had to get to a phone and you had to get to a phone. And, then there were these scheduled times when you called each other, so. Speaker 1: And, this was during the times when not every household-- Speaker 2: By no means. Speaker 1: A phone. But-- Speaker 2: By no means. Speaker 1: Certain people in the community-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --had a phone (laughter). Speaker 2: Certain people in, in the community had a phone and they, there were scheduled times. And, us living in Indonesia, believe me, I mean, it would--you know, a phone call was a major event 'cause you did not have a phone. Speaker 1: And, expensive. Speaker 2: Yeah, and expensive. It was quite something. But, we learned to, you know, maybe we learned to write well. I still value letters today that are hand written. And, I think it comes from that time in my life of, you know, writing my grandparents, my grandparents writing me, you know. Speaker 1: Now, when the phone call came, when you all called from Indonesia back to the states, did you have a chance to talk to everybody? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Did they have everybody (laughter)? Speaker 2: Are you kidding me? Everybody, hello, I mean, basically, you got to say, "Hello," you know. And, my father would give 'em the news, like, come on, come on, come on. So, you know, whatever the news was, you know, so, anyway. Speaker 1: To give 'em a full report to update them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 326787 Speaker 1: What are some of your other memories? What about holidays (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I spent a lot of time in--on A&T's [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] campus. A lot of time. You know, you know, as I, you know, you know, once again, I mean, my father [Andrew Williams] was so deeply involved there; we all did. My brother went to the nursery school on A&T's campus. I don't know for reason, I don't think they sent me. But, my (laughter), my brother did. Speaker 1: Now, this was a nursery school? This was not kindergarten? And, this was not like first grade? It was, like pre-kindergarten? Is that right? Speaker 2: It would've been, it maybe, maybe it was kindergarten. Maybe it was. Maybe it was, now that I think about it. Speaker 1: But, it was the school's, the university's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. That's right, the university's-- Speaker 1: --school? Speaker 2: You know in the historically black college [HBCU] campuses. I think if you go back to any of those campuses, even Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] today, still has, you know, A&T, I think they still have that program, you know, where they had, you know, chil- I think they call it early childhood development now, on those campuses. There was no place else for you to go. Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting because I was in talking with someone from Macon [Georgia], and the school that she attended, even like a little earlier, had a school attached to it and she was wondering what was that school? Was it kindergarten or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: It was before elementary. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, that-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Is a tradition then-- Speaker 2: It is a tradition. Speaker 1: Amongst-- Speaker 2: I think if you go back and look at those schools, almost all of them have had, and still have that--I think that those schools, you know, then, you know, became something else. But, I'd lay odds if you went back and looked at, looked at all of them. They were, they all-- Speaker 1: And, they were mainly for the professors' children? Speaker 2: They were for the professors' childrens, children. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, we, we know about the high schools that are attached to the colleges, the black colleges (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. Speaker 1: But, to go back as far as, you know, pre-kindergarten and nursery schools that's, that's and interesting-- Speaker 2: Right. But, I mean, I remember everybody had, you know, in those old, you know galvanized tubs that they put out in the summertime, and that was the pool, you know. We all had a neighborhood community center, you know, with the pool. And, my brothers [Joseph Williams and Warren Williams], you know, actually went on to, I mean, they were excellent swimmers, excellent swimmers. You know, so, but-- Speaker 1: And, they learned how to swim on AT&T's campus? Speaker 2: Yeah, on A&T's campus. Speaker 1: Well, A, T--A&T-- Speaker 2: A&T. Speaker 1: A&T, I'm putting another T in there, sorry. But, they learned on the campus and-- Speaker 2: They learned on the campus. (Unclear). Speaker 1: Did they do competitions as they grew older? Speaker 2: Oh, they may have. Speaker 1: Or, it was mainly for fun? Speaker 2: I mean, they use to do diving competitions, you know, they were great. I mean, they went on and, you know, be lifeguards and all that stuff. Speaker 1: Oh, that's, yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: You know, but that was an era, you know, when the guys did those things, and girls, you know, stayed with your mother and learned how to sew and, you know, do all these other things. Speaker 1: And, you were the only girl. So, you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the only girl. Speaker 1: You were completely-- Speaker 2: Believe me. Speaker 1: --surrounded by males. Speaker 2: I was the only girl. If you go up and down the street that I grew up in Greensboro, North Carolina, I was, I was the only girl. I mean, we made a picture at my brother's birthday party of the Julian Street crowd, and I guarantee--I was the only girl. I said, and then they tried to make a picture without me. I went, "Hold up. Hold up. I am in that picture, don't, you know, you've always tried to get rid of me and you're not gonna get rid of me now," so (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, where did--Julian Street, is that the street you all lived on? Speaker 2: It was--that we lived on in Greensboro, North Carolina. That was after, that, now, that was the next step after we all left the A&T housing project. We all moved to Julian Street. You know, if you looked up and down that street, the, the president of the--the guy [Lewis C. Dowdy] that became president lived almost right across the street and up a house and, you know, everybody lived right there together. Speaker 1: Now, this was a neighborhood-- Speaker 2: And, we-- Speaker 1: --this was a black neighborhood? Speaker 2: Black, black neighborhood. Speaker 1: And, there were other streets, but that was the street that you all lived on? Speaker 2: Julian Street was the street. Absolutely, (laughter). The Julian Street crowd. You did not mess with the Julian Street crowd. Not at all. You either lived on Julian Street, you may have lived one street off or down the block, but, it was the Julian Street crowd. Speaker 1: Okay. So, some of your neighbors, well most of your neighbors were professors or teachers at the university (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, doctors, you know, folks like that. Speaker 1: And, you were the only girl? Speaker 2: Only girl. Speaker 1: For at least, what, that main street, Julian Street or for the street behind you, or the street in front? Speaker 2: No, you had to go to find some of the girls, so, you know, the guy, you know, the guys were--and I tried to hang out with the guys, you know, so. Speaker 1: You were just one of the guys, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But, the mix was predominately black? Speaker 2: Oh, not-- Speaker 1: All black? Speaker 2: --predominately; it was black. Speaker 1: It was all black, okay. Story_ID: 326788 Speaker 1: So what was--any special occasions that you all had for, you know, while you were growing up on Julian Street [Greensboro, North Carolina], or even before (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, goodness, we had, the guy that lived right across the street, his birthday was on Halloween. We used to have mega Halloween parties. Yeah, I don't know what everybody else did, and you know, people now are all into Halloween so, we always had big (laughter) Halloween parties growing up. Speaker 1: Now, was it a party-party, where you went to someone's house? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we went to his house. It was his birthday. His mother always had a Halloween party for him. Speaker 1: So, you were dressed-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It was a big birthday party and we would--Jimmy Goode, James Goode [ph.]. We would go right there and it was always a major Halloween party. You'd trick-or-treat up and down the street, you know, it was safe, no problems. And, then you'd go--his mother always had a big, big, big party. When we were growing up, the house that we lived in, in Green--on Julian Street, my father [Andrew Williams] put--we had a basement and he'd, he'd fix it up so that we could have parties down there. And, we would have, you know, the neighborhood kids would come over and have cookouts and parties. And, then one day the, I don't know why they decided, I--it's--I always thought it was interesting, they, the black folks in town decided to have a country club, I mean, you know, after all. So, we had the Forest Lake Country Club [Greensboro, North Carolina]. They had horses. They had a lake. They had a pool. They had a tennis court, a building and, you know, all, all black folks belonged to the Forest Lake County Club. Speaker 1: Now, was it an (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was our country-- Speaker 1: --existing building or did they--? Speaker 2: I think it may have been somebody else's country club, but we bought it. The black folks bought it. Speaker 1: So, you all were living big time in Greensboro. Speaker 2: We were having a good time (laughter). You know what, you know, in retrospect, I didn't think so then, but in retrospect, we were having a, you know, pretty good time actually. Story_ID: 326789 Speaker 1: And, you know, I wanna go back to the Catholicism because I went to--one of the commitments that my father [Andrew Williams] had to make to my [maternal] grandparents [Lucille Moore McDonald and James Thomas McDonald] was that he would rear us in the Catholic schools. He would send all of us to Catholic schools. My father made that commitment to my grandparents, and he did. My older brother [Joseph Williams] and I, my--attended, I think, my--well, I attended through--maybe the tenth grade, and then I went to public schools because I begged. I mean, everybody else was in public school. And, then my younger brother [Warren Williams] actually went to public schools. I think by then my dad just decided, cut, I've done all I can do here. But, we all went to, went to, I mean, you know, grew up in the Catholic church. We went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wearing the uniforms to school? Speaker 1: We went--navy blue uniform. Our Lady the Miraculous Medal [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina] was the name of the school. And, when we went to Indonesia, my older brother went to a French Catholic school. And, I went to the international school there. So, during that period of time I was not in the Catholic school. Speaker 2: Now, when you all moved to Indonesia, did someone live in your house while you were gone? Speaker 1: Yeah. They, they leased the house to Mr. Gray [Gerard E. Gray], I've forgotten his first name. Speaker 2: But, he worked at the school? Speaker 1: But, he, he worked at A&T University [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. He was an architect and he taught architecture at the school and he leased the house (laughter). Yes, yes, yes. That was quite a community (laughter). And, I'm, I'm serious everybody still knows everybody. When my grandfather died, you know, the president of the university, Dr. Dowdy [Lewis C. Dowdy], came to the funeral. I mean, it was a close community. Speaker 2: Even with ties today? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, we did, we have very, very deep ties today. We go, we travel together, you know. Speaker 2: So, were you, you just target certain cities or states, or whatever-- Speaker 1: Usually, around-- Speaker 2: And then you-- Speaker 1: We'll usually around Memorial Day, we'd travel together. Now, my brother, again, my older brother has really stayed very close. I mean, his class has major reunions, and they all go places together. I must admit, my class hasn't done all of that, so. Story_ID: 326790 Speaker 1: Yes. Tell us about Greensboro [North Carolina] and the community of Greensboro, and Indonesia also-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --before you came back. Speaker 2: Greensboro, I mean this is a southern town, very segregated. The schools that we went to were black schools, the, you know, the Catholic school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina] was all-black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was not a, you know, mix school by any stretch of the imagination. The churches were all segregated churches. Speaker 1: Even the Catholic church? Speaker 2: Even the Catholic church (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had the black Catholics and then you had the white Catholics? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, the nuns and the priests were white. And, then there were those-- Speaker 1: Exactly, okay. Speaker 2: --black children that-- Speaker 1: Same as it was in Louisiana and other places. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. That, that attended. That's, that's exactly right. I used to, I remember asking once, why there were no black children in the books that we read. Whey none of--no, I think my question was, why none of the children in the books we read look like me? And-- Speaker 1: What answer did you get? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think the nun, I'm trying to remember what she said to me. But, I remember walking away trying to figure out, well, does that mean that no black children that they can make pictures of or some--I remember being, you know, just, it was such a disconnect that I couldn't figure it out. I just couldn't figure it out. The, and I'll tell you one other thing about that school. There were two grades in each class. And, so, we had the first and second, third and fourth, fifth and six, seventh and eighth. So, there was a four room school; Catholic school. Speaker 1: Was that because there weren't many students, or was that just the, the set-up, or was the school just small? Speaker 2: It was a small school. All those A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] professors that we talked about basically, all their children were in this Catholic school-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --too. There was definitely a cocoon that we lived in, you know, I admitted that readily. We went to, when we went to the movies we went to A&T or Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]. And, you forget, in Greensboro, two, you know, grade schools, you know, colleges, with Bennett College and North Carolina A&T University being there. So, you have two very strong schools. So, you've got this strong professional community there. Now, everyone there was involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. My father's [Andrew Williams] best friend, you know, Dr. George Simkins [George Simkins, Jr.] headed the NAACP. My father was deeply involved, and in fact got several awards from the, from the group. When it, you know, the--so, where did the--where the people that went to Woolworths [F. W. Woolworth Company] to do the sit-ins, you know, those were North Carolina A&T students that marched downtown and had that, had a seat. When it came time for the sit-ins, for the, for the marches on downtown for integration, my older brother [Joseph Williams] was deeply involved. Being a girl, you know, my parents were, you know, "You're coming home." And, remember, you know, I mean, I would have been maybe in junior high school and my brother would've been in high school. Speaker 1: Yeah. You were like thirteen, twelve, thirteen, somewhere around in there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. That's exactly right. Story_ID: 326791 Speaker 1: The schools were integrated when my younger brother [Warren Williams] was in high school. My younger brother was one of the first to go to an integrated high school in North Carolina. And, let me remember, my younger brother was born in '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I mean, you think about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], right? Speaker 1: --you know, Brown versus the Board of Education, you know, I remember the discussion that my parents [Jacqueline McDonald Williams and Andrew Williams] had about that. I remember, you know, driving to Gas--you know, voting, my parents voting in Greensboro, North Carolina, and then us driving to Gastonia, North Carolina to take my grandmother to the polls to vote. You know, that, you know, you had to get there early and then you had to get to Gastonia. It was a--it was quite a thing, I mean, you know, the back and forth conversations. And, for some reason I remember being, just you know, feeling, like, is something bad gonna happen because it was so much, you know, discussion about all of this. And, you know, having, you know, spent this two years out of the country in Indonesia. You know, where there all brown people and you know, everybody, you know, all, you know, brown folks were in charge. And, then, you know, to really--I think maybe before I left, I hadn't thought about in the way I thought about it when I came back. You know 'cause it was just a real, you know, I'm grown up, you know, I'm grown now, you know, not grown, but, you know, older and very conscious (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, refresh us. How old were you when you went to Indonesia again? Speaker 1: I would have been--it would have been the fifth and sixth grade for me. Speaker 2: Okay. So, that would've been early '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Fifty what, is it '51 [1951], '52 [1952] or somewhere around--? Speaker 1: In that time frame. Speaker 2: Frame, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's exactly right. So, I mean, yeah, I mean, you knew, but remember, you know, here you have this community that's up to, you know, all into protecting the children and providing this, this something, you didn't go downtown that often, you know. Didn't have any money, that's part of why you didn't go downtown, you didn't have any money. But, you didn't go to the movies downtown, you went to the college, you know, you went over to the college and, you know, saw movies on campus. And, then, I remember one night my brother was out, my father had come home from--they'd had a big rally on A&T's [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] campus, and my, you know, father was very much involved in that. My father came home and asked my mother, you know, where my brother--had he gotten there or something. So, she hadn't heard. And, then they got a call that he'd been arrested, you know, for the sit--you know, for, for marching. And, my brother and the Julian Street [Greensboro, North Carolina] crowd basically, you know, all went, they went to jail. Story_ID: 326792 Speaker 1: You know, I'll give you a little bit of history on my brother because he, you know, he went on to, you know, finish North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], North Carolina Central law school [North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina], became a judge, and now you know, is a lawyer in Greensboro [North Carolina], major lawyer. When you walk in his office, you find it interesting because his clientele is probably--I'm always amazed at the number of white folks sitting there. You know, in Greensboro, North Carolina, with this guy who went to jail to, you know, to get the whole thing integrated. And, a couple of weeks ago in Greensboro, this policeman had been fired--actually, it was long time, a coup--maybe it was, maybe a year ago, this policeman was fired and-- Speaker 2: Was he a black policeman? Speaker 1: Black policeman-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --who went to my brother to represent him. And, my brother got to digging into this and discovered that this policeman in--police chief in Greensboro, North Carolina, had a secret division that were all white that were spy--that were developing cases against and trying to show that the black policemen weren't doing their job. Which was not true. And, my brother's--I--anyway, my brother takes it, believe me, he takes his job very seriously. He does a lot of--I mean, his was pro bono-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That he did. I mean, he does a lot of mega cases where he gets paid very well for these cases. This was pro bono for this guy. Speaker 2: So, he does criminal law? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, as they got into this, they discovered, I mean, this thing went to court the police, you know, the police chief was trying to find this guy my brother's representing, the black policeman. And, they went on to prove that indeed this guy had the secret, kind of, almost a--vigilante group that was following the black policeman. And, you know, trying to get, you know, like drug dealers and others to say that these guys were doing business, I mean, you know, all that kind of stuff. And, guess who told my brother. All these guys out in the community 'cause he knows them all. He grew up there. He knows all these guys who said, "Aw, no, that's not what happened. They, you know, police chief asked me to do this kind of stuff." And, the Greensboro (unclear)--a couple weeks ago, I guess maybe it's been two or three weeks ago, the Greensboro City Council [Greensboro, North Carolina] fired the police chief for this. And, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] is involved now. I mean, this is--it's been all, it's in Greensboro, it's been all over the news. So, it's really interesting when you take the full cycle of all of this. And, in the-- Speaker 2: And, it started out with the sit-ins during the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in one, in one of the newspaper articles they said the mistake the chief made was not hiring my brother to represent him. I thought that was very interesting. I think it speaks to how good he is. Joe [Joseph Williams] said, "The mistake you make is thinking I would've represented him." Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And if you were to turn back to clock, there weren't any black lawyers. Speaker 1: No. No. No. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: No. Not at all. Speaker 2: Very few blacks could've gotten-- Speaker 1: No. Thank you. Speaker 2: White representation-- Speaker 1: And, he was maybe one of the-- Speaker 2: During the days when he was-- Speaker 1: --second appointed to be a, you know, judge in the state. And, I mean, it's just really quite amazing when you go back and look at, you know, what he's done now, you know, in the State of North Carolina. And, that he was one of the, you know, first invited to belong to the, you know, this what was very segregated country club. You know, so, no longer, you know, the country club that we grew up in, you know (laughter). It's this whole different country club. Speaker 2: Well, is that, is that Forest Lake Country Club [Greensboro, North Carolina] still there? Speaker 1: No. No. Speaker 2: It's gone now? Speaker 1: Long gone. Long gone. Long gone. And, it was beautiful (laughter), I mean, you know, horses, the whole nine yards (laughter). Story_ID: 326793 Speaker 1: What are some of the sights, sounds and smells of childhood, when you reflect back? Speaker 2: Cakes, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grandmothers' cakes? Speaker 2: Grandmothers' cakes. How about, how about churning ice cream on the front porch-- Speaker 1: Loved that (laughter). Speaker 2: --in the summertime. And, you had a choice. It was gonna either be vanilla, strawberry, or peach. It depend upon what was ripe at the time. Speaker 1: Peach is pretty good, yes. Speaker 2: And, you never wanted to be the first one to churn. You all, you know, but you didn't wanna be the last one to churn, either. You wanted to be somewhere in the middle (laughter). So, that was all-- Speaker 1: Didn't the guys normally start it out? Speaker 2: No, well, let me tell you. She had a rotation schedule, are you kidding me, my grandmother had a rotation schedule, you know. I remember on Sunday's my mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] mother, Lucy [Lucille Moore McDonald], every Sunday, you had fried chicken, green beans, rice, gravy, rolls. And, she'd have some kind of cake. Speaker 1: These are homemade rolls? Speaker 2: Ho--oh, oh, please. Even today my mother makes homemade yeast rolls to die for. My father's [Andrew Williams] mother [Eliza Johnson Williams], we all--she always had a garden. We would have okra, corn on the cob, biscuits. That's what I remember. My father's mother's biscuits. You--it just--butter dripping. It just, you know, it just didn't get any better. Speaker 1: We use to race to see who could eat the most. Speaker 2: I'm telling you. Speaker 1: (Unclear) know who many biscuits could they, could you eat, or your brother, or you know, you know? Speaker 2: It did not get any better than all of that, so. And, I still love fried okra, fried chicken. I am a serious rice eater. I mean, I--this is what I grew-up with, you know, you know, so. Speaker 1: Rice was one of the staples. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, you know what's so funny, I can't, I think I fry chicken once in my lifetime and it was so bad, my grandmother was like, "Oh, I don't know what you did wrong," you know, (laughter). It was pretty bad. Speaker 1: Well, did you ever learn to cut up a chicken? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. You learned how to do that. Speaker 2: Now, I do, I do know how to do that. I do know how to do that. But I was never good at the frying part. It--I just--it was too quick so it never got done. It looked beautiful on the outside, but it was not done on the inside. Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, and then I remember, which is--we had, we used to have a good time, you know. We spent a lot of time with family back and forth. And, yeah, we used to, we just, we just, we had, we had fun, you know, and I grew up. You know, in retrospect, you know, you, you, you realize, when I listen to some folks just, you know, the richness of--we spent a lot of time in the library, you know. I used to, I was an avid reader. My best day in life was the day I graduated to the adult section. Speaker 1: Was this AT&T's [sic.] li- I mean, A--A (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was on Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the public. It was the black public-- Speaker 1: A&T? Speaker 2: --library on A--on Bennett College campus-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was there a library in the community? Speaker 2: That was the library. Speaker 1: Oh, that was it. That was the only black library? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There wasn't a black library-- Speaker 2: But, it was in walking dis-- Speaker 1: --in the city. That's interesting. Speaker 2: It was in walking distant of our house. I mean, we all, we, that was--on Saturday morning, after you did all your chores, I guess it was Saturday afternoon, basically the community walked to the library, and it was on Bennett's campus. Speaker 1: And this was for the whole black community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, Mrs.--thank you. And, Mrs. Faulkner [ph.] was the librarian. And, her, I still, I know her son and daughter today; Waldo [Waldo Faulkner (ph.)], and what was her--they called her daughter--there was a-- Speaker 1: A nickname? Speaker 2: I'll think--there's a nickname-- Speaker 1: A nickname for her? Speaker 2: And I'll think about it in a minute, um-hm. Story_ID: 326794 Speaker 1: Now what elementary school did you, did you attend? Speaker 2: Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina], Catholic. Speaker 1: Okay. Where there any teachers who influenced you at, you know, the elementary school? Speaker 2: Well, I guess maybe in the first and second grade. You know, my biggest ambition in life was to be a nun. But, I got over that I think about the third or fourth grade, so. I mean, after all, they were so saintly. You know, they had these white hats and, you know, they looked like birds, you know, you know; Sisters of Charity (laughter). Speaker 1: And, you did say that you had two group, two classes-- Speaker 2: Yes. You had the first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in your-- Speaker 2: --and second grade, third and fourth, fifth and sixth, seventh and eighth. Speaker 1: Now, at recess time, did you all play together? Speaker 2: Everybody went out together. We wore brown oxford shoes. We wore navy blue jumpers. In the summer, you wore short white blouses with Peter Pan collars. In the winter, you wore long sleeve white blouses with Peter Pan collars. Speaker 1: Now, were yours starched like your-- Speaker 2: Starched and clean, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: I was probably a decent student in elementary school, yeah, yeah. My, you know, my parents did place a lot of value on education, so, we tried (laughter), we tried. Speaker 1: Now, you brothers were in the same, well-- Speaker 2: My older brother-- Speaker 1: --one of them was older, but. Speaker 2: My older brother, my younger is seven years younger than I am, so ten years younger than my older brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, you were all in the class--school at the same time? Speaker 2: Same time. That's exactly right. Speaker 1: So, you followed in the footsteps of your big brother. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. I was always Joe's [Joseph Williams] sister, Jackie [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] and Andrew's [Andrew Williams] daughter, and then at some point I became Keith's [Warren Williams] sister. Then I got married. And, I became Franklin's [Franklin Biggins] wife, Dawn [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins] and Kenzie's [Kenzie Biggins] mother, you know. I'm not sure I have an identity of my own. You know, I've always been something to somebody, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, yeah. Story_ID: 326795 Speaker 1: So, what was the young Veronica [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins] like? Or, did they call you Jackie? Speaker 2: That--Veronica (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause my mother was Jackie. Speaker 1: Jackie. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I was--I became Veronica. Now, that's an interesting question. I think, you know, having grown up with a bunch of boys, you know, I think, you know, I was always kind of a--looking for something, you know. Oh, you know, I think we can go down here and dig around in this dirt down here by this water and come up with some tadpole's kind of person. But, yet in the same breath, I don't think I was a tomboy even though I was willing to swing through the trees and, you know, do all that other stuff. I mean, you had to otherwise you didn't have anybody to play with. So, I was willing to do all those things. You know, I went, I mean, you know, I was very tall. I think I was the tallest person in my grade--in, it seems to me, I always being the tallest person in the class, you know. So, I always thought that was terrible, where today, you know, it's the most wonderful thing you can be, is to be tall. I didn't think it was good then. And, I used to think my ears stuck out from my head so I used to wear bands that held my ears down. That's why they don't stick out today because I wore these bands that held my ears down. Speaker 1: Did the guys tease you? Speaker 2: No. They never--I, I--it was my thing, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just, you know, you know, my thing. Speaker 1: Not that they did stick out, but to you they did (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah they did, yeah, you know, it was just my thing, no, no one else's. We had, you know, the, these teachers were good, you know. As far as, you know, teaching, you know, getting you focused on reading skills. And, you know, when you have two grades in one class, you do--you've--I actually, you know, everybody goes, "Oh, wow, two grades in one class." I mean there were others schools we could've gone to or could've been, you know, just, you know, first grade, second grade, third grade. I think actually in retrospect, there was a lot of value to that. Because you always moved along, you know. Because you had, you know, all these things going on at the same time. I would lay odds that some place in my mother's house, I probably have books from the first grade and the second grade, and you know, all those things. Speaker 1: It's almost like when the younger children around the older children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. You pick up a lot of things. Speaker 1: You pick up on things faster. Speaker 2: Yes, you do. Story_ID: 326796 Speaker 1: And, then the other benefit--you know, having gone to Indonesia, we learned, we learned a lot about world history. Yeah, I never knew there was a world outside of Greensboro, North Carolina, and Belmont [North Carolina]. I mean, I thought the whole world kind of began and end--ended, you know, in those two places, and you know, only to discover, you know, that, you know, there, there's this whole world out there and, I mean, we-- my parents [Jacqueline McDonald Williams and Andrew Williams] in the process of getting us to Indonesia and back, we went around the world. And, we literally spent weeks in different countries, you know. Speaker 2: So, how did you all travel? Did you travel by boat (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Airplane. Speaker 2: Oh, you flew. Speaker 1: We flew. Speaker 2: Military planes, or? Speaker 1: No. No, no. Speaker 2: Just commercial airline? Speaker 1: Commercial airlines. We went, we flew to California. We flew from California to Hawaii, from, you know, I've got--my mother has, my mother can give you every stop on the trip. But, we went to, you know, Thailand. We went to Singapore. We went to the Holy Land. We went to Greece. We went to Rome, Italy. We went, I mean in the process, we went one way to get to Indonesia, and then coming back from Indonesia, we came the other way to get home, so. Speaker 2: And, you said, she spent time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We went, we went-- Speaker 2: You all had time all over-- Speaker 1: And remember my mother, my mother studied history. So, she, I mean, each point along the way, my parents had a plan for what you would see, what you would learn in that place, so, and, and we did, too, I mean. Speaker 2: And, that was an education in itself. Speaker 1: And, we did, yeah, yeah. So, that, that, yeah, I mean, I used to know, I mean, don't quiz now. But I used to know the, you know, all the capitals and--I mean, there countries we went to now that are not countries anymore. Speaker 2: They've been renamed. Speaker 1: Renamed. I mean, we, you know, we spent, you know, France, and, you know, England, and Germany--when we went, we went a lot of different places. Speaker 2: Well, what was school like in Indonesia? Speaker 1: You know, school was-- Speaker 2: What was class like? Speaker 1: I don't know, I think it, I--we--I went to the international school. See, everybody there, there were white Americans, so for me, you know, this was like, whoa, you know. I, you know, this is a whole different, different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right because you had mostly black students. Speaker 1: --life experience because I had gone, most, you know, my school--my--all blacks students in the schools that I had attended up until then. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, this was a really, you know, a really interesting new experience for me. But, it's interesting they were all white but they were from Australia, from, you know, England, from--they were, you know, all other, you know, European. And, they did not look at me as being black, even though I looked at them as being white, you know, from because of where I came from. And, I was looking back as I was preparing for this interview. I have a scrapbook where I have all these invitations to--this international community used to host parties constantly to keep the children engaged and entertained. And, you know, all those other kinds of things. And, I mean, it's just party after party after party after party after party and, you know, I actually, I guess, kept up with a number of the people for a period of time, you know. After we left Indonesia, you know, there're letters back and forth with different friends that I met there, so. But, you remember, and then the other thing you have to remember, too, Indonesia was a brown country. And, I say brown-- Speaker 2: And I think a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I say brown deliberately because, I mean, it was a brown county. And, you know, brown folks in charge, president, the community, you know, everything. Story_ID: 326797 Speaker 1: What did you all do after school? What was life, what was family life like after school, you know. What did your mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] do with you and, you know, the day, the hours after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we would, we, we, yeah. Speaker 1: --class and then on Saturdays and Sundays? Speaker 2: Everybody had a bike and you would just, I mean, you'd ride for miles. You know, from one house to the other, and you know, visit people back and forth. My mother probably loved that time because we had, you know, we had a cook, we had a housekeeper, and we had a gardener. And, you know, in the garden you had, you know, papaya, and coconut, and, you know, all those kinds of things, you know, every-- Speaker 1: Oh, so, you had fruits and, and veggies? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and you know, in the market, you know, everybody went to the market every day. You know because you didn't have refrigeration, so you went to the market every day for vegetables and, you know, you know, whatever the, you know, fresh food was for the day. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I mean, it was, you know, it did give me a totally different perspective on life that I think has stayed with me as far as just, you know, that the world does not begin and end here. That there are, you know, here, here you have, you know, all these folks, you know, that were, you know, president, and you know, running countries, and-- Speaker 1: And, you interacted with them? Speaker 2: That we interacted with. And, I mean, it was, you know, to, to know that--I learned, you know, a lot about (unclear) and how different fabrics are made, you know, and carvings, and you know, the, you know, Bali [Indonesia], which is considered, you know, paradise by so many. I mean, we lived on the island. We lived in Jakarta, Indonesia, you know, where you know, now today is--I haven't been back there but I, you know, I would love to go back because I, you know, I know it's so totally different than, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Than what it was after-- Speaker 2: --when I lived there. We lived in a, you know, wonderful house and, you know, it was, it was just, you know. Speaker 1: So, did your mom work there? Did she teach? Speaker 2: My mother did not work there. Speaker 1: She--and then she still had a cook. Speaker 2: My mother did not go to college until I went to high school. My mother went to college when I--my mother graduated from college the year before I finished high school and came to work at my high school [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Oh, please, could you talk about a devastated senior year in high school. It just wiped my life out. I couldn't sneak off campus. I couldn't do anything. I'm so serious (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh that's-- Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: She could keep her eyes on you (laughter). Speaker 2: I'm telling you. God, I was being popular all up until that last year (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well let's say, in Indonesia. Did you attend church? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we did attend church. Speaker 1: Was it a Catholic church or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a Catholic church. Um-hm, um-hm. That's exactly-- Speaker 1: And, it was a part of the international community? Speaker 2: Part of the international community, Speaker 1: That was-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah-- Speaker 1: That was inter-- Speaker 2: They had missionaries there as you can image. Speaker 1: Okay, from the states--? Speaker 2: From the states, absolutely. Speaker 1: And, from all over? From other pla-- Speaker 2: And, from, yeah, all other places-- Speaker 1: Other parts of the country, too? Speaker 2: Yes, all other the world. I mean, that's, you know, how did I know about Australia, and you know, people from France, and you know, and all these other kinds of things. I mean, it was because we were all there in school together for two years, in school together. Speaker 1: But, did they bring missionaries in from those places to work or were they just from the States? Speaker 2: No. No, no. They had missionaries from other (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Also? Speaker 2: But, I think, for some reason, I, I don't know why and I do believe this. And, I think it comes from, from then, as I've always felt that the missionaries from the United States were too aggressive. And, I think it comes from, from my time there. I don't, you know, I can't tell you specifically what happened. But, you know, there was something in my mind that said they were too aggressive. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now-- Speaker 2: And, remember that, that is a basically a Muslim country, you know, always has been and still is today. Story_ID: 326798 Speaker 1: So you went to elementary school in the United States, and then you finished up elementary school in Indonesia, did you not (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then--no. No, no, no, then I came back to finish. I finished the eighth grade at Our Lady of Miraculous Medal [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated with the class that started with at Our Lady of Miraculous Medal. Speaker 1: Now, how was it coming back to the class? Speaker 2: Well, you know-- Speaker 1: Was it, was it different, you know, how did you feel? Speaker 2: It was, it was different in that, I think I knew all the stuff but I, I, but I realized quickly that the world was back in Greensboro [North Carolina], you know. I think I, I think, I've always been able to figure out, you know, let's be real clear, you know, where you belong and, you know, what's going on, so. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: I remember once in a class trying to talk about some of the gods, you know, that people talked about in Indonesia. And, the nuns--and it took me a while to realize that, you know, that, you know, that I was talking about, you know, this is a Catholic thing. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: You know, all these other gods, you know, what is she talking about, you know. But, you know, I thought, I thought it was extraordinarily interesting; they didn't. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, you soon learned to just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, you know, well-- Speaker 1: Leave that alone. Speaker 2: You know, leave that alone, you know. That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a junior high school, or did you go straight into high school? Speaker 2: I went then, I went, well, then I went to the Catholic high school for two years. Which was Notre Dame High School [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, then I-- Speaker 1: And, that was like eighth and ninth grade? Speaker 2: Um-hm. No. Speaker 1: Ninth and tenth? Speaker 2: Ninth and tenth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then I, then I went to the, to the public high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there any-- Speaker 2: Which was great. Speaker 1: Teachers that influenced you at either high school at the Catholic school? Speaker 2: In the, you know, I guess, in the Catholic schools, they influenced me from the stand point of valuing learning and valuing reading in particular. I mean, I've always really enjoyed reading. I read, you know, you name it, I'll read it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you know, I'm not--you know, people say, "Do you read--you know, what do you read? Do you read specific kinds of novels? Do you read, you know, biographies? What do read?" I read everything, you know, and just, you know, whatever, you know, if it engages me, I read it, and find it generally interesting now. I'm the one that will start a book that I don't even like and force myself to finish it just because I felt, well, you started it, you might as well finish it. So, I think that probably came from the nuns. You know, the nuns, you know, maybe there I think my parents [Jacqueline McDonald Williams and Andrew Williams] installed--instilled in us, you know, the, you know, issues of integrity and ethics. But, I think, you know, having gone to a Catholic school--now, I did learn to question a lot of things by the time I came out of the Catholic school. Speaker 1: Was this from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, you know-- Speaker 1: --a religious standpoint-- Speaker 2: Because I thought, I thought-- Speaker 1: --or, was this from--? Speaker 2: I thought that there was a democracy. But, you know what, in the Catholic church, there is no democracy. You know, I said something about democracy once, and I was, you know, I learned, oh, there is no democracy, this is the Catholic church; there is the pope. And, you know, and I use to, you know, I learned that, you know, that you could, you know, that sins could be forgiven on Saturday evenings. All you had to do was go to confession. So, I could kill my brothers [Joseph Williams and Warren Williams] during Monday through Friday, but on Saturday I would be forgiven. That's what I learned. But, in--when I got to Dudley High School [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], I--it was like the world opened up. Speaker 1: Was this good? Speaker 2: It was great. Speaker 1: So, you were ready to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had great teachers. Story_ID: 326987 Speaker 1: Tell us about your experience at Dudley High School. What was life like then, when you-- Speaker 2: I loved James B. Dudley High School [Greensboro, North Carolina]. I'm telling you, it was great. The guy who would, Dr. Tarpley [John A. Tarpley] was the principal. He lived directly across from us because by then we've moved. The whole neighborhood then moved--the New Castle Road, and off of--it was like the Benbow Park [Greensboro, North Carolina] area. That was the whole neighborhood, the Julian Street [Greensboro, North Carolina] crowd, moved to the Benbow Park area, you know, so, we all moved together. Speaker 1: Now, why is it called Benbow Park? Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: Is there actually a park there? Speaker 2: --it's right, it's right off of Benbow Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, we lived, New Castle Road's, I mean, you know, so, all of us are living, you know, Dr. Dowdy [Lewis C. Dowdy], the Blunts [ph.], we all lived right there together. Speaker 1: Now, was this because one family-- Speaker 2: I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) moved and built a house? Speaker 2: --know. I don't know. Speaker 1: Or, was it that you just actually ended up moving? Bought-- Speaker 2: We just all basically built those houses and moved at the same time. And, they built those houses. I mean, this was not--you know, how--it's interesting. I'll tell you something interesting. I'm gonna regress for a moment here. The houses on Julian Street; these black parents built those houses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't go into a white neighborhood and buy those houses. They built those houses. And, when we moved to Benbow Park, they built those houses. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The brand new house, moved into, which is, which is interesting because I know, you know, a lot of community, you know, the, you know, the black folks went and bought these houses and then the whole neighborhood cleared out and black folks owned all the house. That didn't happen in Greensboro [North Carolina], you know, they built this neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you had all-- Speaker 2: You know, the architects, the, you know, engineers, you know, everybody got together and they went and built those houses. Isn't that interesting? Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. I mean, it's-- Speaker 1: And, then your whole neighborhood ended up moving. Speaker 2: We--everybody built their own houses. I mean, you had somebody design and build, you know, you know, build those houses, you know, I-- Speaker 1: So, you kept your neighbors from when you were younger. Speaker 2: You kept your neighbors. You kept your same neighbors. I mean, bottom line, we were all over there together. Speaker 1: Now, what proximity was this into--with the school, within the school's limits? Speaker 2: Now, this was, this would've been further from A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], from the campus itself. But, you know, not that far. Speaker 1: Still in commuting distance. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Oh, absolutely. Where we lived before on Julian Street, you could walk to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] or A&T. On, on--when we moved to New Castle, yeah, we could've walk, but I think we drove--we were riding then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 326988 Speaker 1: So, how was Dudley [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], now? Speaker 2: Oh, all right. So, this is, this is, you know, I think my whole life began right there. I mean, you know, who was I before I got to Dudley High School, you know? I didn't have a clue what life was about. Do you know they let people smoke in the quadrangle? I could not believe this (laughter), I mean, you know. No one smoke-- Speaker 1: Wait, you had a quadrangle in the school? At the school? Speaker 2: Yeah, you had a quadrangle. This was a great school. Speaker 1: This was a large school. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this was large school. Are you kidding me? All black folks in town when to Dudley High School. Comm- you know, county, everybody went to Dudley High School. And, Dr. Tarpley [John A. Tarpley], the principal, lived right across the street from us. So, this is all wonderful and good, you know. I didn't think so at all, but, you know. So, here we are, everybody went to Dudley High School. I met--I mean, first of all, I had all my friends from Catholic school, and then I met all these new people that I'd never known before. As far as I was concerned, it was like a door opened to my life. These folks were fabulous people. We had, you know, great teachers. We had teachers, I'm not sure the nuns--I'm not--you know, I can't say what the nuns' expectation of us was; I don't know. But, at Dudley High School, I knew. Mrs. Coley [Nelle Artis Coley]-- Speaker 1: Now, this is the first time you've had black teachers? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All black teachers? Speaker 2: All black teachers. And, here you have Mrs. Coley, what did she say, "I have an expectation that you will tower over mediocrity." I didn't even know what the word meant. I had to go look it up; Webster's Dictionary. Towering over mediocrity. What in the world does this mean? And, that was her expectation of every student. She was an English teacher. She was clear. When you come out of here, you're gonna know how to write. I mean, she just had--you're gonna know, you will know the classics. And, she brought all of that to life. I mean, she--''Beowulf,' I mean, she drew pictures--I mean, you knew what was going on and ah, it was just, it was just, it was great. Speaker 1: That's amazing-- Speaker 2: I mean, remember for the black teachers that was the top profession. I mean, the teachers, the doctors alone, they were all--I mean, there was no greater honor in the black community than being a teacher. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, these people were great. Speaker 1: Now, were any of these teachers living in your neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. They all lived kind of-- Speaker 1: And, they all lived in--with the professors as high schools? Speaker 2: Kind of, you know, kind of surrounding, yeah all surrounding areas, without a doubt, right there. Mrs. Coley lived on the Benbow Road, I guess, now that I think about it. And, then, who was that math teacher's name? He taught math and physics; Mr. Grant [ph.]. He was fabulous. I didn't like math. This man taught you to love math. He taught you that math affected your life every day. That you had to understand that--he brought it alive for you. You didn't think about in terms of numbers on a paper and trying to figure this stuff out. You thought about it in terms of baking cakes, and you know, putting gardens in. And, I mean, he just, he just made it different. You know, when he taught us, you know, all the chemical symbols and, you know. Then, Mrs. Gravely, who taught chemistry; how dare I forget Mrs. Gravely. I mean, just, I think Mrs. Gravely's husband [Clinton E. Gravely] probably designed the house that my father [Andrew Williams] built, now that I think about it 'cause he was an architect. Speaker 1: He was an archi- okay? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. I mean, but she, and she taught chemistry. And, then, what was the lady's name that taught French; Lord have mercy. I can't remember her name. But, I mean, the point is, you know, great teachers that cared about us. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I mean, if they walked by you and you were acting stupid, they would haul your buns up right there on the spot. They, you know--at that point, people didn't worry about, you know, some teacher being--going to jail for, you know--they would jack your buns up right there on the spot. And, you were gonna do right. You never thought about not doing right, you know, you just didn't. Story_ID: 326989 Speaker 1: In that particular case, no child was left behind, right (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you, thank you. Speaker 1: --because all children were well held to high standards. Speaker 2: You know that, no, no. Were held--were held to high standards. And they held every child to high standards. I mean, they would have you--that morning, whatever, you better show up at, you know, so and so taught thirty minutes before school started; you come and see me. And, you would be there, too. You would not hesitate. They would call your mother. They would call your father. I mean, you--they would put the fear of God in you. And, you did right (laughter), you know. So, I mean, what do you walk away from that. You walk away, I mean, I can't tell you the respect that I held those teachers. And, you know what's so interesting, they were, you know, getting everybody into college, you know. What does it take, you know, if somebody was good, what does it take, you know, what do we need to do to get that, you know, you know, to get the money for that person to go to school? I mean, they did those things. You know, I always thought that I would go to Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]. You know, I'd spent, you know, from elementary school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina] on I think, you know, reading programs and summer programs and science programs and all those things on that campus. They, you know, it was Dudley High School [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina] teachers that opened my mind to dreaming of going away. You know, what about Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], you know, I, you know, what about Spelman College? And, they had people in the, in the community that had gone to Spelman College, talk to the ladies about, you know, you know, as a possibility, you know, if you wanna go to Spelman College, I'll write letters. I'll talk to the school and see can't we get you in there. Speaker 1: Now, the roles of teachers have definitely changed over the years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh boy, have they ever. Have they ever. Speaker 1: Because the teacher had so many, let's say responsibilities, at that particular time. And, not that it was required of them. But, it was that they took it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --upon themselves to make sure that the stu-- Speaker 2: It was mission. It was a life calling. I tell you, my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] always wanted to be a teacher. She was disappointed when I didn't become a teacher, you know. And, came--as I said, came to my, came to my school to teach my senior year. Oh, what a devastation that was but, anyway. We had a--I mean, we just, we had a fun time. You know, I just--so many people that went to school with me then went on to do really interesting things in life, so. Speaker 1: So, and you said that some--was there that basketball player? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, chi- you know, Lou Hudson who played for the Atlanta Hawks, you know, great basketball player. I see him periodically. You know, he--no I--somebody else died. But, anyway, Charles, Charlie Sanders who went on to the NFL [National Football League], you know, so. I mean, we had some really interesting people that came as part of our, you know, kind of the, you know, our class were a lot of people that were kind of the first. Story_ID: 326990 Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who [sic. what] were you thinking that you wanted to do at this particular time? What career were you thinking about? Or, were you thinking about a career at this time? Speaker 2: I hate to admit this, I, but I think it is probably true, I don't think I was. Speaker 1: You were just enjoying-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: Enjoying being free from-- Speaker 2: You know what? I love life. Speaker 1: --Catholicism and-- Speaker 2: I love life. And, I was loving life. I mean that fact that, you know, that there was democracy [at James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. You know, that you could, you know, have a debate with the teacher. And, you know, that--I mean, that was different from going, it was really different from going to the Catholic schools, that you could do that. And, I loved being, I mean, all black teachers. I mean, these folks; they cared, and you knew they cared, too. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, did you participate in any extracurricular activities? Did you do sports? Did you do band? What were you mainly interested in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always thought that I wan- I wanted to be--I did want, I did have a goal once of being the drum major for the band but that was saved for the guys. I played the piano. So, I did not play an instrument that would get me down the street with the band. I played a piano and went to piano lessons and dance lessons and you know, did all those kinds of things. I did, so, you know, I did the cotillion, you know, the deb- you know, where the debutant-- Speaker 1: Debutante? Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Part where, you know, where you were introduced and-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I did the Jabba Walk, I remember that, you know. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. What is the Jabba Walk again? That's-- Speaker 2: All right, that's the Delta's [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. Speaker 1: Deltas, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams], my mother honey, my mother's a good Delta. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: So, you know, obligations here-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, see we did the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 2: Which was a cotillion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the--yeah, the debutante. Speaker 1: Yeah. I did that. That was it. Speaker 2: So, I did both of those. I was in both, you know. Speaker 1: And, that's interesting. So, let's--tell, tell about your experiences with the cotillion and with the Jabba Walk. What all was involved in grooming, I can't really say grooming you but, in actuality (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know what, they did, you know, they had those courses-- Speaker 1: --it was grooming you for-- Speaker 2: About, you know, how to eat correctly and, you know, how to do these things and do that things. But, see by then, you know because I'd been, you know, the overseas experience, you know, your parents had whipped you into shape by then. And, so it was not, you know, I kind of knew a lot of those things going into that. But, you know, they did--there was, you know, certain grooming that quote occurs as part of that. My favorite part of the whole thing was I learned to waltz with my father [Andrew Williams], you know. And, we were stepping all over each other's feet and everything else, but we had a great time. Speaker 1: So, that was-- Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute, was he actually your escort? Speaker 1: My--no, but your father brings you out. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Your father is the one who introduces you to society-- Speaker 2: All right. Okay. Speaker 1: --to society. Now, remind you this was held in the nor- in the North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] gymnasium. I want you to get a good perspective, you know, it wasn't in some, you know, grand hotel with chandeliers. I don't want you to get the wrong picture here. This was the basketball arena on A&T's campus, you know, so, you know, I don't want you to--and, what was the song? I actually have the program some place and the guy who was my escort and, you know. My mother made the dress that I wore, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I know-- Speaker 1: And, my father came and picked me up after it was over. After all, you're not riding home with that guy (laughter). So, so serious (laughter). Story_ID: 326991 Speaker 1: For the Jabba Walk that was a--that was different in that you had to have a talent. So, you know, I debated, you know, playing the piano, well, you know, I didn't think I was good enough for that. So, I--but the talent was, was something that my grand mama, my grandmother [Eliza Johnson Williams] on my father's [Andrew Williams] side, and my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] taught me, was--which was how to sew. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I made a wardrobe. And, I modeled the wardrobe, and explained, you know, what I had on and how it was made and the fabric and all those kinds of things. I, I came in number two. I came in number two according to my mother because if I had done my job and got out and raised money, I would've come in number one. (Laughter) But, I didn't do that part really well. So, I came in number two (laughter). It was fun. And, you know, and it's interesting because a lot of the same people again, you know, the Julian Street [Greensboro, North Carolina] (laughter), you know, some of the ladies were some of the, you know, as you expand to the bigger community, I mean, they're people that were at the Catholic school with me. And, then, you know, at, you know, that, you know, that did the Saturday programs at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] or, you know, went with me to Dudley High School [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: So, do you think that being a part of the Jabba Walk, Jabba Walk was--that you or influenced your becoming--you became a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Delta. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: No. My mother influenced me becoming a Delta. I wouldn't--I can't think of anything I would have been but a Delta. My mother's best friend wrote the Delta Sweetheart song. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, please. I didn't have a choice. And, not that I would have wanted a choice. I love the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, and I've got a lot of great friends. I have great friends on both sides. Both the, you know, AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) AKAs and Deltas-- Speaker 1: And Deltas, absolutely. Absolutely. Story_ID: 326992 Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did you start taking piano lessons? Speaker 2: Oh, God, I think I took piano lessons all my life; elementary school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I took piano lessons forever. Speaker 1: Did you go to the pianist's home -- Speaker 2: Well, no. Let me think. No, no-- Speaker 1: --or, did she come to you, or did you take-- Speaker 2: He, he. He. Speaker 1: Oh, it was a he? Speaker 2: Mr. Pearson [ph.]. He came to my house initially. And, then it seems to me later on, you know, we went to him house. But initially, he came to our house to teach. Speaker 1: Now, what was your experience as a young person learning how to play the piano? Speaker 2: Well, let me think, I guess after I got my fingers whipped a couple times with that pencil, I got a little more serious about it. He used to have recitals (laughter). I used to hate those recitals (laughter) because, what was, you know--I learned and I can still play today 'Ave Maria' [Franz Schubert]. That was one of my favorite songs. I mean, after all, is that the most Catholic song you know? They sang it at my wedding, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Well, a lot, that pencil made a lot of the students turn around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm telling you. Speaker 1: --and not go-- Speaker 2: I'm telling you. Speaker 1: --and not continue it. Speaker 2: That is so true. That is so true. But, I did take piano lessons for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I still, you know, I think probably I, I mean, I still happen to enjoy, you know, the symphony and piano--especially when it's more, you know, the piano focus than others, um-hm. Story_ID: 326993 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, after Dudley, what did you do? Speaker 2: When I finished Dudley High School [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], I went on to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Influenced by--yeah, I think both of my parents [Jacqueline McDonald Williams and Andrew Williams] had thought either Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] or A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], especially my--I mean, everybody, everybody even today my brothers [Joseph Williams and Warren Williams], my nephew, I mean, everybody went to A&T. My--you know, everyone. So, I'm sure that they were, you know, concerned about family tradition here. But, I did come to Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And, you chose Spelman? Speaker 2: I chose Spelman. And, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why do you think you chose Spelman? Is it because you just didn't wanna continue the family legacy? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, I think I did think it was something to be said for going away from home. I never lived away from home up until then. It's not, you know, just never had. So, this was my first time living away from home. You know, Atlanta had a reputation for being kind of a, you know, really exciting place. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, then not to forget there was Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]; you can't forget that, you know. So, it was--I didn't think I was going to an all-girls school because I knew there was this all-boys school across the street. So, I never ever focused on, you know, somehow I was gonna be this, you know, isolated for any reason. I didn't think that at all. There was one other young lady from, maybe I think there were actually two people from my, from my high school that came to Spelman. So, there were three of us. And, we were all influenced by a lady who lived in the neighborhood who was a Spelman graduate who, you know, invited us for tea, and talked to us about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Teas were very popular then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes, very popular. And, talked to us about Spelman. And, applied. You know, I was accepted at Spelman, Bennett, and A&T. The three schools that I--where I applied to attend school. Speaker 1: So, tell us about the tea experience. When you were invited for tea and--? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, I mean, and she did serve tea. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Tea and cookies. Speaker 1: Tea and cookies. Speaker 2: She--not, not, not, you know, the traditional English tea but, she, she did. I mean, she served--now that I've come to know what tea really is about. We had a great--it was very, it was very nice, and she, you know, spent some time talking about, you know, Spelman, and you know, the, you know, what they, you know, the women that went to Spelman. An article had just come out in some magazine calling Spelman College the, you know, the Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] for black women. And, you know, why she thought, you know, this would be a good idea to attend Spelman. I think both my parents, both really supported the thought of me coming to Spelman. You know, at that time, let's face it, Spelman was, you know--where did black folks want their daughters to go to school; Spelman College. I mean, there--it just didn't--you know, here my father was a professor at one of the best universities in America, and he wanted me to go to Spelman College, so. They were very pleased when I was accepted. I'm sure I still have that letter some place, where I was accepted. Story_ID: 326994 Speaker 1: Okay. So how was your first day at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I loved Spelman, are you kidding me? Speaker 1: Being away from home now. You were away from home (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved it. I don't think I was ever lonely. I loved Spelman College. My--well, she was, she did, she came--became my roommate my, my sophomore year. But, I met her my first day on Spelman's campus. She's still one of my best friends. You know, so, you know, it's these--what a great group of women, you know. As I think back, you know, my, my godchild's mother [HistoryMaker Shirley James] was, you know, graduate of my class. I mean, I think about all these people in all of our lives that are just so mixed and intermingled. You know, they were all, you know, they--we were all there and we, we had a great class; the class of '68 [1968]. We finished in the class of '68 [1968]. Think about when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [sic. 1968]. Right, '67 [1967]? Speaker 1: Sixty--it was '67 [1967], '68 [1968]; yeah, '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: I get--yeah, my mind went to Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] there for a minute. But, I mean, where did his body lay in state? On Spelman's campus. Where did, you know, they said--I read in the paper the other day that they said, there were maybe 200,000 people for King's funeral. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. You, you could've convinced me that there was less than a million people there; 500,000. Because they were all lined up on Spelman's campus to go see his body. You know, the, the news cameras were out. You know, they had--I have, I have pictures where the cemetery [South-View Cemetery, Atlanta, Georgia] that he was initially buried in was owned by my roommate's uncle. So, you know, we, we went--we did not go down, we didn't go Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], we went over to Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, then from there that evening, we went to the cemetery 'cause, I mean, her, his, her uncle obviously got us there. And, I have picture of, you know, the--of his, the canopy is still over the grave. I mean, it was that first, that first day that they put his body there. Speaker 1: So, what was the, I wanna say attitude of most of the students, or as it's put, there was a lot of students that went through, you know, to view him. But-- Speaker 2: Oh, we were, yeah, but, I think even prior to that, I mean, if you think about, you know, the '60s [1960s], I mean, you know, we had just come through the sit-ins and then to come, you know, to Atlanta [Georgia] to, you know, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] where, I mean, it--everybody was talking about--the first afros, I mean, on campus. I remember, you know, first people that, you know, the young lady's that cut their hair. And, I remember my father [Andrew Williams] calling up going, "Don't cut her hair." The, you know, the-- Speaker 1: Well, did you cut yours? Speaker 2: Not then. Not then. I was still living with him remember. He was paying all my bills. There was a lot of, I mean, we had great raging discussions on campus. I mean, you had, you know, Spelman named for David Rockefeller's [sic. John D. Rockefeller, Jr.] mother [Laura Spelman Rockefeller], maiden name Spelman. David Rockefeller came to campus and people, I mean, we protested him being there. Speaker 1: He came during that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Major protest. Speaker 1: And he was donating quite a bit of money then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. Understatement. Quite a bit of money. But, democracy at its best, right. You had, you know, Bobby Kennedy [Robert Francis F. Kennedy] who came-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to campus. I heard Martin Luther King preach on that campus, yeah. [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman was chairman of the board [Board of Trustees]. And, then I went on to be on the board at Spelman, the Board of Trustees for Spelman. And, when I first joined the board, Marian was still chairman of the board. Speaker 1: She was still there. Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was--maybe Marian wasn't chairman when I was on campus, now that I think about it. She probably became chairman of the board after that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After you graduated? Speaker 2: But, Albert Manley was the president of Spelman at the time that I was there. So, we had not, you know, I guess we had had a female president, but it'd been back with the founding white, you know, the two white women [Sophia B. Packard and Harriet E. Giles]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that founded Spelman [Atlanta Baptist Female Seminary; Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And, this was before--was this the last white who was president of Spelman? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because after that-- Speaker 2: And, then Albert Manley, and then Donald Stewart-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then after Donald Stewart, Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole]. Speaker 1: Johnnetta Cole. Speaker 2: And, then [HistoryMaker] Audrey Manley, and now Beverly Tatum [HistoryMaker Beverly Daniel Tatum]. Story_ID: 326995 Speaker 1: But, you know, I mean, Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and whole AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, Spelman--but, Atlanta [Georgia], you know, Atlanta didn't have the civil unrest that occurred in other cities. Yeah, I--I've heard lots of people pontificate on why that was. I can't, I don't know if I could actually, you know, get you to, you know what I mean, you know, why it was. But, it, it was. You know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] then was here at Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King]. You know, it, you know, the world is so small (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] was still alive at that time. Speaker 1: Daddy King. And, then I went on to be, you know, Mrs. King and I were friends. I mean, I visited with her and, anyway, the, the world is tiny. Speaker 2: Yes. It is. It most certainly is. So, when you were at Spelman, what did you major in? Speaker 1: My major was psychology, minored in sociology. So, the questions was, what did I want to do? I still didn't know. But, I really enjoyed Spelman College. We had great teachers. Millicent Jordan [Millicent Dobbs Jordan], English teacher. She expected you to do right. She expected you to show up and be prepared and just--she, she was great. I mean, you know, she could not have been better. We had a sociology, a political science teacher, Dr. Moreland, fabulous women. She may still be at Spelman for all I know (laughter). I think was, I gave a speech over there a couple years ago, she was still there then. And, who, I mean, she, she taught you the nuances of the, you know, politics and how we had better pay attention and it was in our best interest to pay attention. And, you just, you, you know, you had a responsibility. You know, I think that school did teach you to, to be responsible adults. You know, that, you know, so I had my first real boyfriend, too, while there. That was wonderful. And, you know, it was-- Speaker 2: Was he from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: More--oh, where else, you know? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Where else? Speaker 1: Where else would he had been from? Morehouse College, I mean, you know, come on. Of course, my husband [Franklin Biggins] didn't go to Morehouse, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, it, it seems like the English teachers are always the morality teachers. They're giving you the advice on life, how to live, and you know sort of like a civic teacher. Speaker 1: True. True. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, then here you had that in high school [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], and now even at Spelman. Speaker 1: Even more. Yeah. Speaker 2: She standing--the English teacher standing out again. Speaker 1: Still there. Still there. Dr. Robert Brisbane who taught sociology on Morehouse's campus. As a Spelman student, you could attend school--classes at Morehouse, Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark A [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--I mean, you could attend school at, classes on the various campuses. And, so I took sociology from Dr. Brisbane who, you know--here this man had graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the '30s [sic. 1949]. I mean, come on. Do you know how brilliant you have to be? He was absolutely brilliant. And, he went on--his daughter [Phillipa Brisbane] and I are still dear friends. His daughter was in my class at Spelman; dear friends. Close not only to me, she's close to my daughters [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins]. You know, it's, it's really, really, something, I mean, you know, once again (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was quite an experience at Spelman. Speaker 1: All these--oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 2: And, of course, you lived on campus? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, my four years; four years lived in the dormitories and there were a group of us that always, after my freshman year, we always lived in the same dorm. And, we stayed on the first floor because it was only half a floor, you know, versus the other full floors. There, there was this very tight knit group that spent three solid years together. Speaker 2: You lived in the same place for three years? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Same dorm? Same room? Speaker 1: No, not--our sophomore year we lived in a different dorm. And, our senior--junior and senior year, we lived in the same--No. Our sophomore year we lived in--not in a different dorm but still together-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: On the first floor. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And, then our junior and senior year, we lived in the new dorm on campus. But, the same group of people and the same half--you know, still a half floor, you know. Speaker 2: Now, these were all fema- I mean-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, all females. Speaker 2: All female--? Speaker 1: All females. All females. All-- Speaker 2: No, co-ed with Morehouse or (laughter)--? Speaker 1: No. Are you kidding--oh, please. Guys weren't even allowed on the hall much less, you know. They could come to the, you know, the waiting area, the sitting area to visit. Speaker 2: Did you have matrons who were--? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Over the dorms? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: See, it's not like that anymore. Speaker 1: I know. I know. I know. But, you know what, it was good, you know. We didn't care, it was just fine. And, so, so you had to be back on, your freshman year I think, curfew was at nine o'clock. But, the party started at four [o'clock], so by nine [o'clock], you were kind of ready to go back (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were ready to come back (laughter). Speaker 1: And, it was okay (laughter). Speaker 2: When, and when you became a sophomore, junior, and senior, did the curfew extend? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I-- Speaker 2: Did it ever get up to midnight? Speaker 1: I think our senior year was midnight. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, the ninth, tenth, eleventh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Speaker 1: And, so, you know, what's so funny because some of the guys on Morehouse campus are still some of my dearest friends. And, I, I'm--I'll give you kind of an advanced glimpse. Michael Lomax was in the class of '68 [1968]. Story_ID: 326808 Speaker 1: Tell us about Dr. Lomax [Michael Lomax]. Speaker 2: Well, Michael and I were in the class, you know, we started in '64 [1964], finished in '68 [1968]. We took classes together. And, you know, the small world category, you know, Michael then went on here in Atlanta [Georgia] to be chairman of the Fulton County Commission [Fulton County Board of Commissioners]. I was deeply involved in, in you know, helping raise money and being part of his campaign. He then went on to be president of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. However, now as a senior partner with Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.], what do I do? I recruit people for executive positions. I recruited Michael Lomax to be the CEO of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. Speaker 1: Everything goes full circle (laughter). Speaker 2: Everything comes full circle. I mean Michael and I met in '64 [1964]. Who would've ever dreamed? And, we're dear friends. That who would've ever dreamed that here were are, you know, now, you know, he is now the, you know, CEO, a president of the United Negro College Fund and that I had the pleasure of recruiting him for that role. Speaker 1: That is amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: These bonds that-- Speaker 2: I'm telling you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you formed when you were younger, you know, in school and even-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you. Speaker 1: Just out in the work world. And, even when you're in elementary and junior high, and senior high even. You end up seeing each other again. Speaker 2: Seeing each other again. That's why I tell people don't burn bridges. It's just not worth it, you know. Story_ID: 326809 Speaker 1: Okay, so after Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], what did you do? Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, finished Spelman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Unless there are some more stories that you have to tell us about Spelman, or some experiences at Spelman. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I mean, I had a great time. Spelman was wonderful. I loved being at Spelman. I think my parents [Jacqueline McDonald Williams and Andrew Williams] probably wondered specifically what I was doing at Spelman College. My father got me focused though, when he wrote a nice long letter and said that it was costing him a lot of money to maintain me at Spelman. And, he really needed for me to focus more on my grades than I did on my outside activities of having fun. So, that kind of flipped me into shape to do better. When I graduated from Spelman, I still had not decided what to do. My mother thought, my mother--as far as my mother was concerned, I didn't have a degree in teaching, what in the world was I thinking about. And, on top of everything, didn't have a husband. What in the world (laughter). I'm sure that that was probably my mother's thinking. She won't admit that. But, I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was a part of it during those days, you know. Speaker 2: I'm, I, I'm just telling you-- Speaker 1: That was, that was it. Speaker 2: I mean, I know my mother well enough to know what she was thinking. But, you know what? Speaker 1: One thing was not to have a career, so to speak to be a teacher-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly-- Speaker 1: The other was definitely--you were supposed to get a husband (laughter). Speaker 2: That something, I was supposed to have done something. But, I did, I did substitute teaching for a period of time in there, until January. In which time, I had been applying for graduate schools. And, I wanted to come back to Atlanta [Georgia]. I did not want to go to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I don't know why. But, I mean, you know, I spent all that time in AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, I went to Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia] for graduate school in, in psychological counseling. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because all of a sudden, I mean, there was something that said, you know, that there was something in there that just kind of resonated with me. So, I went to Georgia State and, you know, got, you know, finished a master's [degree] program there and went on from there. I enjoyed Georgia State. I went on to, I've served on the Spelman College board [Board of Trustees]. I've served on the board of trustees for Georgia State University. Was Georgia--a state university doesn't give honorary Ph.D.'s, but they do give out kind of dist- you know, distinguished alum, and I'd been recognized at Georgia State as one of their distinguished alums. And, then went on to, but, you know, be recognized by the business school [J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Atlanta, Georgia], where I didn't co- you know, where I didn't even finish the business school. But, I was honored by the business school, so I was very pleased about that. Speaker 1: And, this was at Georgia State? Speaker 2: Georgia State University. The--after finishing Georgia State, I joined what was then the Atlanta Technical school [Atlanta Technical College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I was one of, I guess, I was the first black person hired in one of this whole state system of schools, as a counselor. And, doing, you know, guidance counseling. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, there I--during that time, I met who was to be my future husband [Franklin Biggins]. He did not work there. He worked someplace else. But, a young lady there introduced me to him. Story_ID: 326810 Speaker 1: We met in January. Now, my mother's [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] gonna cut this part out of this tape. But, we met in January of 1970, and we were engaged in February of 1970. And, we got married in July 1970. Speaker 2: Oh, she didn't know these dates? Speaker 1: No, she does. But, she hates that. Because my mother tells her friends, "Oh, they knew each other a lot longer than that, don't worry about it." (Laughter) So, that's not true (laughter). You know, it was one of those things. You know how you know you've met your life mate. You know, hey, we knew it. And, we've been married now for thirty-five years, so, you know, something went right. Speaker 2: So, you knew each other for three months and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Got married, yeah. Speaker 2: --you've been married (laughter) thirty-something years. Speaker 1: And, I know lots of people that dated from the first day of college until the last day of college, got married the week after and-- Speaker 2: They were divorced (laughter)? Speaker 1: --lasted, lasted three weeks and they were divorced, so, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, mom, there're no complaints. Speaker 1: No complaints. Speaker 2: Because, hey, it's-- Speaker 1: That's right. Thirty-five years later, we're still here. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. So, you were the first black hired, and you were--so, you counselled [at Atlanta Technical College, Atlanta, Georgia] for a while? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. Speaker 2: You were doing--at the--? Speaker 1: And, I did, and enjoyed it. And, then my--after we got married, my husband [Franklin Biggins] applied for law school [Columbus School of Law] at Catholic University [The Catholic University of America] in Washington, D.C. And, he applied at a number of law schools. But, Catholic was the one that he was targeting, and I can't remember now, why. But, he was accepted and we moved to Washington [D.C.]. I took a job there. I took the job that paid me the absolute most money, which was at a college there, in counseling. Which, you know, happened to work out well. We--our first child was born there in Washington, D.C. So, we were poverty stricken for a long time, believe me, you know. We, we were just downright poor. You know, nothing else to say about it. But, we had a great time. And, we had, you know, law--all the law students were poor so it didn't make any difference. And, we just really enjoyed each other's company. And, living in Washington during the Watergate era. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, yeah, let me put it in the perspective when we were there. So, I mean, you know, we got--we saw this up close and in person. And, I'm the person that on--my husband studied a lot on most Saturdays. And, so on Saturday, even before our first child was born, I would go to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] for some reason. It became my place to be. I, I used to know the Smithsonian inside out. It was free. It was warm, and it got me, you know, I didn't have to stay home by myself and, you know, I could go down there and wander around, and I did. And-- Speaker 2: So, you just toured it, and you just visited any place that you wanted to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Almost--almost every day. I mean, almost every Saturday. I mean, it's what I did on Saturdays; I went to the Smithsonian. And, but, you know, you could also go--remember then, I mean, [U.S.] Congress--you know, these things were a lot more open then. I mean-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: You did have the opportunity-- Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot of stipulations like now. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. But, the Smithsonian Institute in particular I thought, I found, you know, the museum and the--and I found the jewel area. I mean, it seems to me as, as the--I used to know the guard there because I went in there so much. I mean, I just thought it was so incredible that people actually owned these things personally at one time. So, I really enjoyed and when after our first--Dawn, our youngest daughter, Dawn Elizabeth Biggins was born, you know, what did I do on Saturdays? You know, I put that girl in that stroller and we went to the Smithsonian and pushed around and, you know, did things like that, which was fun. Speaker 2: Does she have any memories of doing this (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably not. She was, she was-- Speaker 2: She was young then? Speaker 1: No. She was an infant. Speaker 2: Okay. She was an infant then. Speaker 1: I mean, literally. When we left Washington, she was born in April and we left Washington the next Jan- that following January, so she wasn't a year old. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: When we left Washington--Franklin graduated. Speaker 2: But, I'm sure she has images in her mind that would--that she just probably help pull to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've told her about it. She probably thinks-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she did. She probably could tell you like she was there and she doesn't have a clue. But, when Franklin finished law school--and, you know, again, you know, the Watergate era, a lot of things going on up there, you know. You know, living in Washington, you focus on politics a lot more than you focus when you're not there. Story_ID: 326811 Speaker 1: Just physically being there, there's something about it. So, I watched the Watergate trial, you know, I was probably addicted to it there for a while. I mean, I, I do become, I don't know, it's just something about me-- Speaker 2: What was the feel for that, that time in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Was it tense--was it-- Speaker 1: It was very tense. Speaker 2: --was the city atmosphere tense (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness, yes. It was very tense in Washington. And, it was quiet. I remember that for some reason, it was a very quiet time. It was a very sad time for Washington. I think that maybe the, maybe I was not mature enough at that time to understand that a lot of the sadness was around the fact that here this great country, this great government, and look at this that's playing out. Speaker 2: Put air in your dirty laundry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --out in the public. Speaker 1: I mean, it was, it was a very sad time. I think, you know, in retrospect now when you go back, you know, it was a sad time for this entire country. You know, but, I was a young mother, you know, first time mother, you--look, I was just, you know. So, you know, even though-- Speaker 2: Really, you kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had a sense-- Speaker 2: --newly married-- Speaker 1: Yeah, newly married-- Speaker 2: You know, like a year or two. Speaker 1: You know, lots of things; trying to bal- I mean, so I, I knew that there was this great sadness. But, I just, I was not focusing on, you know, I was focusing on, you know, mama and, you know, trying to be a mama and all that other stuff. But, I was very engaged in watching this trail. And, who said what, and who shot who, and you know, not literally shot-- Speaker 2: Not, no, not, but still. Speaker 1: But, I mean, who said what about who, you know, and the taping and, you know, just, you know, every day. I mean, I was, you know, give me the newspaper, let me read this. But, still I do think, you know, in retrospect, I didn't have the sense of, you know, the, the overall devastation. I mean, it was just news, you know, so, you know. Speaker 2: Now, did any of your friends, how--you know, like your, the law school students and your friends and, well, I won't say much, so much family, but the ones that you were actually, I'd say hanging with, in the D.C. area, how did they view this whole-- Speaker 1: Well, my husband [Franklin Biggins]-- Speaker 2: --Watergate--? Speaker 1: --actually did an intern for Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] at the time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, you know, he did, he was, you know, he did an internship there with Andy. So, you know, you know, obviously, you know, you're still, you know, hearing and, you know, engaged in, in all of these things going on. And, it was, you know, very much a topic of conversation. And, you know, then you had, you know, law school and what it, you know, the ethics issues that were raised. And, you know, you know, what, you know, what is ethical, what is unethical, you know. They--there were some really interesting debates, you know, on all of those things and, you know, impeachment and, you know, what does impeachment mean. And, what are the articles of impeachment. You know, I used to know. I used to know that. At that time, I did know that. You know, but, you know, the law students certainly knew it 'cause it was a major discussion for them, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I've always wondered and I think a lot of people wondered what happened to the black guy [Frank Wills] who-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --actually exposed it. Speaker 1: Yeah. You know what, I remember on some news program that they, that guy, I mean, pov- he's in poverty someplace. I just remember, there was something about it that I remember them saying that, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. 'Cause it seems like he should've gotten some type of recognition-- Speaker 1: Right. I don't think so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for actually exposing this-- Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: But, it wasn't the best of thing that could've been done but, it was a good thing-- Speaker 1: Somebody-- Speaker 2: --that it was done. Speaker 1: Somebody probably should have just taken care of him, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's-- Speaker 1: When you really think about it. Speaker 2: That is so true. Speaker 1: No, did not happen. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Did not happen. Story_ID: 326812 Speaker 1: You taught, or you counselled again. What type of counseling--? Speaker 2: Kind of student, you know, students coming into school and helping them think about, you know, what they wanted to do and, you know, where to go. And, I was a real good expert at that. I mean, after all look how long it took me to figure it out. So, now, after I--let me think, 'cause after I had the baby [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins], I went back to work relatively quickly. I mean, we, we didn't have a whole lot of choices. It's like somebody--even though my, my father--my father-in-law, wonderful person, so he did support us for an entire summer, you know, so, you know, which was wonderful. And, I have a great appreciation for him as a person. The, you know, it was interesting, but it was just a job. I never viewed it was a career. It, it--I had some interesting people that I interacted with every day there. But, there was nothing about it that was engaging to me. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: You know, this was a means of support. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you see where, or do you draw an analogy between your earlier counselling days and what you're doing now in your profession? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know what, I left there--yeah, because I guess there, I mean, there is an analogy. But, I think the analogy probably comes more from my days at the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] than it comes from that period of time in my life. It was interesting, it was engaging, it was certain helping people think about their life and where they wanted to be--young adults, thing about their life and where they wanted to be. I mean, actually we were all about the same age. I'm gonna tell you the truth because this was, you know, more of a school where people came back to school. The--when we moved back here, my husband [Franklin Biggins] finished law school [Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C.] whatever January, whatever the date was. When he, by the time he got home from his last exam, we were packed and ready to drive back to Atlanta [Georgia]. It was during the, you know, the, you probably don't remember this but, it was during an extreme gas shortage. My father [Andrew Williams] was very concerned about, you know, where will you buy gas? Because we were gonna drive from Washington [D.C.] to Greensboro [North Carolina], spend the night, and then Greensboro on back to Atlanta. I mean we had a plan. We were coming home; coming back to Atlanta. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) this was, what was this, mid-'70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: This would have been-- Speaker 1: Like '70 [1970]--? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974] maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], '74 [1974]. Seventy--yeah, '74 [1974], '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So here we are--yeah, '74 [1974]. Here we are-- Speaker 1: There was a gas shortage? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Prices weren't that bad. Speaker 2: Oh, prices weren't bad. Speaker 1: It was just that there was not-- Speaker 2: But, there was a huge gra- a huge gas shortage. Speaker 1: It was a scare. Speaker 2: I mean, really bad scare. Speaker 1: Really bad scare. Story_ID: 326813 Speaker 1: So, we're driving back to--and we have two cars, I mean, you know, this is, you know, we have two cars that we're driving back, back, back to Atlanta [Georgia]. And, so, you know, Franklin [Franklin Biggins] and I, you know, I've got--I'm in one car with the baby, he's in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he's in another-- Speaker 1: --another car. And, we're just, you know, trailing back and went to Greensboro, North Carolina and spent the night. My father [Andrew Williams] was so happy to see us. I mean, I just, you know, no cell phones. There's no way we were, you know, talking back and forth. I mean, he just had to-- Speaker 2: And no stopping and using pay phones along the way. Speaker 1: Thank you. He just had to stop--wait for us to get there. And, and we, so we moved back to Atlanta and my husband went to work for, as a lawyer for the State of Georgia attorney general's office. And, I was going to stay home with my sweet baby. She was such a sweet child. However, it was driving me nuts. I'll be very honest with you. For some reason, I wish I could say that some place in my life that I had been a good stay at home mom. But, I just cannot say that. I--it just, you know, I think Dawn [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins] and I would get up and Franklin would not be dressed. We would be out the door going someplace. You know, and then he'd come home from work and we'd still be out, you know. I would've, you know, we, we did all kinds of things, you know. The--we discovered, you know, interesting things to do with children and, I mean, we discovered, we, we just went, you know. Speaker 2: So, you created a job, huh, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I created a job. I created a job. And, then I decided that I actually was not good entertainment for my daughter. That she needed to, to interact with, you know, you know, people her age. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, do things with people her age. And, then I, then, or maybe I, maybe what I was doing was justifying why I thought I needed to go back to work. But, I decided to really carefully think about what I was going to do next. I talked to a lot of people. I--and the one person that I talked with, this is, Shirley Barber James [HistoryMaker Shirley James] was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] with me. She married a guy, [HistoryMaker] Robert James, who was at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Robert James went on to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for an M.B.A. at Harvard and, you know, which was wonderful. And, went to work for what was then C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia]. So, in this conversation with different people about careers and what were they doing, and whether or not they enjoyed their life, Robert said to me, "Why don't you think about banking?" I know nothing about banking. I know nothing about banking. He said, "Banks have management training programs." And, what they want to do is hire people that are, you know, intelligent, that have, you know, broad interests, and basically they teach you, you know, a lot of things about, you know, you know, becoming a banker. So, I applied at C&S Bank. A guy by the name of Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard] interviewed me. He was the head of the management training program. I thought I was going down there and have a little interview. I didn't know I was gonna be down there all day. And, then went back the next day. And, then he hired me. I mean, I'm like, wow. They made a job offer. I'm like, oh, now this is really interesting. Story_ID: 326814 Speaker 1: --Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and if you would state your name, spell it for us, and give it, give us today's date, and our location. Speaker 2: What is today's date? The (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) June 19th. Speaker 2: --19th. Okay, so, and hi. Its Veronica Biggins and actually Jacqueline Veronica Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins], J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, Veronica, V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A, Biggins, B as in boy, I-G-G-I-N-S. Today's date is June 19, 2006, and we're located in the Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.] office in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 326815 Speaker 1: When you ended your last interview, you were actually talking about being hired with the bank. And, never having even thought about, you know, getting into banking. So, can you talk about--there was a man named, I think, Pat-- Speaker 2: Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard], um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: That, you know, had interviewed-- Speaker 2: Who hired me. Right. And, you know, decided to, I think he decided to take a chance maybe, you know because I was, you know, the question is what did I--what financial background did I have to become a banker? But, it was a good interview. We went through, at that time and now, people are back at doing this, which is the long involved, talk to a lot of different people, interviews. And, he, you know, he made the offer and, you know, here I am. So--or, here I was at that point in time in my life. And, it was interesting how I entered the management training program, but I probably, I probably was the oldest person they hired because I was not straight out of college. Obviously, I'd been working for a while and had a baby. Speaker 1: So, now, how old was your daughter at this point, Dawn [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. So, she would have been probably right at one years old, you know. And, I think initially, I thought I was gonna stay home. But, that didn't last long because we were out and about. Speaker 1: That's what you said, you were always going places and things like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, when you--so, what does your husband [Franklin Biggins] think of this, you know? And, what--and I'd like you also to put it in context because this is the sort of mid-'70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: That's right. It was, it was the mid-'70s [1970s], I think I was maybe one of the, one of kind of a handful of African American management trainees. I--maybe there were five or six or something like that. And, it was, it was a very interesting time. And, in that, you have to know a little bit about the history of C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia], which was one of the first banks in America to bank women at--without your husband. I mean, you personally could have an account, and African Americans in Savannah, Georgia. It's really interesting. It's, it's--I did not know the history then; found out that history. I went back, did some work on some--something totally unrelated and discovered this interesting history. Very deeply involved in the Atlanta [Georgia] community. Deeply involved in the Georgia community, maybe I should say that versus just Atlanta. They, they were very--it's interesting, I mean, I--I remember my very first performance appraisal, which was a very good performance appraisal, excellent actually. But, the manager made a mistake, he said to me, "Well, you, you're absolutely one of the best, you know, black management trainees we have." And, I said, "Well, you know, my goal was to be one of the best." And, you kind of put it in some context here not just being, you know, one of the best. And, I think I helped reframe his thinking at that point in time. After a short period of time with the, with the bank, first starting in the downtown office, they sent me out to Marietta, Georgia. All right now, Marietta, Georgia now is people know the city. They know a lot about it. When I went out there, I was the only person of color in that bank; of any color (laughter), in that--and it was, at the time, you know, just it was still way out. I mean, it was still considered a separate city. Now, when people say, they'll say they're from Atlanta, they could be from Marietta. But that was not the context then. My first week, I would say was interesting out there. Here I am, the assistant branch manager. People would walk in one door and out the back door and, you know, kind of looking at me as they made this trip through the bank. Story_ID: 326816 Speaker 1: We had some really strange things happen, to put it mildly. I mean, they had--I'll give you a great example. You know, here, a financial institution, they had some guy who came through the drive-in window with a check that, you know, he didn't bank with C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia]. He had nothing that in any way connected him to us, and they refused to cash the check. So, he's out there pitching a fit. And, the teller got the bright idea, oh, have we got something for you. You should go and talk to our assistant branch manager. So, this guy then comes in. He rounds the corner. And, he goes, you know, kind of--then, you know, he proceeded to--you know, he hands me this check. And, I guess, he thought, well (laughter), I'm sure she'll approve it. So, I declined the check. He talked about me, my mama, my father (laughter), my grandparents. I mean, if you get the context of, I mean, you know, he really plowed in, and to say it was ugly is an understatement. It's interesting, though, when he, he was walking to leave, you know, God works in mysterious ways. He kicked a swinging door open and stepped up to it and that door swang back and hit him in the mouth. And, I hate to say it, but it knocked his front tooth out. So, here we have a tooth on the floor. We, you know, he's called my race into context, you know. He's done all this stuff and everybody's like, oh my God. And, then, what did he do? His finest moment in life. He picked that tooth up and walked out the door. And, everybody in the branch is going, oh. It's interesting, they never commented on his tooth. And, all these, all these people in the branch said, "We're so sorry he talked to you like that." Which I thought, isn't this interesting. Because, all, all these people who thought I was the strangest thing they'd ever seen in their life. In that moment, I think came to a a-ha moment about life, which is, you know, really, it was, it was--anyway, lots of things like that went on out there. But, it's interesting when I left that branch, I guarantee you that the majority of the customers came through to say thank you. They were sorry to see me go, which was really interesting. But, we had all, you know, it was a community and slowly but surely, you know, they came to accept that I was their banker; they were gonna have to talk to me. They had financial needs, we had money, you know, money always helps, I guess, when, you know, when somebody really decides they need to talk to you. Then I moved back down to the corporate office. Speaker 2: Now, tell me, were you living in Atlanta [Georgia] commuting to Marietta [Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness, yes. I was the only person in the world on the highway headed to Marietta, Georgia (laughter). Speaker 2: And, how far-- Speaker 1: Everybody else was headed into Atlanta. Oh, I don't know, like maybe twenty miles. I mean, it was, you know, you know then, you know, now people do this and it's a regular--nobody says a word about it. But, it was quite a trip, you know. There was, it was, you know, it was like going to a different world every day. Speaker 2: So, and your daughter [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins], who's taking care of her at this point? Speaker 1: Well, that's--we had, first of all, it's always good to have a good husband, you know, somebody who even in then was pretty liberated about, you know, dropping and picking up and all those kinds of things. So, I mean, he [Franklin Biggins] was good about that. We had, we had great, kind of a downtown daycare center that was wonderful. And, then, you know, after a period of time, we were, we were able to afford somebody to come in and help out. So, that, that made a big difference. Speaker 2: Now, he was working at the state's attorney--? Speaker 1: Right, he was at (unclear)--attorney general's office-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: That's exactly right, yeah. Story_ID: 326817 Speaker 1: Put this, though, in some context about banking here in Georgia. What kind--you know, I know in other places it's--was Georgia a banking, a branch banking state? Speaker 2: You know what, that, that--very good question because, when I went to Marietta, Georgia, that was a--even though part of the C&S [Citizens and Southern Corporation] umbrella, it was a separate bank. You know, separate president out there. They--peo- the, the--like a C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] owned a percent of a number of banks, which gave them kind of statewide banking. But, you know, the State of Georgia did not have--you couldn't bank across county lines. So, that, you're right, that, that was a very complicated time for banking here, you know. Speaker 1: And, what was, you know, you were, this was still mid-'70s [1970s], you know blacks were just sort of moving into Corporate America in the late '60s [1960s], you know, '70s [1970s] in some numbers and women are also. So of this, in this management training program that you participated in, what were the, were you the only one, or was there, you know (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were like five or six of us. And, in the management training program at that point in time. Speaker 1: Out of how many? Speaker 2: Oh, you know what, I'm sorry, I don't remember. But, there were a lot of management trainees, you know, that--but, they, you know, I was in that kind of the beginning group. There was a guy from, actually a guy from Savanah, Georgia, by the name of [HistoryMaker] Robert James, was one of the first people hired in that, in the branch management, the bank management training program. Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] M.B.A., you know, real sharp guy. He's actually the one who first talked to me about going into banking, so. Now he's president of a bank [Carver State Bank] in Savannah, Georgia, so. But, that was his beginning roots right there. And, he must have been, he must have been one of the very first, you know, in that first class. Speaker 1: Now, was there any reaction to you as a woman, at that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what-- Speaker 1: --and also a woman with-- Speaker 2: I think initially, now this is my personal feeling. I think the reaction was more with me being black than a woman, to be honest with you. I don't think people said, there's a woman who's black, you know, you know, here's a black person. So, you know, I think I had two things. At some point it became being a, you know, the fact that I was black and a woman. But, I think, initially, it was color. I mean, lots of people challenged me on a lot of things. I remember, probably one of my best learning experiences is--oh, God, who actually in the end became a friend. So, this is a--he dropped this very complicated loan application on my desk and said, you know, "I'm going out to lunch when I get back I need to have this done." I read through this thing and thought to myself, I don't have a clue how to do this. But, you know, tenacity is everything. I asked everybody in the world. I called everybody I could call. I got lots of information, and when he came back from lunch, it was done. We had that down to a T. And, I think he was, I think that he just knew it was just no way that I would figure this out; just no way. I mean, there was, there were--this is one of the--it was complicated enough that somebody a lot more senior than I should've been, you know, the person that he handed it to. And, you know, it, it went a long way. 'Cause I was determined. I was very determined. Story_ID: 326818 Speaker 1: You had been really doing counselling, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So, what were, in the counselling arena did prepare you for banking? Or, was it, I also read that you thought that the, you know, the banking industry--you know, this particular bank had a great training program [management training program]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm, um-hm. And, and why because of [HistoryMaker] Robert James, I knew about the training program and what they did. But, I think, the ability--you know, psychology teaches you to listen to people, and, and think carefully about what they're doing. In banking, you got to listen to people. I mean, what are you there for? A bank is there to make the community a better place. And to provide the financial wherewithal for people, indeed, to be a part of, you know, a better community. And, part of the C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia], kind of, value system, was, you know, the, the improvement of whatever community they were located in. That indeed that community could be a better place. The bank was the first to open a branch in the black community here. That branch was opened, what was then, I've forgotten what the name of the road--street now is, but it was--oh, is it still Bankhead [Atlanta, Georgia]? I think they may have changed the name. But, it was opened in Bankhead. The very first branch of a bank, major bank, opened in a black community. That was major. I mean, those kinds of things are what said to me, this organization has a potential for being good. It's interesting, they had Hale Woodruff, you know, kind of turn of the century, master artist. They commissioned him to do paintings for that branch. Which were, I mean, if you go, you know, Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], you know, Hale Woodruff, I mean, he's there. I mean, so, you know, you had that going on. And, so, how in the world--but, the--it's interesting the guy who was the property management person also happened to be an avid art historian. And, knew something about the Atlanta [Georgia]--white guy, but he knew something about the Atlanta university system [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], knew that Hale Woodruff had been there. When I left the bank, they gave me that painting as a parting gift. I mean, which is, you know, what can I say? I mean, it just made the--it was just great. Story_ID: 326819 Speaker 1: Tell me, where were you living in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time? Speaker 2: Let me think. We lived, where were we living? We lived by--at that time we were living in Niskey Lake, which is southwest Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Not southeast then? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, southwest Atlanta, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. And, so you're a young married, you know, couple. You have been a student here. And, I'm wondering how it was to be sort of a young professional working fam- you know, couple or family. Speaker 2: Of course, according to my husband [Franklin Biggins], if you didn't go to school here or you weren't born, either born or went to school here, you know, forget, you know, Atlanta, Georgia does not embrace you in any way. Speaker 1: But you went to school here. Speaker 2: I know, that's why it was so good. We had lots of friends. I mean, I can't tell you the friends that I had here, and still have. And, you know what, I think it, it helped us as far as just, you know, really great networks and people--like the guy that I mentioned to you, [HistoryMaker] Robert James, his wife [HistoryMaker Shirley James] was my classmate. So, we, you know, we both were, you know, young professionals coming along together. His first born child is my godchild. So, you know, really, you know, those deep connections. You know, a lot of people who grew-up here went to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. And, you know, lived--came back here to live and we all, we, we, we had deep to connections then, and continue to have those connections. You know, I found, I think--and I still think Atlanta's a great place for, you know, professionals of color to be, you know, deeply involved. Anybody that's willing to put in the time and energy. Now, you got--in this city the demand is, you got to not only be good at your profession but, you also had to be good at being a part of the community and trying to make the community a better place. You got to be good at both for this community to really embrace you. Story_ID: 326820 Speaker 1: Let's go back. I would like to sort of trace, you know, your twenty years at the bank and your sort of movement through there. Because I would assume that when you got started, were you thinking you would have a twenty-year career? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, no. But, you know what, remember back then, people went to work for a company, you know. Now days, I mean, my young daughter has probably worked for three different companies. You know, I, you know, I had, I mean, who, who would've ever know. I mean, that you would--it was just the expectation, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In most com- most people who work for C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] had been there forever. Speaker 1: Now how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it's the model. Speaker 1: Now how large--I'm just wondering where C&S fit within-- Speaker 2: At the time, we were the largest bank in the State of Georgia, yeah. And, then, you know, went on--the rollup was C&S to, I've forgotten some of the other names in there. But then, NationsBank [NationsBank Corporation], and now Bank of America. And, I still, you know, I still have great friends. A matter of fact, the guy who's the, the chairman of NationsBank, Ken Lewis [Kenneth D. Lewis], know him well. The guy who's the, like number four person in the bank, African American guy, Milton Jones [Milton H. Jones, Jr.]; know him. I mean, great guy; know him very well. You know, so, a lot of friends still there that were there when I was there. So, they never left. I, you know, so they, you know, they're still there. Speaker 1: So, who was president of the bank at the time? Speaker 2: When I started? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Mills Lane [Mills B. Lane, Jr.]. And, how could I even hesitate on his name because he was, you know, probably known for being a lot more open in understanding that you had to bank all communities. Probably more so than a lot of other people would've known. He--kind of legendary around; grew-up in Savannah, Georgia where the bank started. One of my, you know, I guess maybe my, you know, when you first start at a management training program, you learn everything. You learn teller window, you learn everything as you--I mean, at that time. I think now it's changed. But, you learn the entire banking process. So, here I am learning to run a teller window. Now, this was, I must admit, my worst moment in life as far as banking career. So, this guy comes over to me, they hand--he hands me this check and I've been through orientation and I knew what Mills Lane look like, and I knew this guy in front of me was not Mills Lane. And, he had a Mills Lane check to be cashed. I said, "Sir," I said, "do you have any identification?" You know, so, and he tells me who he is and something else. I said, "Well, I can't cash this check," I said, "because I've seen a picture of Mills Lane, and you, you're not Mills Lane." He was his executive assistant. I mean, this guy was major in the bank. Next thing I knew, here's Mills Lane, talking about, "Well, you did the right thing," (laughter). So, anyway, met Mills Lane. You know, at that time the organization was small enough that people got to know you. And, I started in kind of the main office and got to know a lot of people. I think I was promoted to, actually I was promoted to officer while out at Marietta [Georgia]. My first--I was promoted to an officer at the bank. So, I had been here, year and, been there year and a half when I was promoted to, to an officer. But, let me tell you seriously, I worked very hard. It's not like anybody gave me anything. I really worked hard for that promo- first promotion. It moved back--I moved back downtown to take, what was my next job? Oh, I worked in what was then called branch administration, which you got to travel the whole state. And, work with all the various branches on, on lots of different issues and things that come up at the branch about how to better run the branch. And, so, that was really interesting. And, then from there I went into the human resource area. So, if you think about it, you know, I got to know the organization. But, now I'm kind of back at what I do best, which was, you know, the psychology part of this. Going into human resources was, you know, some people said, "Oh, I can't believe you're gonna leave a line side." But, it's, you know, it was my comfort level was, you know, what I knew I did best was in a human resource function. Story_ID: 326821 Speaker 1: I did a number of roles within human resources before then becoming the head of human resources for the organization [Citizens and Southern Corporation]. Speaker 2: Now, why do you say that, that was what you were best at? Describe--tell me about that. Was, I mean because really sort of managing people is, you know, is the same thing as sort of human--you know, managing the bank (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that's true. That is true. That is true. And, I did a number of things, managing people within the, the line management of the bank, before the--going into the human resource function. At C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia], when you looked at the people that ran human resources, or had been through the human resource function, they then had come out and gone into other major roles in the organization. So, I, I had also looked at that, as far as a track is concerned and thinking about what to do next. But I also felt, you know, human resource function, I mean, you can look at, you know, who is the organization hiring, you know, what are the skills and competences that are--that people are looking for? You know, got deeply involved in the whole assessment process of, you know, how people are assessed and, and how managers are taught to assess people. You know, that whole thing, went to--learned change management, which is really interesting. Because today people talk about change management, I mean, it's like the new competency. You know, I learned change management back in the '80s [1980s]. So, you know, the guy who headed human resource at that time, was definitely, you know, very much a forward thinking person. Yeah. Speaker 2: And, so what was the bank trying to do really in terms of its human resource function? And, you know, and, what were some of the, you know, the assessment tests that you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --speak of? Was it Myers-Briggs [Myers-Briggs Type Indicator]? I mean, what--? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean, we certainly tried a little bit of everything-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --including Myers-Briggs. But, you know, the bank, we, you know, at that time if you thing about it, affirmative action is, is major. You know, the organizations are really, you know, focusing on affirmative action from a number counting standpoint. And, there was a definite focus on looking at every department within the bank. And, you know, what was the representation and, you know, and if there was no representation, what does that mean? I went to visit with a guy who headed, at that time, what was the considered the international bank. And, so, I was like, you know, you have zeros here which are not--we can't defend zeros and we really need to think about what we're gonna do. And, he told me that he had not met many black folks who spend anytime overseas. I went, "Really?" I said, "Well, now you met me." And, I have, and I said, "And, I know a lot of other people so let's, you know, let's not, let's not get stuck on stupid here. Let's really think about, you know, what are the competencies?" And, then I said, "And, the other questions I would ask you is of--so, you're gonna tell me that everyone that works in the department right now, spent time overseas?" I said, "If you can tell me that and we can go back a verify that, then guess what, that'll become a competency. But, if not, it's not a competency." So, we got through that. I think what gave--I had, I think I had great creditability in the organization from the standpoint of, I knew basic banking. I mean, I had, you know, kind of gone through the, you know, been tested in the fire waters, had been, you know, I ran, little things. I mean, talking about civil leadership. I ran the United Way [United Way Worldwide] campaign in the bank once--one year where we raised more money. And, I think we had 99.9 percent of every person in that bank gave to United Way that year. Those kinds of thing, it's interesting, made a difference with your credibility in the organization. You know, and had gone through enough of the test of, you know, I think that in, just, I mean, I went through a lot of tests, you know, in this whole process. You know like, as you travel to some of the smaller banks throughout the state, and you know, they were out there having all types of problems. And, you know, then I'd show up and they'd go, "Oh, my God, now we're really in trouble." But, you know, slowly but surely. I mean, you do build a base of knowledge that people gain respect that you knew what you were talking about. That made a difference. It really did. Speaker 2: So you were head of human resources for how long? Speaker 1: Let me think. Goodness. I guess, that was leading into the acquisition of--by what was then NCNB [North Carolina National Bank Corporation]-- Speaker 2: And, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So probably four or five years. Speaker 2: Four or five years. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, we're talking about-- Speaker 1: Maybe five or six years, now that I think about it. Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: I'd have to go back and take a look at that. Speaker 2: Or was-- Speaker 1: That, that would've been leading into the '90s [1990s]. Into-- Speaker 2: Nineties [1990s], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that would've been leading up, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 326822 Speaker 1: I would like to just sort of touch upon the whole period of the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, if we could (unclear). And, if you can talk about sort of critical things that happened, you know, well, I want three different areas. But, let's talk about critical things that happened in the banking industry in the '80s [1980s], you know. Because there's been, you know, we're now, you know, in the 2000s, where there's been tremendous consolidation, you know. Speaker 2: And, oh boy, has there ever. And, that consolidation actually started in the '80s [1980s]. If you'd look back at what was then the kind of, what they consider the 5 percenter banks and, you know, where you only own a certain percent of a bank. The Georgia laws changed, and we were able to rollup to become one bank versus all these individual banks. That's why we started working on the whole change management competencies because then you're requiring these organizations you had to think about. Even though they already had the C&S [Citizens and Southern Corporation] label on them, they weren't true C&S banks from the standpoint of, you know, this, they, you know, they, they'd operated independently, you know. Separate president, you know, separate board of directors, and now they're rolling up into one president, you know, one board of directors. All those, you know, small boards had to go away. You know, the communities, you know, had, you know, were concerned about, what does this mean? Do we have to go to Atlanta [Georgia] now if we want something? All of those kinds of things had to be managed through. And, that, you know, that required, you know, time, energy, on everyone's behalf to really say that this bank is for the entire state. It's not just, you know, an Atlanta bank. You know, now you hear about the New York [New York] banks, you know, the, you know, do I have to go to New York? There was the same concept at that point in time. And, then, so, not only--so, then you had the first rollup within the state. Then you had the ability to step outside of the state and acquire other banks. We acquired a bank in the South Carolina--the, what was called C&S South Carolina [Citizens and Southern National Bank of South Carolina], which was a totally separate bank. Went to Florida and acquired, oh my goodness, I'm sorry, I don't remember the name of the bank. But, we acquired a bank in Florida [Landmark Banking Corporation]. And, during this period of time, I mean, literally, I'm travelling to the various states. You know, working with the whole rollup as far as employees. What does this mean? How do we integrate, you know, the employees into, to our bank? You had the Community Reinvestment Act [Community Reinvestment Act of 1977], or you still have. Which said, you know what I mean, what is the broader community thinking about? You haven't, have you indeed benefited the entire community? You know, deeply involved in those kinds of issues, what happens. You know, making sure that we were number one. Doing the kinds of things we should be doing. And, number two, you know, if not, what is it that we should be doing? I spent a lot of time out--in--a great example in Florida with issues that came there when we were severely challenged as far as the Community Reinvestment Act. And, what does this mean? What should we be doing? You know, what kinds of things? Getting the right groups out to listen, you know, in the communities. You know, taking the president to communities that I guarantee, community groups that I guarantee you they'd never sat down with before to listen and to figure out, now what is this, how does this, what does this translate to? What do we need to do as far as a financial institution now that we--I mean, what is it, what is the message here? And, you know, what were the messages that we had not been fair, and these are, you know--you know, where we acquiring. There was a, and this was--I think I still have the original cartoon that was done in the--and this was actually in the Atlanta paper, that showed, you know, a black couple talking to a mortgage lending officer and, you know, they were, you know, the answer basically was no. So what does this mean? I mean, what does it mean for us as an organization? What do we change in order to have fair lending policies? There were--believe me, I'm probably just skimming the surface, surface here because it, it was, it was complex. I mean, the, you know, the mortgage folks had to understand, you can't do this. You know, you cannot do this. You can't require, you know, something of one that you're not requiring of all. Now, can require that, but you've got to require it of everybody. So, let's decide, you know, what you gonna do here. Story_ID: 326823 Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about, you know, how, how many claims or were there, you know, perceptions that C&S [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] was--were there claims against it for redlining, you know? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not, let me, that's a good question, whether or not we had specific claims. It was--the claim was against banking industry in the South that, in fact, certain communities were not getting loans at all. And, you know, one of 'em, a great example was Grant Park [Atlanta, Georgia]. And, and it's interesting because people will tell you today, my husband [Franklin Biggins] and I probably got the first loan in Grant Park. And, why? Because I was, you know, I said, "Well, you know, let's find out. Let's find out. We're gonna apply for a loan here and find out what's going on." Now, people will say, "Well, honey, you were at that bank. What were they gonna do? They weren't gonna turn you down." But, it opened the door for them now considering in-town lending in a poor community that was, you know, not, you know, that had a lot of developing to do. And, this was Grant Park in-town community, run--going down. I don't know if you, you know, great example, like Ansley Park [Atlanta, Georgia] now 'cause we live in Ansley Park, people are taking what had been a declining neighborhood and really lifted it up. That's exactly what happened in Grant Park. Then, it opened the door for other people, you know, to move into Grant Park and get loans. Because I mean, after all, they're gonna lend it to us, they can't turn other people down. They--the, in southwest Atlanta, I mean, people will tell you, they had a hard time walking in the bank and getting, getting loans without having to mortgage their first child kind of thing. But, in the same breath, having that branch out in Bankhead [Atlanta, Georgia] had, you know, with, you know, having--I mean, we really did aggressively hire, hiring of, you know, people of color to come in to, you know, help bring about, you know, a fairness to the process. Because if you walk in a bank and you don't see somebody that looks like yourself, you do start questioning. And, so, to open it up, people start, that then folks could ask questions. You know, figure out what is the process. I remember when I was out at Marietta [Georgia], probably one of my more poignant moments was this older black gentlemen came in, ah, I mean, he was just grand; he was such a handsome man. And, you can, I mean, you could, this guy had worked on the railroads all of this life and he had this money he wanted to deposit. So, he opened this up and he laid it out on my desk. It's all gold coin. And, I said, "Sir." I said, "You cannot just deposit that money." He said, "I knew you were gonna be just like the rest of 'em." He said, "Now, here I'm coming to you," you know, black woman, you know. And, I said--I had to have him bring his daughter. I said, "It has nothing to do with your money." It was worth so much more. If he had just deposited that money, he would've gotten dollar for dollar. A five dollar gold piece, would've been five dollars in his account. That five dollar gold piece was probably worth, five thousand dollars. I mean, so, I had to, I had to--it, it took a, we had to--it took a while. I mean, but he thought I was rejecting his money. And because that's what, you know, he'd had a hard time opening just a regular account there before. In the end, we got this guy who specializes in old coin. He had this wealth of money and didn't even know it. So what we opened for him was a safety deposit box. So he could put that money in the safety deposit box. And, as he needed it, then his family understood as he needed money, he could then, you know-- Speaker 1: Cash (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sell the coins, and it had--but, it was--and I guarantee you, if he had taken it to one of those tellers, he would've gotten dollar for dollar. I mean, it--anyway. Great, I mean this was, you know. But, I, I'm digressing. I mean, but that was a moment that--I think that, you know, as a bank and I, you know, some, some things are just fortunate, I guess. I mean, C&S Bank really did work on trying to do what's right. But, you know, in that whole process it's not like every manager in there was working on doing right. I mean, you know, by any stretch of the imagination, they weren't. Story_ID: 326824 Speaker 1: But, we were--we fired a couple of folks, you know. The discrimination cases, we had to, you know, sometimes you had to have a public hanging to let the entire company know you're serious. So, we had a couple of public hangings. We did the same thing over sexual harassment. Some guy thought, oh, please. This is--it's no big deal, blah, blah, blah, I said, "It is a big deal and you just lost your job over it." I mean, you know, sometimes you just, yeah, a statement, you know, a public hanging and maybe that's a poor choice of words to say that. But, it did the trick. People got the message. This is unacceptable in this corporation. Speaker 2: That it wasn't going to be tolerated. Speaker 1: Not gonna be tolerated, at all. Speaker 2: Now, how long was Miles, was he still head of the bank? Speaker 1: Mills B. Lane [Mills B. Lane, Jr.]. Speaker 2: I mean Mills B. Lane. Speaker 1: He was there maybe five years or so after I got there. And, then Dick Kattel [Richard Kattel] came in and had, they had very semi- I mean, the, yeah, he was not a good, you know, he was just not the best leader. And, there were lots of problems and Fortune magazine showed a picture of C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] with blood running out its front door on the front cover. I mean, it was like the worst day in the life of the, of the corporation [Citizens and Southern Corporation]. Speaker 2: Now, why was that? Speaker 1: Just, he bad--well, bad lending, and particularly related to Hilton Head. We owned Hilton Head Island [South Carolina]. And, it went, it went into total bankruptcy; real estate lending. Let me tell you, go back, oh, my God. Now--we could've, my husband [Franklin Biggins] and I could've bought a house in Hinton Head Island then for fifty, sixty thousand dollars 'cause they offered it to the office--offered these houses to the officers of the bank first. Of course, we couldn't afford it at that time. That would've been--a second home. Are you nuts? (Laughter) We can't afford the one we've got. It, it was a mess, believe me. It was--real estate market caved. The bank had a lot of money tied up in real estate. It was awful. Our stock went down to three and four dollars a share. Speaker 2: So, was that because they were just--during--it was a lot of respective, or just lending (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Real, real estate-- Speaker 2: --with, with not many (unclear)? Speaker 1: --the real estate market caved. It just caved. I mean, I, you got to, I mean, this was terrible, absolutely terrible. And, so, then, you know, the board of directors removed Dick Kattel, and Bennett Brown [Bennett A. Brown] came in. And, Bennett Brown was just, he was an old, not old, he wasn't old at the time. But, a southern gentlemen in every step of the way of being a southern gentlemen. And, he did a great job of leading the bank. He really did; great job. Story_ID: 326825 Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about this change management? You know, what the theory was and, you know, and how, how that got implemented or how you implemented it? Speaker 2: Yeah because it's--I'm always interested now when I interview people and they talk about, you know, they have change management skills. Like it's something new, you know. And, it is new out there for people to talk about. But, the question--we're doing mergers and acquisitions, you know, we're out there acquiring companies. And, the question is, you know--the financials are always were, you know. You can look at the numbers. Accountants can look at the numbers. But, the questions are the people, you know, the culture. You know, how we're gonna make this, you know, bring it together and make it work as one. And therein were the complicated issues. And, so, we went through under a guy who headed human resources [at Citizens and Southern Corporation] at the time. Who I think was probably one of the best forward thinkers in, you know, complex human resource issues. A guy by the name of Harry Garrett [Harry L. Garrett], who--we, we were taking classes at night on change management and how to help an organization think through complex change issues. And, you know, and most of those change issues are people issues. Understanding that culture. Understanding, you know, the culture that you were trying to bring them into. You know, understanding, you know, who, who is in charge? You--what are the issues? You know, if you look at benefits, and you know, our benefits versus their benefits. And, you know, how do you combine all these things and come up with, you know, one standard program? If you look at Bank of America today, they grew through, through, you know, acquisitions, you know. Speaker 1: So, how--what made it successful then? What were the steps to make, you know, the merging together, you know, acquiring of assets successful, from a people standpoint? Speaker 2: You know, when you look at, you know, being able to sort through and clearly communicate who's gonna be in what job. Because people, when you're being acquired, everyone presumes, I'm gonna lose my job. The good people leave early. They're the first ones out of the door. So, you want to identify, who are the good people, communicate with them that you want them to stay. What specifically you want them to do. Get them involved in the process so that they're helping think through and become part of, you know, that, that organizational process of, of moving forward. The--I remember back when--this is when the NCNB [North Carolina National Bank Corporation] acquired C&S Bank [C&S/Sovran Corporation]. This was a--one of the bigger acquisitions that occurred at that time in America from a financial standpoint. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: So, that must--it was early '90s [1990s]. And, Hugh McColl [Hugh L. McColl, Jr.] sent out trains and said, "You're either on it or you're not. If you're not, you need to leave now." People got the message. Clarity of communication. The change management requires clarity. You can't be, you can't be in the corporate speak. You got to be in clearly speaking to people. You need to have people out there that are delivering consistent messages every day. You know, you can't be in, you know, mixed message screw it up every time. You have got to be, you know, the clarity of the message and the consistency of the message. And, also the vision, you know. How do you communicate the vision of where we're going and then the values? You know corporations today get mixed up on values. Values are very important to people. People wanna know, what kind of company am I joining? Is this an ethical organization? Is this a place that I wanna be a part of? How do you communicate that and let people know? So, over communications is fine, just communicate, communicate, communicate. But, you've got to be, you know, have some clarity around what you're communicating; where you're going; how do you intend to get there? And then, what is my personal role? You know, people wanna know, you know, what is it you want me to do personally? And, then people can engage and move forward. Speaker 1: And, now, how large is the human resources area at this point, you know at--? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. You know, we were, we were big. I mean, we did, it was, you know, you know, for the State of Georgia, every, every town had a person who would've been the manager of human resources in hiring, managing hiring, et cetera for that particular area. Management training came under, you know, that, you know, that was, you know, we did the management training; all the hiring for the organization; training, both executive training. And, matter of fact, one of things that I did while there was develop an executive training program where, you know, we took senior executives now, not the management training. These are senior executive that had high potential and, you know, help them work as--work more effective as a team; put them, put them through combat training almost, you know. Story_ID: 326826 Speaker 1: Were there failed attempts during the time that you were there? I mean, things that didn't work or, you know, was pretty much in the banking world things were sort of tried and true when you try them. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I remember, well, I'll give two things. And these are things today are just concerned no-brainers. All right, "So, guys, I think it's a good idea if we take the company non-smoking." Are you nuts? Are you nuts? The guy who was asking me this was smoking a cigar at the time. Are you crazy? We're not going non-smoking. You know, this is nuts. And, but, it's interesting, we had a person die from cancer; smoker. "Well, Veronica [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins] maybe we should talk about this a little more." This was a very senior person. "Maybe we should talk about this a little more." And, then, so we did. We went through--it was complex. I mean, we were banking the tobacco industry, you know, the--we were put on notice, "If you do this, we're gonna," you know, "we're moving our accounts," blah, blah, blah. Then we had, and it's interesting because it was my direct boss; lung cancer, avid smoker. All of sudden it became even more important that we consider this not--going non-smoking. And, we took the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] non-smoking. I can't rem- we took the entire thing. You couldn't--you can even smoke in--you couldn't smoke at a branch. You couldn't even walk in smoking. All--he died a month later from cancer. I mean, it was, it was, it was terrible. It was really bad. But, you know, we got it done. Speaker 1: How long did it take to get that done? Speaker 2: Oh, it took, two years I'm sure, or, if not more. You know, it took a long time. It really did. Now, the maternity policy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did the, I'm sorry, just one other thing. Did--what happened with your banking clients, the tobacco--? Speaker 2: Well, you know what, we had people protest big time. I mean, you know, complaining to the managers, you know, people that were used to coming in there with cigarettes. I mean, we, we got all kinds of complaints. And, yeah, the tobacco folks closed their accounts and moved them. But now, guess what? You know, it's, its common now. But, we, we did it before it was common. You know, we did it before everybody decided that non-smoking was a good idea. I mean, we, we did it because it was, it was indeed the right thing to do. So, you know, it's--but, we had to have some, some, you know--then Bennett Brown [Bennett A. Brown] died from lung cancer. You know, the pres--the chairman, the president of the bank died from lung cancer. It was--every, everybody smoked. I think I was the only person--I was never a smoker. I grew up in a family who didn't smoke, so, you know, it was--we had a number of people die. It was very bad. And, I guarantee you, direct, direct from cigarette smoking. Speaker 1: So, that was--well, people started believing you after he died, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you said the other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, remember my, my direct boss died. It was a month--I mean, we got that policy done, you know. We got that policy through. Speaker 1: Okay. But, you're saying your direct boss, then the president of the bank? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: The chairman and president of the bank. Speaker 1: The bank was-- Speaker 2: This guy was-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --reported to him-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I reported to him, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 326827 Speaker 1: You said also the pregnant (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the maternity policy-- Speaker 1: --maternity policy. Speaker 2: That was one of my finer moments, because I was nine months pregnant when I did the presentation to the board of directors that we were gonna, you know, that this pregnancy policy, and you know, how, you know, that, you know, we had to treat women and why you just couldn't make a decision about a woman based on, you know, pregnancy and all of that stuff. And, they said, "Don't you have a little vested interest here?" I went, "I sure darn do," (laughter). But, you know, it was interesting, when I got pregnant, the women in the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] said, "So, you're giving up your career? You're gonna stop working?" I went, "Well, no." This is my second child [Kenzie Biggins], second child. They forgot I already had a baby [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins]. I mean, this was nothing new. But, anyway, everybody presumed. I was the first female officer to get pregnant. And, got promoted to senior vice president while pregnant. So, then every woman got pregnant. Everybody went, okay. Then, they all went out and out pregnant. The bank said, oh, this was a terrible example, terrible example. Speaker 1: Now what were the policies about leave at that time, you know, were-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, I mean, if you got pregnant--I don't remember all of who shot who but it was--I mean, bottom line, you had given up your job, you know. And, we moved it to be whatever the, the--I mean, we maintained a person's job, you know, as long as they, you know, came back in a certain period of time, we would maintain that specific job. You know, otherwise, they could come back to a--you know, they could come back, but it may be a different job that they were coming back to. Speaker 1: Wait, so you're saying, they basically gave up their job? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: So, you didn't have a maternity leave policy? Speaker 2: Not--we had, you had, you know, I mean, you could go out and have--I mean, you basically gave up our job. I mean, bottom line. Remember the pregnancy policy came about, what? I have to go back and remember the year. Speaker 1: I thought it was the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: It would, yeah, it would've been--well, let me think. She was born in, all right, so, let me think about this. Yeah, that would've been the '80s [1980s]. That's exactly right, yeah. Yep, yep, absolutely. Story_ID: 326828 Speaker 1: You never told me how large the human resources area was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness. We probably--I mean, there had to be a couple of hundred people, yeah. Because we had not only--you had, you know, payroll, and benefits, and training and development. You had, you know, hiring, you know, all those kinds of things, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What--did they incorporate at that time, you know, sort of, I call them, I don't wanna call frilly functions, but were--was there, you know--psychiatric counseling for people, you know, were there benefits? Speaker 2: We put in, we put in an employee assistance program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where if--where a person privately could go and get help when they needed help. And, it was, it was, I think it still exists today. It, it was well received by the organization [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; C&S/Sovran Corporation]. Speaker 1: Any other programs that you put in that would've been at that time considered innovative? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think non-smoking was kind of the, kind of the best (laughter). We, all right, so, we did the employee assistance program. I don't, I mean, I'm sure there were probably other things. That seems like it was a zillion years ago (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Years ago. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, it just seems like--and it act like it's a whole scheme of life, it wasn't. But, it just seem like it was so long ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I wanna know one thing also in terms of organizational, you know, you said that-- Speaker 2: We put in technology. I'm sorry, I just thought about this. Because when I started, I mean, everything was paper, paper and pencil basically. And, we put in a, you know, technology system to track people. And, eventually, we even, we got to the kind--the point of, you know, where you had a one sheet on yourself, where you knew, you know, the jobs that you had been in; the--what your salary had been each year. You can tell, you know, whether or not you're the person that indicated whether or not they were in, whether or not they were amenable to moving some place. And, it was innovative that you also got a copy of this. Remember that personnel--you know, you did have access to your personal files. Now, you know, that's pretty common now, that you have access to your permanent, your personal files. But, I mean, people didn't then. And, what we really did was put a sheet where it showed, tracked your, you know, performance appraisal report--you know, scores, and you know, the jobs that you had, and whether or not you said you would, you would move. And, if so, where. What types of jobs were you interested in. That was considered innovative at that time. Story_ID: 326829 Speaker 1: Now what about organizations that you were involved in? I'm specifically thinking banking organizations, or were you in--was the ELC [Executive Leadership Council] around at that-- Speaker 2: You know what, the ELC was. And, probably the big mistake was I didn't join. I--I remember, Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] guy, now retired (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Carl Ware? Speaker 2: Carl Ware came to me about this, and, you know, at the time, I mean, I--believe me, you know, we had so much going on, that the whole thought of stepping out to do something that wasn't directly involved in the banking industry, so now we're on my part, a mistake on my part. I should've joined. Great-- Speaker 1: Now, why do you say a mistake? I don't-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I should've joined. I should've joined. I should've joined. I mean, great networking process; would've, would've been even better then, as far as networking. And, I got so many friends today that belong. I chaired for the American Bankers Association. I chaired the human resource division, which was a great honor for, you know, all the banking, you know, big, small, and in between, I was the chair of the human resource division for two years. Which is--the rotating process is a two year chair and so, that was great. I remember the, the--we had a major event while there. And, I had Warren Bennis [Warren G. Bennis] as the keynote speaker, and it really, in San Francisco [California], it went really well. Speaker 1: Now, there was also--what was the minority, the black banking-- Speaker 2: Urban Bankers [National Association of Urban Bankers; Urban Financial Services Coalition]. Yeah, yep (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, (unclear). Okay. Speaker 2: Yep, Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, when did that get started? Speaker 2: You know what, I don't remember when it got stated. But, I definitely, you know, participated in the Urban Bankers-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, a matter fact, I think, I think every black officer in C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] participated in the Urban Bankers. Story_ID: 326830 Speaker 1: Now, during this time that you're head of human resources [for The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; C&S/Sovran Corporation], now first of all I wanna know, how are you judged? You know, line items, you know, line item functions, which you said, people were like, don't get out of that. 'Cause that's where a lot of African Americans-- Speaker 2: I know, yeah. And, you know, what, and I encourage people today to stay in a line job. Because, I mean, it's so much easier to, you know, the accountability is easier. But, you know, I think when you're--let's face it, when I was coming along, you know, you took a look at, you know, what are the things that can really help you move forward in the organization. And, that, that was, that was the track. I mean, without a doubt the track. Today, I'd say to my daughters [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins], don't do that. You know, stay on a line job, you know, you know, add to the bottom line of the corporation. Even though, and I wanna be clear because I think a human resource function in an organization, even Bank of America today, a human resource--the human resource function is a very valued function. And, a well-run human resource function in an organization could make the world of difference. So, I no, I in no way distract from that. Speaker 1: Now, what were you judged on then? Speaker 2: Well my, well, you know, each year we would set, you know, this strat- you know, strategically this is where the organization is headed. And, therefore, these are the things that we need to do. A great example was establishing the executive, the training program for executives. I mean, it was very time consuming. It took a lot of input for the entire organization. But, we needed something that brought in all these people from these different organizations that would bring them together in tight. So, that they could go through kind of a--something really complex together and know they could depend on each other, and get to know each other outside of all of a sudden we've got to work together. So, that's a great example of just, you know, helping. And, something that, you know, the organization--so, the question is, what adds value? It wasn't, it wasn't making sure everybody got paid every day, and you know, everybody got their benefit statements every, you know, when they needed them. That wasn't what I was judged on. I was really judged on, you know, the kind of the bigger complex, strategic, you know, issues related to the organization. And, you know, whether or not we had the right people in place. Whether or not we had the right talent in place. And, you know, helping managers think through, you know, if you had, you know, back then, you know, so we're gonna have to downsize. Well, what does this mean? How do you, how do you think through, you know, where is it that you're trying to be five years from now. So, what type of talent do you need to have in order to do that? Therefore, what people to you really need to keep, you know? So, your best friend doesn't qualify. Well, you know, best friend's got to go. Story_ID: 326831 Speaker 1: With NationsBank [NationsBank Corporation; Bank of America], the Foundation [NationsBank Foundation; Bank of America Foundation] was also part of human resources? Speaker 2: No, no. Totally separate. Speaker 1: Totally separate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Totally separate, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a totally different job. Totally different position. Speaker 1: That was when you became executive vice president of-- Speaker 2: No, I became executive vice president in heading human resources. Speaker 1: Sources. Okay. But, what-- Speaker 2: I was the first, I was the first African American and the first woman executive vice president with the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; C&S/Sovran Corporation], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, how many counterparts did you have around the country at that time? Speaker 2: There was a woman in California who-- Speaker 1: What was her name? Do you remember? Speaker 2: (Unclear). I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. That's okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And, then, and you got promoted to that position you said in the--wasn't it in the, was in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: It would've been in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s]. And, you held that position for ten years? Speaker 2: Now, let me think. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Til you left the bank. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Now, went I left bank, I was executive vice president, and-- Speaker 1: Of corporate relations? Speaker 2: Of cor- yeah, external, yeah, corporate relations. And, we did the foundation, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, but, so, so, you're saying did that incor- encompass though, you know-- Speaker 2: That, it wasn't, it wouldn't've been ten years, it was probably more like five or six years. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, then you went on to corporate relations? Or, was it 'cause sometimes the human resources function-- Speaker 2: No. Human resources, and then the last five, maybe five or six years of my time with the bank. I then became executive vice president heading, you know, the public affairs, foundation process for the, for the bank. And, this would've been right, all right, it, I went into that job the year before we were acquired by NCNB [North Carolina National Bank Corporation]. Because there were a lot of things we wanted to do community-wide. And, you know, to make sure that we were doing--we gave, we gave a lot of money away. But, we wanted to be strategic in where that money went. And be--make it a, make sure we could be accountable for it. Plus, it was a little different from just, you know, unfortunately, they just didn't give us money to give away. I mean, we had, like real estate as part of our portfolio. Things, you know, where people had left certain things within the bank that we then were the conduit for where it went. Speaker 1: You mean the trust? Like different-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay, trust accounts. Okay. Now, did you, was that a move that you wanted in terms of that, the last position that you held? You know, and how did that, you know, did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, but, I mean because I was so involved in the community anyway. And, I mean, it was a way that I, I mean, I just, it was a great, it was a fun job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was really a fun job. So, you know, going into that position and I, you know, at the time, I didn't realize we were going to acquired, remember this, you know. So, I didn't realize that we were getting ready to be acquired, nor did anyone there think we were gonna be acquired. And, we were, we were pretty big. I mean, nobody--we expected to be the acquirer, not the one being acquired. So, when I went into that role, it wasn't with the thought of, you know, we're gonna become a whole different organization. You know, it was the thought of, you know, the C&S Bank part, and you know, growing that, growing that div- growing that area. And, we had, I don't know, probably twenty-five, thirty people, you know, that were involved in that, you know. And, then in the whole corporate giving process throughout. But, by then, I mean, the, you know, lots of things had changed. So, I mean, you know, then we were acquired and all kinds of things happened, so. Story_ID: 326832 Speaker 1: So you were surprise by the merger [of C&S/Savron Corporation with North Carolina National Bank Corporation]. Now, my question is, is NationsBank [NationsBank Corporation; Bank of America] at this point a very difficult--a different, I'm sorry, different environment, you know, corporate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --environment than-- Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: --than, you know-- Speaker 2: It, it definitely was. Speaker 1: And, tell me how. 'Cause you, you know, you-- Speaker 2: We're no longer in charge. You know, when you're no longer in charge, you know, that, that's, that's a big change. We're no longer in charge. But in the same breath, you know, NationsBank, NCNB [North Carolina National Bank Corporation] then to become, you know, NationsBank had a great value on the community, on community reinvestment, those kinds of things. So, I went then onto head this, you know, foundation [NationsBank Foundation; Bank of America Foundation] group for, for Bank of America--for, I'm sorry, NationsBank. And, you know, actually, you know, changed, yes. But, we had the power of a much bigger organization and a lot more money. So, I mean, we are really, you know, then becoming a lot more strategic in what we're doing, how we're doing it. You know when they moved here, you know, moving in here, I was the one who, you know, made sure that, you know, you know, Ken Lewis [Kenneth D. Lewis] then and Hugh McColl [Hugh L. McColl, Jr.], you know, met the powers that be here. I remember, you know, taking Hugh McColl to meet Coretta Scott King. Which he will tell you was one of his moving moments in life. I remember hosting a luncheon there in Charlotte [North Carolina] for Hugh McColl who was from Bennettsville, South Carolina. Or, is from 'cause he's still alive; is from Bennettsville, South Carolina, to meet [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman; grew up in Bennettsville South Carolina. Her father [Arthur Wright]--they grew up at the same time. I think they're the same age. Her father headed the black community. His father [Hugh McColl, Sr.] headed the white community. They never met; never met. So, I introduced them. They, they now have gotten a great relationship. In fact, Marian hosted a dinner at her house in Washington [D.C.]. This is when we were then moving into the Washington, D.C. area, you know, invited Hugh and I for that dinner at her house. And, so, we got to know a lot of other people in Washington. So, it then moved to be kind of a different role. You know, we really, you know, did--had a lot of focus on, you know, making sure we were correctly positioned as far as a much large base, you know, community, you know, large--Florida. I mean, then we're moving up to giving like million dollar grants and things like that to people, so, you know, really different. Story_ID: 326833 Speaker 1: Now, were your, your grants and lot of things still in the fin- you know, things to help investment and communities? Speaker 2: Things to make the community better. Because the financial institutions are better, you know, a great community and a great bank do walk hand and hand. You're not gonna find one without the other, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, a lot of housing related (unclear)? Speaker 2: A lot of housing related. We did, oh, I'll give you a great example. We did programs where we taught people throughout our service areas that--you know, when you get a mortgage, it's more than just paying the loan. You got power. You got grass. You got upkeep. I mean, just the whole, you know, what does it, what does it mean to own a home, and what does it take, the wherewithal. We did a lot of programs around that. We did renovating neighbor--doing low income housing in neighborhoods where, you know, to bring about mixed-use neighborhoods and major development for that. One in Washington [D.C.] in particular that went really well. We did things like, with diversity suppliers where we brought in, you know, lawyers. Like, from the, from the, the, what is it--the American Bar Association to help understand how to do business, you know, with the organization [NationsBank Foundation; Bank of America Foundation]. And, how to access and who they needed to call. We did a--we did lots of things along that line to help people in a much bigger way. You know, understand, you know, how they could make money, you know, working for a, working with and for the bank [NationsBank Corporation; Bank of America] in various ways along with, you know, doing the opposite things of it. You know, helping the comm- the broader community. Story_ID: 326834 Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have is, this--so, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] gets elected, you know, around the time that you're--well, your husband [Franklin Biggins] you said, worked on his campaign. And, that began sort of a, you know, a twenty year span that you even are enjoying today of having black mayors. How did that change, you know, sort of those who were high on the corporate structure? How do you think that impacted you? Speaker 2: You know what, it probably helped me greatly; me personally. Because all of a sudden, I mean, you know these people already and all of a sudden, you know, Corporate America, you know, that the corporations are going, oh, my God, who do we know that has a relationship here, you know. And, oh, got that; excuse me, you know, relationships going on here. So, you know, nothing better than having somebody you know in this role. And, it helped everybody. I mean, if you think about this community, it lifted this community. You look at the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. You look at--I mean, all the things that Maynard did while mayor, you know, let's face it, the community's a better place. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Better place. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], you know, the whole international perspective getting the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], you know. And, and you know, Sheryl Lee [ph.], my goodness, you know, she says she's going down as a sewer queen. I can't wait for these sewers to be finished (laughter). It'll be good. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, why do you think Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] been able to do that, you know, maintain a twenty year-- Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I think, I think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean no other place in country really have-- Speaker 2: No other place has Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. I think when you look at the, the professionals that in the, you know, that--when you have, you know, Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], when you ha- when you look at that center, when you look at the intellectual capital that's there, and people forget that's a business. Those colleges are businesses. But, you know, you can't ignore that. Just, just nobody else has that. No other ci- no other town in the world has it. I think that to me, made the world a difference. And, you know, where did Maynard come from? He came from Morehouse College. When you look around this town and you look at the, you know, just the doctors that are here. The fact that, you know, I mean, most of them went to, you know, Morehouse, Morris Brown. I mentioned to you [HistoryMaker] Robert James, who's now president of Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], Morris Brown graduate. I mean, just, it just make--I don't think it's just for the City of Atlanta. I think it's the entire state that it, that it makes a world of difference. But, in particular it does make the world of difference right here in this metropolitan area. Story_ID: 326835 Speaker 1: So '94 [1994] comes along-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay, and you get a--now, were you active in the Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] campaign (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God, let me tell you, kind of convoluted, so who, I mean, I don't know if you have children but how do you know best? You know, you know your children's friends best, right? And, their parents because that's all you do when your children are little. You spend, you know, all your free time you spend with them doing things with their friends. That means their parents and you get to know all these people. I did this, it's this international business fellows program a while back. I've forgotten the year that I finished. Met this guy as part of that who then invites me to, quote, Renaissance [Renaissance Weekend], which is this event that was being held on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] once a year, and organized by a guy by the name of Phil Lader [Philip Lader]. And, so, I convinced my family that we're gonna go to Renaissance for New Year's. And, they're like, "Mom, why are we doing this?" I said, "Hilton Head for New Year's, this is gonna be fun." They were skeptical the whole ride. They were all skeptical. We get down there and we--it, maybe thirty families. And, it's a think tank. It is a discussion about what's going on in the world. Everybody participates in the discussion, it's very interesting. Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton], Bill, and Chelsea [Chelsea Clinton] are there. They'd been coming--I mean, the thing has been going on now for maybe six years and here we are, we're new to this process. Chelsea and my younger daughter; Chelsea's about a year older, they started running, you know, playing together. I mean, they're--they had a little play school there. They may have been, you know, Kenzie [Kenzie Biggins] may have been five at the time, and Chelsea was probably six or seven. They started playing together. Chelsea asked my daughter to spend the night. I said, "How many times have I told you, you don't spend the night with people I don't know." So, they both are upset about this. I'd say an hour later, here comes Chelsea and her mother. So, you know, then we get to know each other, you know, back and forth and the girls started spending a night back and forth and get to know each other. So, so we started going, I mean, we started--we became regulars. I mean, I've been going to Renaissance, Kenzie's twenty-five--we've been going to Renaissance twenty years. So, and so I guess, Renaissance must be twenty years, I mean, its twenty-five years old. We just last year celebrated the twenty-fifth, so they'd been going on five years. So, that's how we got to know them. I mean, every year New Year's, where everybody's there talking about what's going on in the world, and, you know, what's need to be going on and what's, you know, just wonderful ranging debates. And, now it's grown to this huge thing where they--where it's several times a year, and you know, it's, it's so, it's very interesting. Anyway, so, that's how we got to know the Clintons. Story_ID: 326836 Speaker 1: You know, when he [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected president, I mean, I did participate, but I wasn't major in the campaign. I--but, you know, certainly supported him. And, you know, did, did a couple speeches here in Georgia when he came through here as far as introducing him and some other things. And, so, we got invited to inauguration, oh, my God, I died and gone to heaven. We certainly went (laughter), we had a great time. And, then for Christmas we're invited to a Christmas party at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Oh, yes, we're going. Absolutely guys, get dressed, we're flying to Washington [D.C.]. We're going to this party. So, while there, Phil Lader [Philip Lader], back to Renaissance [Renaissance Weekend] now, is the deputy chief of staff who says, "President wants to explore whether or not you have an interest in, in working in the administration?" I said, "I had, I mean, I gotta, you know, I gotta," you know, I'm like blah, blah, blah, you know, talking all over, you know, I have not a clue. But, I flew home and then flew back up there the next week to have a conversation with him about whether or not. And, I, and my initial reaction was, "No, I don't think so." I mean, I've got child--children [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins], and in particular a younger child, and, you know, who's in school and all this other stuff. Anyway, but, you know, when the president of the United States ask you to do something, you kind of figure it out, so, went to Washington. Speaker 2: So, talk about your appointment. Speaker 1: I was, I was assistant to the president and director of presidential personnel. He'd been in office for a year. If you recall, there had been some very public issues that occurred with some appointments. So, let me think. Who--God, I'm sorry to blank on this; I'll call his name in a minute. I can see his face and I'm just not calling his name. I'd been wearing several hats, but they anyway ask me to come (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Bob Nash? Speaker 1: Not Bob; no Bob, Bob came in after me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I did the search (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: President's best friend. Speaker 2: Oh, president's best friend. Speaker 1: I'll think of it in a minute. I'm just thinking--I'm just blanking at the moment. Anyway, I went up to--in January of, that must have been January 2004, to head personnel at the White House. Decided-- Speaker 2: You mean, 1994. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994]. Initially, the family was--thought about it, and we decided not to move them because, you know, my youngest daughter was in--my older daughter just got into college. The younger one was in, you know, just finishing lower school. So, I mean, it just was not a good time. And, her teacher said, "Don't do this. This girl is doing really well here; don't do this." Because, you know, Washington by all definitions--by definition is temporary. So, I got a tiny apartment and commuted. My--I was, I was part of the, you know, senior team at the White House; worked in the White House, did all the political appointments. And, the president has the authority to appoint, you know, four thousand some odd positions. Three thousand some odd of 'em were open. So, we had a task here. And, so, change management skills really came into play here even though--I said, "Guys, we need to have a strategy here. We've got to have a system by which we're gonna get this done. And, my aim is zero by August." Story_ID: 326837 Speaker 1: So we developed this little banner. Zero by Aug- you know, the zero by August. You forget that you not only have like ambassadors and secretary of state and all this other stuff. The--you'll have all these commissions that have to be staffed. And, they require, you know, some of 'em required people that were Independent, you know, a couple of Democrats, a couple of Republicans. And, then you take it to [U.S.] Congress and get, I mean, they--it was, it's, it's very interesting what happens from a personnel standpoint in the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: But, how is that? 'Cause there're background checks and all of that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, full background checks. Speaker 2: Which some of them in security clearances. Speaker 1: Full selcu- yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: But how, but how--but there also the politics of things-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --which are different than maybe what you were doing at the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; NationsBank Corporation]. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You--let me tell you. It was so different in that--you know, first of all, you wanted people to have the competencies to do their role. This is in, I mean, you get to--like the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which is a great example. We did--and Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had made a commitment for an administration that looks like America. So, here we are, you know, we wanna make sure we have diverse talent pools. We wanna make sure we have people that have the competencies to do the job. And, so, for that, there's an opening on the commission for--Nuclear Regulatory Commission. This is kind of one of my first really serious things that we were working on now. Looked at a lot of people. Shirley Jackson [HistoryMaker Shirley Ann Jackson]; so, when I sent this name up they were like, "Huh, what, what are you doing here?" By the time she finished and got through that, that process, they asked her to be chairman. I thought, now, this is when you know you're on a roll. Just a sharp, sharp woman, as you well know. I mean, she went on to have a--and now, you know, president of Rensselaer University--Rensselaer Polytechnic [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York], I'm sorry. But, so, Shirley came in under me; brilliant woman. We did a number of things along that line where you really had to look for competencies and--but, you wanted people that, you know, were kind of on your side of the aisle. But, we did other things, too. You know, that, you know--you know, where, where somebody had to have--done work on the campaign, you know. There were positions like that where you also put people in, put a structure in to make this work. And, the structure was that every major cabinet person needed to have a personnel person working directly with them. So, that they could--so, that you know the openings could be strategic in finding them, you know. So, you would know all the state people who were, you know, weren't right for the state department [U.S. Department of State]. You would know all the people that were right for the department of interior [U.S. Department of the Interior], I mean, it really worked well. It really worked well. Speaker 2: Now what I find sort of interesting, you know, sort of an outsider. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: It's not like, you know, people are only in office, you know, I mean, well, four years, or eight years, or whatever. But, how you staff so quickly given that, and you had three thousand, you know, plus positions to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, we had, we had a number of people that worked as part-- Speaker 2: How many? Speaker 1: --of the--all right, you figure each, each, agency had, you know, a lead per- a lead personnel person and then a couple of folks that work with them. And, then, oh, God, I don't know. May--let's say a hundred, you know, I don't--I must admit I don't know the exact number. But, then again, everybody in Washington [D.C.] thinks they're an expert as far as personnel is concerned. You know, you find--I found that, anywhere I went, all of a sudden, you know, I thought I was, you know, incognito. Every--it was like the first weekend, I walked in some restaurant late one night somebody, with somebody to have bite and people said, "Oh, do you know who that is?" I heard 'em. I'm like, oh, my God. I mean, I just--it was just really interesting. Story_ID: 326838 Speaker 1: This is different, though because when you were there you were a young mother before running around the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]. Right? Your husband [Franklin Biggins] was in law school [Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C.], so you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. This is real different. Speaker 1: So, you come back and-- Speaker 2: We worked twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. People think that folks in Washington [D.C.] are up there going to state dinners and all that kind of stuff. And, yes, I did go to some great state dinners. But, as soon as the dinner was over, I went back to my office and worked. You know, my family wasn't there, you could work twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. And, matter fact, I could've not paid for that apartment, I could've just live in my office and been just fine, so. Speaker 1: So, tell me, what did you like about it? What did you like about Washington-- Speaker 2: It was, it was challenging. It was interesting. It was--I mean, you're a part of history, you know. The papers that you did there are now, you know, still, you know, they're on, you know, they're in the Clinton Library [William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum, Little Rock, Arkansas], you know, so. You know, you, you--every day you knew what was going on in the entire world. So, if you're put--and I've always been one who found history extraordinarily interesting. My mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] was a history teacher. I mean, so, engaged in all those kinds of things to know what's going on, you know. You're not gonna find anything more interesting. But, also very humbling, very humbling. Speaker 1: Now, in what way (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because, because you're making decisions that affect people's lives much long than your time, you know, will ever be there. You know, with the appointments that are put in, with the kinds of things that people have to decide. You know, again, you know, Shirley Jackson [HistoryMaker Shirley Ann Jackson], Nuclear Regular--Regulations [Nuclear Regulatory Commission]. You know, global issues that, that are affected by, you know, the decisions that she made at that point in time, and probably still makes even today. You know, you look at, you know, I mean, just--it's interesting, you, you don't worry about, you know, when you plug something in if you're gonna get shocked; you know it's safe. You know, when you turn your water on, you know it's safe. You know, and you realize that, for all said and done, our government works extraordinarily well. A learning for me, too, was, it doesn't matter which side of the aisle that you're on. Most people generally have the best interest of the country in mind. Some people just, you know, they see what that, what that potential interest is. Maybe they see it from a different perspective, but, but, you know, they do. That, you know, all that's said and done and you know we look like, you know, it looks like to the rest of the world, what and how in the world did they ever make a decision. People do get together, and they do discuss things and they do figure out things. And, they're brilliant people that are willing to work for the government of the United States, who take, you know, major salary cuts in order to go do that. You know, but they're willing to do it. Story_ID: 326839 Speaker 1: What appointment--I know you were a proud--very proud of the Shirley Jackson [HistoryMaker Shirley Ann Jackson] appointment, and she is an amazing person. What appointment--do you have any that were like very hard, very difficult? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, I mean, oh, I mean, we did the secretary general, if you remember, you know--the surgeon general, you know, they were, you know, you know, person, you know, that had to leave and, you know, new people coming in. And, you know, people get mixed up, they-- Speaker 1: Talk about that. Speaker 2: Well, politics are politics, you know. You can't, you have to remember that-- Speaker 1: Are you talking-- Speaker 2: All said and done, it is the president of the United States. You know, unfortunately, it's not you personally. It is--and some people get mixed up. They think it's them personally. I can't go in and decide that I personally feel this, therefore, you know, I'm gonna put this out as though the president of the United States feels. You can't do that. It--you have to--you speak every day in that role for the president of the United States. You wonder how, like, people can go on the television and say, you know, "On behalf of the president," because that's what you're there for, on behalf of the president. You're not on behalf of yourself. But, then the other thing, during that whole surgeon general process their (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that David [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher]--who was it? Was it--? It was-- Speaker 2: No. It was, it was--there was a person that was nominated, and I'm not gonna call the name. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: There was a person that was nominated who had ended up not getting the role; specifically asked several times, "Is there anything in your background that may cause an embarrassment to the president of the United States," if, you know, just tell us because it's better to manage beforehand than after. You know, it's better to know before than after. And, they said, "No, no, no, no, no." And, then, you know, bam. You know, what do that papers do? You know, they, they, they research and they find out and they report. And, this person took it personally. We said, "Honey, it's--." I mean, not honey, but, I shouldn't have said that, but, "Sir," I mean, "it has nothing to do with you personally. Nothing to do with you personally. It has everything to do with the president of the United States. And, unfortunately, you know, this is not gonna work." People got, you know, people got really upset when they didn't, as you can imagine, you know, and people got publically embarrassed, which was terrible. But, then somebody's asked you and when you explain it carefully, very carefully, if there's anything in your background that's gonna cause embarrassment to you or the president of the United States, once it's made public--please let us know now. It's better to get these things out in front than, you know, in the back end. I don't know why, I don't know why people think that people aren't gonna report on everything they've ever done in their life. But, when you come into the, when you come into a public appointment, I guarantee you anything you've ever done in your life will be exam- examined. Somebody that you did something to that's still angry with you is gonna call and make sure, you know. You know, so. You know, all that's not good, but it's true. I mean, it's just, it is just the light, just the facts. Story_ID: 326840 Speaker 1: You stayed in that position 'til '98 [1998] or longer? Speaker 2: No, no. I left, all right, I was there for a year and a half. Speaker 1: A year and a half? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep. I went for, I went to stay for twelve months. I went to, you know, do--I said I'd help clean it up, and--you know remember my family didn't move. I had to come home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Were you-- Speaker 2: But, people get lost up in the Potomac, don't they? But, I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. They do get lost. Speaker 2: They, they get lost. Speaker 1: Sometimes they never come back. Speaker 2: Well, most, most of my friends that went up never left. They're still there. Speaker 1: Oh, no. They never, they--it entraps them sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But, you're, you know, you're also sort of the flavor of the moment. That's what some people don't realize (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, that's very true. But, you know what, I'll tell you that, I think that one of the best things I did, my--my--the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], I said, "I must go home on the weekends. Or, you know, my family will come here sometimes, you know, based on certain things, but otherwise, I must go home." And, I did. I went home just about every weekend. I'd leave either Friday night or Saturday morning and go back either Sunday night or Monday morning; cost us a ton of money. I mean, 'cause we paid for it personally. But, I, you know, that--so, when you walk in the grocery store and the guy behind the counter says, "You know, Mrs. Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins], let me tell you something," you know. And, they--and people--it kept you very grounded because you knew very day of, I mean, knew every weekend what people thought versus, you know, being in that cocoon. Because Monday through Friday, I thought everything was grand and wonderful. But, not the rest of the time, you know. Speaker 1: Now, anything else you learned from that experience you think that (unclear)? Speaker 2: I, I've, I met great people. The--I think, I think I probably learned, don't judge people too quickly, you know. To really, you know, take your time figuring out--but in the same breath, you have to be--take your time, but in the same breath you got to get it done. Because time is of essences, you only have four years or eight years. So, you know, it's not, you know, there was no, I'll save it 'til tomorrow; you got it done today. Speaker 1: And, that rapid pace, that didn't make you dizzy? You know what I mean 'cause you'd had been in a very structured environment? Speaker 2: Yeah, but still a rapid pace environment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --even there. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But, this, believe me, this was times one hundred, you know, like on speed, you know, kind of thing when you get to Washington [D.C.], totally. It's interesting, I found myself, when I'd get on the plane to go to Washington my brain would (gesture), and when I'd come home I would (gesture), kind of have to gear down a minute or two, you know, just really interesting. I'd be home trying to tell my daughters [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins] whatever, and they'd be like, "Mom, we need cat food, we need dog food," you know. I don't know what you're talking about but need some basics going on here, so. I mean, that keeps you, you know, that keeps you pretty well grounded. Story_ID: 326841 Speaker 1: How did Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.], did it come out of, out of, you know, coming back? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, you know, Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard], and I'll go back to that. But, you know I wanna mention one thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pat Pittard? Speaker 2: --that happened at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. I was the White House representative when--at the airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.] when Nelson Mandela landed for the first time in Washington [D.C.]. That to me--now, talk about life experiences, I probably, I mean, I just, it was, I had the, it was just great. I mean, just to--I went to the, and I, even though I went to several state dinners, what do I remember the most? I remember the state dinner that they did for Nelson Mandela. Everybody's in black tie. He had on a suit because he didn't own black tie, and I thought, isn't this fabulous. He was--it was just a defining moment I think for everyone. People, people were in awe. I mean, and people have seen--had seen a lot of people; Nelson Mandela was the--he was a showstopper by far. Just his demeanor. His, you know, taking the moment to speak to the janitors, he come in the door, I mean, you know, it was just, I mean, now, this man, it was just, it was a--really truly defining moment to have him, without a doubt. So, I wanted to not, not miss that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were in charge of per- you said-- Speaker 2: No, no. I was the--the White House would have different people for certain things and they would ask, you know, you know, they'd be a little contingency that would, you know, be there. And, I was, and I was the White House person when Nelson Mandela landed in Washington, D.C. to meet that plane and there with the folks from the state department [U.S. Department of State] and others, too, so, really phenomenal. Speaker 1: So, did you learn a lot about protocol? You know, they-- Speaker 2: Oh, my good--yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. I learned--I had a whole group-- Speaker 1: Do they have protocol training? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. But, I also had a group as part of the personnel group that--I had a group that reported to me that answered--I cannot tell you how many letters we got related to hired--being hired at the White House. And, we wrote the most, it was very good. The thoughtfulness of the letters that went back out to people about appreciation. And, you know, that showed great respect for the individual and, and you know, making sure just the correct, you know, how do you address individuals, all those kinds of things, really well done. Really well done. Story_ID: 326842 Speaker 1: Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.], Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard]. Remember Pat Pittard who hired me at C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Who was--right--that's-- Speaker 1: So, Pat Pittard was, he wasn't, was he--he wasn't president at the time. Pat Pittard was, he was one of the, he was one of the senior people here at Heidrick & Struggles. So, he'd left the bank, joined Heidrick & Struggles. As I looked here, three--two people, Charlie Hoskins [Charles R. Hoskins], and, and Jean Brackley [ph.], Pat Pittard; all three at some point had headed human resources for C&S Bank. They all worked here. Now, this is the good ol' boys network at its best. So, they all came to recruit me. And, they, they had tried before I ever left the bank to recruit me here, and I turned them down. And, so, they came to Washington [D.C.] and said, you know, "I don't know when you're planning on coming home, but we know what your commitment was when you came here. We wanna talk to you." And, I had always thought that I'd go back to the bank. And, the bank had thought I'd come back to the bank, too. But, you know what, you don't go back places. It's, it's good to move forward. So, they, they went through this big--press sent the new chairman of the company into Washington. Story_ID: 326368 Speaker 1: They had all headed up the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had all headed human resources; had been part of human resources at C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; NationsBank Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell, can you, before we get into this. I mean there's Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.], there's Spencer Stuart-- Speaker 2: Spencer Stuart. Speaker 1: Are those the two-- Speaker 2: Korn Ferry [Korn Ferry International]. All right, Heidrick and Struggles, Spencer Stuart, Korn Ferry. Who's Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Tribbett] with? It's not Korn Ferry. Speaker 1: No he's with-- Speaker 2: Hold on a minute. Speaker 1: He's with Russell Reynolds [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Russell Reynolds. So, those would be the top four. So, you know, you know, Heidrick, Spencer, Russell Reynolds, and Korn Ferry would be the big four. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, can you describe the industry first of all before we get into you being here? What are--describe what the industry is. Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's--well, first of all, I think it's very personal one-on-one, people-to-people kind of business. We work strictly for corporations; not individuals, corporations, in helping them do the top of the house searches. Generally, it's generally C level. We help people with corporate board searches and helping them find new corporate board members, CEOs [chief executive officer], CFOs [chief financial officer], COOs [chief operating officer], CIO [chief information officer], you know. And, then, I mean, we certainly do other searches but it's usually two fif- if you had to think of a compensation level, it would be probably the low level would be 250 [$250,000] and up, you know, then, and then we go up, you know. Speaker 1: So, when they were recruiting you, why did they, why did they perceive this would be an opportunity and why did you likewise perceive it be an opportunity? Speaker 2: So, good ol' boy network, right? They knew me; knew the, you know, the C--you know, the C&S Bank days; knew the, the--and matter of fact, when I was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] one of the first things I did, I brought Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard] in maybe my second week there to teach executive search. I mean, what are doing here? We're doing executive search. But, nobody had a concept of, quote, executive search, none, no one, which I thought was actually quite interesting that people hadn't thought about. The second thing that I did at the White House was bring in somebody, you know, to do long range strategic planning so we could get the job done. So, Pat had been up. He understood what I was doing. I mean, he had recruited me to--my first job at, you know, at C&S Bank, and here he is back again, right. And, so, he spent a lot of time explaining the industry to me. Then I thought, I thought, "Well, let me look into this. This is interesting." I talked to a couple of former heads of personnel at the White House. What did they all do? Executive search. Now, most of them had started their own small firms. Not gone with one of the majors. So, I think I was the first one coming out to go with one of the majors. So, there was a history, you know, you've got a great network, you know, that you can now, you know, really spend a lot of time. You know, you have access. You've worked with, you know the, you know, top of the house. You know the top of the house. Know how corporations work, been exposed to different kinds of, you know, thought processes. So, you know, it, it--for me I thought, pretty natural, pretty natural. Story_ID: 326369 Speaker 1: So, what areas were you told you were gonna focus on? And, is that how the search business works? Speaker 2: When I first came in here, it was pretty much general. Everybody did a little bit of everything. That, that was--you know, I've been here ten years now. So, that, that has really changed now, and it's certainly more focused. Now, the--let me think, when I first came in--I'll tell you who made a world of difference in my life coming in the door; Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], Bill Gray. You know, Bill Gray's helped more people in his life. Well, I'd known Bill Gray for a long time, back from my C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia; NationsBank Corporation] days when I--when Bill Gray, working with Bill Gray, we were giving a lot of money to UNCF [United Negro College Fund]. And, I suggested something to him that worked out really well. He had a matching gift program. And, I said, "Opposed to us giving to all these individual colleges, why don't we give the money to you. If you will guarantee us, the next day, a check flows out of you to that college. But, then it gets matched three for one. So, you have four dollars versus one dollar." And, the money--let's say I'm giving the money to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. The money went first to UNCF. The next day they send a check on to Spelman. But, he got the three for one match. Which meant then CN--UNCF had three more than they would've had. So, Bill and I worked through this. I certainly saw him in Washington [D.C.] back and forth. When I was leaving Washington, I went to call on a number of people to say, "I'm leaving," you know, a lot of people. Well, two people I called on, Bill Gray and Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]. In talking to Bill Gray he said, "Well," he said, "call me back 'cause I think I have a search here that I'd like to ask you do." So, all of a sudden, here I am brand new but I got my first search. And, so, Pat Pittard [Patrick S. Pittard] and I actually--I took him with me to call on the Bill Gray 'cause I didn't know, you know, know a whole lot about what I was doing. So, here I walk out with my absolute first search. So, when I walked in the door here, I walked in with the first search. And now, have done a number of searches for what then Bill Gray did--his replacement. And because we do, you know, I mean, once again presidency of a company, he's, you know, Mike--we, Michael Lomax went in as the head of UNCF. I did that search for UNCF, so. Speaker 1: So, does it--is it paid on a commission basis or is it--so, how does it work, you know? Speaker 2: It is. I mean, we are, even though, we're a publicly held company, most search firms are not publicly held, but we are. We do--you, you get a base salary and then, you know, based on your, you know, you have, you have to cover your base salary al- and then any uptick from that is additional dollars. So, it's not exactly a commission; it's earned income. Speaker 1: Now how long does it take to--now, okay, before I get there. In the world of searches, where does Heidrick & Struggles [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.]--I mean, where do you--who's one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're in the top. Speaker 1: --one, two, three, four, who's-- Speaker 2: You mean, as far as the firms are concerned? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's a good question. We're probably, you know, it trades back and forth. Yeah, every year, I think it trades back and forth. Speaker 1: Between you and Spencer [Spencer Stuart]? Speaker 2: Between us and Spencer and probably I think Korn Ferry, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, more so than Russell Reynolds [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, do each of them have their specialties, or you're all sort of in the same league? Speaker 2: Well, everybody's in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, we're all competitors and they're great people-- Story_ID: 326370 Speaker 1: So what do you like about this business and how long does it take to do an average, you know, search? Or, is there an average like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, probably. I mean, just, you know, board searches may take a little bit longer today because of the complexities of Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002]. But, most searches, you know, probably four months would probably be about an average time that you would spend. By the time you, you know, meet with the client, develop and, you know, spec, you know, look at, you know potential candidates, interview--client interviews is probably, you know, person resigns. It's probably, probably four month, you know. I'm sorry, what was your, it was, you had another--oh, why this--if you wanna get to know the personality of a corporation, there is nothing better than executive search. You know, all companies are different. All companies have personalities. And, you really get to know, you know, different companies and different personalities. And, you know, what makes for a success and, you know, what leads to not's, you know, being unsuccessful. You really learn a lot as part of executive search. We are, we are, we're insiders. I mean, with the, you know, the, the body of knowledge that we have about a company and where they're headed, and you know, what they're doing; we definitely become insiders. And, then the other thing is, you meet the most extraordinary people, you know, that, that you have as candidates to be considered. You know, really, really interesting people. And, I pride myself personally on bringing, on any search on the diversity of the pool that, that our client will get to consider in this process. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in that whole thing like when you're doing the client, you have people I guess, sort of in your database-- Speaker 2: We do. Speaker 1: --you know, that--and, is there still--do you do and I was just wondering do you do interviews in office, do you do them at the country club, do you do-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --them over at the airport? Speaker 2: We do--we did, every place, every place, every place. I've interviewed people here [Atlanta, Georgia office of Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.]. I've done video interviews. I've flown to, you know, airports and met people in airports. I've met people in the little teeny breakfast place in the middle of nowhere, you know, you meet people everywhere. You know, you go to Europe. I mean, you just meet, whatever it takes, you know, to get to the right client. I mean, you really wanna see them. We, I think, we're using technology more today to do initial screening by video to see if indeed if this is a viable candidate. Story_ID: 326371 Speaker 1: From the standpoint of competencies, and, you know, people's resumes, you know, everybody knows how to polish up a resume. The question is what have you really done? And, we do very much competency-based interviews. Where we wanna know, give me specific--you say that you are a good developer of people. Give me a specific example. Tell me people that are now in key roles in other organizations that you helped develop. You know, you say, you know, that you help this company develop an innovative marketing campaign. Be very specific, you know, what was the issue? What did you do? And, what has been the outcome? And, we really plow down, I mean, people have to be very specific. Speaker 2: Now, how long did, you know 'cause you when you talked about being interviewed for the bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia], you know, and you said--so, how long are these interviews that you do, you know? 'Cause I remember as a young lawyer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I spend, I spend a couple of hours with a person. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And, then the company, then is gonna, you know, spend, you know, time and time and time. I did, I do full write ups where I tell, you know, everything there is to know about that person from the day they were born to that day that I interviewed them. Speaker 2: Now, how are you using video for, for the interviews? Speaker 1: Initial screening? You know to, so, opposed to getting on a plane, let's say that this person is in, in Australia is a great example. So, opposed to getting on a plane and flying to Australia, which involves days, you know. I will, you know, I would do, I would do a video conference interview first to, you know, really to meet the person, for the person to meet me, to have, you know, really do strategic interview. And, then decide, you know, whether or not if the person's a good candidate and, and then go on to meet them in person. Speaker 2: I guess what I'm wondering, is someone there asking them the questions you would ask and so that you're seeing the responses on-- Speaker 1: No, no. I am. I am. It's, it's live video. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: Live video. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Over the Internet? Speaker 1: Over the Internet. Speaker 2: I see. Okay. Okay, that's--that's where I wasn't understanding (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay. No, no, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, television; we're both sitting in front of a television. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. No, no, no, no problem. Now, I'm gonna find out-- Speaker 1: Video conferencing. Story_ID: 326372 Speaker 1: Was it 2005 you got appointed to AirTran's [AirTran Airways]? I mean-- Speaker 2: What is--2006-- Speaker 1: Six [2006]? Speaker 2: I, I must have gone on the AirTran board in 2000-- Speaker 1: Three [2003]? Speaker 2: Three [2003], maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. I couldn't tell. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. 'Cause I've been on there a couple years now. Speaker 1: Okay. Was that your first corporate board? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No. What was your first-- Speaker 2: My--my first corporate board-- Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: Would have been-- Speaker 1: To--is that-- Speaker 2: --NDCHealth [NDCHealth Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That would've been my first corporate board. Which-- Speaker 1: Okay. What year was that? Speaker 2: Let me think. It would've been 2005, right after I came back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, not 2005. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, 1995 (laughter), 1995. What year is it? That--it was in 1995. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And, talk about that, you know, that, how that happened. Speaker 2: How that happened--oh, goodness. Okay, I guess that was, a gentlemen that had been on the C&S Bank [The Citizens and Southern National Bank of Georgia] board, on the compensation committee, he chaired the comp committee in fact. The guy who had been the general counsel to the bank, all were on the NDC board. And, when I moved back from Washington [D.C.], they approached me about the possibility of coming on the board. And, we talked about it and spent some time thinking about it, looking at it, and decided it would be a good fit. Speaker 1: Now, how was it different being in, you know, a senior person in a company and then serving, you know, on a board of directors? You know, how, tell--? Speaker 2: Because on a board, I mean, you are, you are strategic policy; you're not running that company every day, you know. So, they may choose to hire a person this way. That's their business. The question is, strategically, is it in line with where the overall, you know, company is headed. I mean, but, I don't second guess, you know, how they do it. It's the big picture of where we're headed that you focus on as a corporate board. Speaker 1: Now, the board--that board, were they, how many, how many people were on the board, and how many minorities or people of color? Speaker 2: All right. There were--let me think, there were maybe eight of us. When I initially went on, I was the only woman, the only African American. When--we sold the company last year, and there were three women, so, yes, yes, yes. I was still the only African American, even though we had, we had worked on two other people that just because of other things and, and what happened was we split the company. And, one of them went on the--this guy went on--African American when on the other company board. So, that worked out really well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, then, then you were you--what about Avnet [Avnet, Inc.]? Was that second? What was second? Speaker 2: Avnet was second. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were doing a search actually. And, this wonderful gentleman, Fred Wood [ph.]; somebody, he--you know how you talk to people and you get suggestions? Someone out of St. Louis [Missouri] had, who went to law school [Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with my husband [Franklin Biggins], suggested me. He then called me, flew in here, we met for dinner, and then I met the chairman and CEO and went on--and then after that went on that board. Speaker 1: Tell me what kind of, what company is Avnet? Speaker 2: Electric distribution. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. So, you're on three then? Three corp--? Speaker 2: Well, now, NDC we've sold. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--okay. Speaker 2: NDC we've sold. So, I'm not, and I--at some point then Morrison's [Morrison's Cafeterias], the cafeteria group, I was on that board and we sold that company. But, I, I'm now on AirTran Airways, Avnet, and then I'm also, I'm on the Kaiser Permanente board, but that's not a public company. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, the other two are public companies. Story_ID: 326373 Speaker 1: But in the meantime, Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002] came in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, so, how did you find that that 'cause that's just, that was probably a little bit around the time you went on AirTran [AirTran Airways], right? Speaker 2: It was little bit after actually (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A little--okay. Speaker 2: A little bit after. The Sarbanes-Oxley has changed some things. But, this is how, and I do strongly feel this way. Well-run companies were well-run before Sarbanes-Oxley. If somebody was gonna do wrong, they did wrong before, and they can do wrong now. It may be a little bit harder; somebody'd be stupid. But, you know--and plus, when you go to corporate board, you spend a lot of time looking at, is this an ethical company. I mean, I do. I'm not interested in being tied up in some company that's gonna cause me problems for the rest of my life. Or--you know, or bring my own ethics into question. The, you know, audit committee you certainly, and I serve on the audit committee for AirTran, you certainly do your job as far as the audit committee is concerned. Every I is dotted, every T is crossed. We have a great guy that chairs the audit committee. He knows what he's doing, which is wonderful. Speaker 1: Well, it's only, isn't that the, that's the committee to be on, isn't the audit committee? Speaker 2: The, it's either one, it's either to be on or not to be on (laughter), I mean, you know. I mean, they are, they are, you know, a lot of people would tell you, "Oh, no. I do not wanna go on the audit committee." Because it's time-consuming. We have a lot of calls, and you know, just a lot of things that you just have to, you know, stay focus. And, and, we, let me tell you, we stay focused without a doubt. For AirTran, I also chair the compensation committee, and I'm, and that is, you know, you know, so what are people interested in. And, I'm probably on the, on the two that, you know, they're interested in the audit committee, and they're interested in the compensation committee. Because after all why are you paying all these people all this money. And, then with Avnet [Avnet, Inc.], I, I, they--everybody has a rotation schedule now on boards, which is very good. So, I was the chair or the audit, I'm sorry, the compensation committee and I've rotated out of that, out of the chair; still on the comp committee and on the governance committee. So, you know, both committees, you know, you know, deep dive and look at the corporation. Story_ID: 326374 Speaker 1: So, what is your--so, you are recruiting people for board positions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There's still this big push to get more, you know, minorities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --and, you know, and more-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And, more women-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --on boards, you know. And, the women, it's--no, women are still, still have issues within boards. But, they're more, but minorities still have--do you think it's more of a-- Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think-- Speaker 1: --minority issue than-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --'cause-- Speaker 2: Well, probably--I think it's probably a little bit and I--let me think. There's still boards that don't have women on 'em. I mean, major company boards that still don't have women, and it's interesting. So, I think, I think for boards, this may sound strange, I think they've been pretty male-oriented. And, so, they, they're actually African American men on, on boards. I think what you discover, though, used to be, before Sarbanes-Oxley. You know, you'd have the same person on every board. You don't have that anymore. You know, that does not exit. And matter fact, folks have had to come off of some of those boards. Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause I remember when I first, way back when, before I even started The HistoryMakers, I'd interviewed, John Roger's [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] mother. What is, John Rogers' mother, she was on twenty boards at the time. Speaker 2: Corporate boards? Speaker 1: I think so, or at least--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness. How in the world? Speaker 1: Because there would one, you know, they couldn't really serve in--I mean, they're place holders more. But, she was--I'm almost posi- well, maybe, maybe ten. But, it was a lot. Speaker 2: Maybe ten-- Speaker 1: Maybe ten. Speaker 2: But twenty, I just can't even imagine-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --trying to sit on twenty boards. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was her last name Rice? Speaker 1: No. It--not Linda--this-- Speaker 2: Not, Lo- it wasn't Lois Rice? Speaker 1: It was--what is Rog- oh, what is--oh, wait a minute, wait. Stradford, Stradford MANkarious [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious]. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. What is-- Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't know why, God, I'm dry, dry. Okay. Now, are you involved with the black board of directors--I mean, not the, the organization [Black Corporate Directors Conference] that John Rogers and [HistoryMaker] Charles Tribbett had been? Speaker 2: As I said to Charles, they should invite me, but see, I'm with a competitor. Speaker 1: Oh, there's a competitor? Speaker 2: Well, remember Charles Tribbett is, is Russell [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Is Russell. Not, Russell. Is, is-- Speaker 1: No, no, no. Oh, but I would--oh, my-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But, there, there is a, there is a competition there. But, I've said to Charles, "Charles, come on guys-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you should invite me to come." Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So, anyway, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: There, there is a bit, I mean, the-- Speaker 1: I see, I got your-- Speaker 2: You know, it's been run by a number, by different-- Speaker 1: I didn't understand that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I understand. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 326375 Speaker 1: Where are you right now? Where is, is Veronica Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins] right now? And in the--you know, I'm--I go back to your initial interview and the very rich family background; the knowledge of the family history. The history there itself, the, you know, ascension, you know, into Corporate America, which not many African Americans can ascend. You know, you ascended and stayed. But where are you at this sort of point in your life? You know, your kids [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins] are up and gone. Speaker 2: Out of my household. And, in less, and except when I want them to do something and I pay for it. Otherwise, on their own, on their own. This is a good place to be in life, I'm telling you. Where am I? What in--I mean, that's such a, that's such a deep question. I had a conversation last week with a, my spiritual advisor, Austin Ford, formerly retired Episcopal priest, about what are you on this earth for? I mean, what were you put here to do? Isn't it interesting, I do think, I mean, you know, you know, you've rea- you know, you've married, and still married, you know-- Speaker 1: That's right, which is-- Speaker 2: --thirty-six years later (laughter), you know, we're still married to each other (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After three months of meeting, I mean-- Speaker 2: Let me tell what you and somebody asked me once. They said, "Now, is this to the same man?" (Laughter) Yes, believe it or not. And, then our children who are seven years apart, we get asked the questions, "Are were--so, with different, different men?" No. Same marriage, same husband, same, you know, the whole nine yards. But, you know, you do start asking. I think, is it age, is it that you start thinking about--have you, I mean, is it, it's not the question, is this all there is? But, have you really done the things that you--that you want to do in your life? I think, when you stop thinking about it, you probably die. I think, you always should be asking yourself, you know, what else, you know, what, what else should you be doing? Have you made, you know, you know, I think you go from the smallness of your individual family and being concerned. I mean, we, we've been fortunate. I mean, we don't have to worry about, you know, health insurance, and you know, you know, both si- I mean, on both sides of the family. I mean, every, you know, things are, are fine. But, have you helped enough other people in your life? You know, I look at the mayor [Shirley Franklin] here, who this Next Step program and trying to get, you know, youth into college. And, we actually, by the way, I have a young lady that's working here [Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.] for me this summer that's part of that program. You do, you know, the, the complexities of, you know, do I wanna, do I want, do I wanna sit by a pool and read a book, or do--I don't know, that's, it's such a complex question that you've asked. And, that, that I, you know, you really have to noodle, you know. I, I'm, you know, one of the things that I know about executive search, you know, senior partner, I've done well here. And, I asked a senior partner the other day, I said, "So, when you gonna retire?" And, he said, "Well, I mean, you know, you don't ever retire from this business." I went, oh no, you (laughter), I don't wanna know that, you know. But, it is something that you can, you know, that you develop even more skills as you go along because of you, you know, the breadth of people that you know and the companies that you know, and all those kinds of things. But, I don't want my life to be defined by having done well in Corporate America, you know. I think, I think am, I hope, I don't, I hate it today when, when people that, their question is always, "So, what do you do?" You know, I hate that. Because I think that, that, you know, I, I regret, I think there are times when I probably spent too much time thinking about my career. And, that's probably, you know, I regret that. You know, are there things that, I think my husband [Franklin Biggins] was a better father than I was a mother, you know. Even though, you know my daughters are great and doing well. I mean, you just look back and say, "Did I miss something?" And, I made the birthday parties. I made the, you know, every school activity. I made all of that. But, still you wonder, is there something I did not do? You know, as far as--I mean 'cause when you look back, what do people judge you on? They don't judge you on a professional career. You know, it's, it's, you know, what did you do otherwise? You know, did you use your life for good stuff and I, and I have to think about that. Story_ID: 326376 Speaker 1: If you think about--back, either from the family you came from, or from you as a, you know, a young person, how have you changed? I mean, who is the person you are now different than the person you were? Speaker 2: You know, this Catholic girl, you know, who--with long hair pigtails with bows on the end. I guess in a lot of way, I'm probably the same person. I always had good friends, and I have good friends today. I, I've always tried to live my life in a way that would be opened to considering other things. You know like, I'm learning to kayak. Save me somebody, please. But, you know, like take the risk of leaving a great job and going to the White House [Washington, D.C.]. You know, my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] said, "Are you crazy? You're not becoming a teacher?" You know, even though in my opinion, teaching is the best profession in all of life, as my mother and father [Andrew Williams] both were. My mother said to me the other day, she said, "You were always the one who was gonna go try to figure out something different, weren't you Veronica [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins]?" (Laughter) And, I guess I was, or still am. So, I, I think, you know, I think I've been, I think I was fortunate in early on being exposed to a country [Indonesia] that was run by brown people. You know, where the president and everybody. Because I never doubted, you know, the--it gave me a whole different view of the world very early in my life about--I mean, everybody, you know, darker, darker, darker than I am. Dark and, I mean, by far and yet, you know running a grand and wonderful country. You know, I have seen, you know, I lived through Greensboro, North Carolina, and the civil rights, you know. You know, Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he died, you know, they brought him to Spelman. You know, Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] was a personal friend, you know. I hope that it all made me a better person. I think, that, you know, I got to make sure that in my life, I have, that all the things that people have given to me that in some way I've given it back. You know, they say, you should give everything away. That your, your life is better. For everything you give away comes back to you tenfold. Story_ID: 326843 Speaker 1: You've been married thirty-five years-- Speaker 2: Thirty-six, this year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirty-six, okay, thirty-six. Speaker 2: July 11th, this year. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, that's good. Congratulations. What do you think has been the success in that? You know, that marriage, you know, 'cause you've both been two working people? Speaker 2: I think because we both came from an example of having mothers and fathers in our lives. I think it makes a world of difference. I'm worried about my daughters. I mean, 'cause every guy they've dated, none of 'em has come back--come from a family where they had both mother and father as an example. I think, I think we've worked hard at this marriage. I mean, it hasn't all been (laughter), it hasn't all been easy. But, and, so, I think, you know, especially with, you know, two people and both careers and, you know, trying to balance all those kinds of things. I think that, I think that, you know, we've had to, you know, discover each other every now and then again, and you know, realize, oh, my goodness, you know. But, I think, I think the girls kept us grounded initially. You know, children will kept you pretty grounded and--about your life. Of course, the dog keeps us grounded. Now, you know, can't divorce, I mean, after all, what's gonna happen with the dog, we got to stay together (laughter). He has the mommy and the daddy. I don't, you know, and sometimes it's just dumb luck, you know. I real--I'm interested now when these people go through all this stuff about, you know, discussions before they got married and all that other stuff. I--we got, you know, we, we got married so quick, my mother [Jacquline McDonald Williams] was still going, "Oh, no, you know, you can't; don't tell anybody this," you know, so, you know. Anyway but, it just worked. And, it's and it still works and, you know, it hasn't been easy and we've had complex times that we had to figure it out. But, we had, we've taken the time to figure it out. Speaker 1: Now, your children-- Speaker 2: And, I guess, let me--I wanna say something else. I think that we come from families where married grandparents and married great-grandparents and no, no one was divorced in the process, too. So, maybe it's not having had any, you know, having to had examples where people worked it out, makes a difference. Speaker 1: Now, your children, who--you have two daughters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two daughters. Speaker 1: Okay. Dawn [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins], and Kenzie [Kenzie Biggins]. Speaker 2: Dawn and Kenzie. Speaker 1: Who do you see yourself in, you know, in-- Speaker 2: Oh, probably both, in different ways; different ways. Now, my, my older daughter is--you know everything has a place, you know. She use, you know, very bright, very--but, very quiet. She's actually an introvert, which is really interesting. And, then my older daughter, I mean, my younger daughter, here I am; very outgoing, very just, I mean, they, seven years two totally different personalities; totally different personalities. But, I think if you were to, if you were to meet my daughters, anyone will tell you, there's some of both of us in both of them. So, which is inter- is really interesting. I mean, but in both there's--like my younger daughter, is questioned, I mean, have you really cleaned up that condominium recently. My older daughter, you can be guaranteed she'd cleaned it up like I would have. But, in the same breath, my younger one has never met--I mean, she can run her mouth any place, so can I. Where the older one tends to be more quiet and reflective like her father [Franklin Biggins]. Story_ID: 326844 Speaker 1: Well let me just ask, if you were starting your career today, what career would you aspire to? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Think about the things that exist today that didn't--executive search. I didn't even know executive search when I was growing up. What in the heck had ever heard of this (laughter)? I don't know, would I be--you know, who started Google? You know, that might be interesting. You know, I mean, I don't know. I kind of like the life I've lived actually. I like, you know, the people I've met, the things I've done. You know, I don't know. But, I mean, would I do something different? I've had great mentors in my life. I would hope the same, you know, for both of my daughters [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins]. Would I be more of a risk taker? You know, I think I took risk. I don't know. And, I mean, there's some great things going on out there today. You know, I think, I said to my daughters yesterday, "If there's something I think I would do, that we all should've done better, is to be more outdoors people." You know, hiking, you know, spending just a lot time outdoors. I'm sorry that we didn't. So, maybe I would do something that involved being outdoors more. Speaker 1: Well, you're doing kayaking now (laughter). Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I'm learning kayaking. I'm learning. Story_ID: 326845 Speaker 1: When you look at the black community, 'cause you grew up in such a, you know, culturally rich environment, what are your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Professional black folks in a-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --great town. Speaker 1: What about--what are you hopes and concerns about the black community as you-- Speaker 2: That we do not tell our history. I mean why do--we've let people forget. Why do we not value slavery? From the standpoint of look what it taught us as a people. I met an Asian guy the other night, went to this dinner. He'd been in this country short period of time, moved him with $31, five kids, and something else. And, now owns this chain of restaurants around town. What is it about economic--being involved in the economic system of this country have we not engaged in? You know, we, we, you know, starting business--growing up in Greensboro, North Carolina, we had some powerful black businesses that are still doing well. We did business with each other. We went to our doctors. You know, today, I mean, and I'm not, and I'm not advocating segregation. I wanna be clear about this. I mean, I think you, you look around, but all of a sudden, you know, it's like, you know, our things aren't, I mean, aren't good enough anymore. And, I don't understand why, you know, we've kind of arrived at that, at that point. We've let, we've let our children forget our history. My Jewish friends have not let their Jewish children forget their history. They know it every day. We need to, we need to know it every day. There is a strength that comes out of slavery; a strength. Why, why, why push it underground like this didn't happened. I think the worst thing that ever happened to black folks was welfare, you know, terrible. It, it took aw- you know, moved pa- moved fathers out of the household. You know, we used to, we used to value marriage. We used to value not being pregnant until after you got married. I mean, when did it, you know, I can't imagine when it became okay. You know, my grandparents would've just, my grandmamma would've just killed somebody. And, I realize things happen. I'm, I'm not living in some whatever. But, I--my point is family. My point is, you know, my husband [Franklin Biggins] has this saying that, welfare mothers raised, no, I'm sorry, that's not it. That mothers raise great sons, they don't raise men. And, I think there's something to be said for that, you know, the example of a man, you know. You need a mother to care for you and nurture you, but you need a man to teach you certain things. I mean, I, I--my daughters [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins] will tell you now, it was dad's (unclear), you know, you better grip it up and come on here; be tough, you know, so. But, in the same breath, we, you know, you could look around us, we, I mean, look, I mean, there're just people that are, that are great. I mean, you, you know, when you think about, you know, Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], you think about some of these young entrepreneurs coming along, venture capitalists and lots of other things, doing things that, you know, hey, I didn't even know existed in my life. I'm sorry that more people don't look at them as role models, versus athletes, so. Everybody can't dump a ball, everybody can figure out how to run a business. Story_ID: 326846 Speaker 1: Now what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, I guess in the end, it's your children that get--that really represent you. I mean, what else do you leave in the world? If I've done right by my children [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins and Kenzie Biggins], I've done all right, you know. I guess, you do want to think that you've helped somebody else along the way in the whole process. But, I hope that my children will help somebody else, and I hope that their children will. So, that you know, there things that move forward. Yeah, I'm sure that people have very profound things that you know, you know, they wanna look back on and say. I think, I think, I mean, my family means everything to me, you know. Bricks and mortar and, you know, all that, I mean, it all goes away. Story_ID: 326847 Speaker 1: All right, now this is my mother, Jacqueline Williams [Jacqueline McDonald Williams], with her father, James Thomas McDonald. Now, James Thomas McDonald, I know his birth date. He was born in 1898, and he died June 6, 1977. Speaker 2: Can you spell Jacqueline, and can you spell McDonald? Speaker 1: Yes. Jacqueline is J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, McDonald, M-C and then capital D-O-N-A-L-D. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. This is Lucy Moore McDonald. She married James Thomas McDonald. Now, she was born in 1897 and died in 1985. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My father, Andrew Williams. Born in Gaston County, North Carolina. I know you gonna ask me his date he was born, and I'm sorry, I just--I'll think about it in a minute. But, he died in 1977. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Died young. Speaker 2: Oh, this is my father. He received a--my father was a--an engineer, a mechanical engineer at North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And, he developed a, this tools which was patented and for that received a national award. And, this is him during that ceremony. So, obviously quite happy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. My daddy as a young dapper, dapper man, day--this was--I think he must have been dating my mother at the time. But, I'd may say he was quite sharp, quite handsome. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Now, this is actually my husband's side of the family. I'm sorry. Yeah, I'm sorry, that's a bit of a mix up there. Go to some of the-- Speaker 1: This is my older daughter, Dawn [Dawn Elizabeth Biggins]. So, you have here four generations. You have, well obviously me, then my mother in the white and the green, and then her mother. So, my mother Jacqueline Williams, and her mother, Lucy McDonald, so four generations. That, that's a very special picture for me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right. So, this is right after my husband and I were married. I am--am I skinny or what? Is he skinny or what? But, this was in Daytona Beach, Florida in the backyard of this house. So, our first time going to visit after we were married. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is me. I don't know how old I was at this point in time, but my mother made all of my clothes. She was a great seamstress and actually taught me to sew. And, if you'll look at all those great clothes hanging in the background, you know, they're nice and fresh and clean. And, she loved, she loved light colors, so we were always pressed. Speaker 1: This is, this is a great picture. This is my father's mother [Eliza Johnson Williams]. Obviously, a lot younger at the time. And, me and my brother [Joseph Williams], so, the--I think this, I think this photo was made at her house. And, again, you can tell my mother loved to sew. Speaker 2: Okay. The Biggins family; my husband Franklin [Franklin Biggins], me, my youngest daughter, Kenzie [Kenzie Biggins], and my older daughter Dawn. This was a church photograph. You know how at church they do the annual picture, so--this was done at church. Speaker 1: Do you know approximately what time? Speaker 2: I don't. I don't remember. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This photo was ac- and actually appeared in the Atlanta Journal and Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], we were--they had asked us to do something totally different that had nothing to do with Journal-Constitution; all of us. And, we were out in the park and they were making pictures and the next day we looked up and the photo was in the paper. So, obviously, my husband, younger daughter, who'd probably was maybe five or six at the time. And, anyway, so, we were out having a good time, spending time outdoors. Speaker 1: This is my older daughter with Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. My older daughter did an internship at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Dawn Elizabeth Biggins did an internship at the White House. Speaker 2: Okay. These are all my buddies. We were out having lunch one day. So, if you look at this, Colleen Dempsey [Colleen Bozman Dempsey] with the red dress on died from breast cancer a couple of years ago. [HistoryMaker] Alexis Scott, from the old Scott family here in Atlanta, Georgia, and runs a newspaper here. If you come, the person that's seated is Deborah Lumm [ph.]. The person above her, Rhonda Mathison [ph.]; person in the white, [HistoryMaker] Monica Kaufman and then me in the black. So, we were out having fun. Speaker 1: That's my--Kenzie Biggins, me in the middle, and Dawn, my older daughter. We were all down in the islands. We were in Freeport [Bahamas] on family vacation. This was shot about a year ago. And, we do, we, every year try to go someplace together as a family and we were obviously having a great time. Speaker 2: This is my mother's retirement party. Notice that lovely blazing red dress she has on. Anyway, I'm the first person that you see. Next to me is my sister-in-law, Georgia Williams [ph.]; my older daughter, Dawn Elizabeth Biggins; my mother, who's retiring. We had a great retirement party. We had so much fun. And, then my younger daughter, Kenzie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Kenzie's spelled, K-E--? Speaker 1: K-E-N-Z-I-E. She's named for her great-grandmother. Speaker 2: All right. This is, when Nelson Mandela first trip to America after coming out of prison there in South Africa, he has just landed in Washington, D.C. and I am part of the, the delegation on the--of White House person that is there to meet and welcome him to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: This is my, my husband, and President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] doing my husband, Franklin Biggins and President Clinton do what they both love to do, which is to play golf. And, they, they have golfed often together. Speaker 2: Oh, with Al--Vice President Al Gore, he was vice president at the time and me. This was in the West Wing of the White House. We had been talking about something, standing in the hall and turned around and the official photographer caught the shot. So, I was, I was glad, I like him quite a bit. Speaker 1: Another White House shot. These are the, these were the African American women of the White House. And, we were there for, I think, they, we had just had a, a senior meeting and broke, just the meeting had broken up and we all decided, let's have photo done together. So, you have me. You have [HistoryMaker] Hazel O'Leary, who was secretary of energy. You have [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman who headed on Legislative Affairs [Bureau of Legislative Affairs]. Let me think, I think I may be blanking on her correct title. And, then Cassandra Pulley [Cassandra Pulley Greene], who was the number two person in Small Business Administration. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is from the, this is from the women's conference [Fourth World Conference on Women], which was held in 1995 in Beijing, China. It's help every ten years and I was vice chairman of the delegation. The chair of the delegation, was, there were two chairs, Madeleine Albright, seated to my left. And, then you have Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was also by--were chairman. So, Madeleine and Hillary were the chairs of the delegation. And, then the person that you see seated in the end with the brown is Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky. She was one of the vice chairs. That--we represented the United States for the women's conference and spoke on behalf of all women in the United States. Story_ID: 326848 Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite photos from the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Number one, I love the black and white that it's captured in. Number two, it was a, it was a very serious meeting we had. A number of things to get done, and you know, really working hard obviously at explaining what we had done. And, I'll tell you, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was a task master. He really, you know, wanted things to go smoothly and to have the right things happen from a personnel standpoint. And, he was giving us a grilling that day. Speaker 2: This is--there is a tradition at least in the South in the African American community of photos being made after funerals because you have a lot of family that's there. So, in this photograph, this is the, the, the--right after my grandfather [Kelly Williams] had been buried. This is my father's [Andrew Williams] father. So, you see my father, you see his brother, Arthur [Arthur Williams (ph.)]. You see, Ike [Ike Williams (ph.)] his, his, right there in the middle, brother. You see, Raymond [Raymond Williams (ph.)], and then I'm blanking on the last name; I was doing pretty good there. But, then, my grandmother [Eliza Johnson Williams] who is seated there next to my father. And, then his, his sister, Mable [ph.]. So, the whole--all the brothers and the sisters and they, you know, this is right after the service and right after they'd lost their father. Speaker 1: So, this is the entire family. This is my--the Williams family and the Johnson family from the, after the service. And, in this picture I, I, well, I'm, I can't even start to name everybody in the picture. But, my older brother [Joseph Williams] is in the picture. I'm in the picture, my father, my mother [Jacqueline McDonald Williams] and my youngest brother [Warren Williams]. You know, and lots of other relatives. It was a, it was, you know, sad on one, one side, but, you know, it was a joyous occasion on another because the whole family had gotten together and had not gotten together in a long time. Speaker 2: And, this is my grandmother. If you look seated to the right, that's my grandmother. The rest, and then all of her sisters. And, this is my father's mother, and boy, they were a great looking group of women. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is back to my mother's side of the family. My mother's, this is her great-grandmother, Viola Moore [Viola Fox Moore]. And, then the young girl standing is my grandmother, Lucy Moore [Lucille Moore McDonald], and the young fella to the right is, is her brother, Michael Moore [ph.]. I'll tell you, it just hit me, my Uncle Mike who said, he was, this is when I was at the White House, he was at a family reunion, and he made the comment that he had known his great uncle who was a slave and his great niece who worked at the White House. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: This is my, all right now let me think, this is my, this would be my great-great-grandfather on my mother's side. So, this was her mother's father's father. I have to get all these relationships right. Speaker 1: On your father's side? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, on my mother's side-- Speaker 1: Mother's? Speaker 2: This was her father's--yeah, yep, yep, Sam Moore. Speaker 1: This is, well, that's my grandmother. This is Lucy Moore as a child. Oh, no, no, no, I'm sorry. That's, that, I forgot. Forgive me. That, that's her, that's my, that's my mother's uncle, that's Michael Moore as a child. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a boy actually. And, then that's Lucy Moore, that my, you know, my grandmother. Speaker 2: And, she's the one who became--is that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. No, no. That's her child. Speaker 2: Oh, that's her-- Speaker 1: That's her child. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, then that's my grandfather, I'm sorry, not my great--that's, that would've been my great-great-grandfather. The younger person that you saw earlier, this is him as young--as an older man. He was brick mason. A lot of the cotton mills in that area, Gaston County [North Carolina], were built by him. And, and if you go there now, the church, the Catholic church there, at the cornerstone, the stone says Sam Moore. Speaker 2: So, that's Sam Moore? Speaker 1: Um-hm. And, that's, yeah, that's Sam more obviously in a younger day but he was, you know, he was very well-known and a lot of cornerstones in that town [Belmont, North Carolina] still have his name on it, brick mason. Speaker 2: I think some of the--and this is Viola Moore. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, which one are you? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Viola Moore and that house, it's interesting, the house that she's standing on is on the Belmont Abbey [Belmont, North Carolina] property. One of--we, we, the family actually has property there that was given to her--oh, I've forgotten all the relationships here. But, the whole point is that, you know, first out of slavery and that's where the property came from. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: My mother as a--right, right--I guess, this was before she got married, and out of high school, and looking, looking pretty, pretty, looking great there actually, looking beautiful. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my mother when she finished high school in 1940. Look at that. I had to look at that closely but that's my mother's high school graduation picture. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. My mom, my mother and father the day after they got married. Actually, my mother and father got married twice. They ran--they eloped and then my [maternal] grandmother made them get, they came home and told my grandmother they had eloped so the next day, she married them--made them get married again in the Catholic church. So, they got married the day before and the day after Christmas (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You know, it's always great to have great friends in your life and [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones certainly is one of my dearest friends. And, we were at some event having a great time. And, you know what, for some reason, I think that may have been like at the--at Andy Young's [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] birthday party or something, several years ago. And, it was a great black-tie event and the two of us were there together. Speaker 2: This is, well, the President Bill Clinton and my daughter, Kenzie Biggins. This was bring your daughter to work day, so she flew up to Washington [D.C.] and spent the day with me. And, got to experience a day at the White House working. She learned a lot. Speaker 1: Family. You have my daughter Kenzie, my husband Franklin Biggins, me, and our daughter Dawn Elizabeth Biggins. And, not to forget that great dog, Blue. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. Now, this was in the newspaper. This was an article that was in the newspaper right, prior to going to China. So, this would've been, we went in September, 1995. And, you see here, my daughter, Kenzie, me in the middle and then closest to us is my daughter, Dawn. Just discussing, you know, the issues of women and what the, what the conference [Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, China] would mean to women in general. So, I was really glad to have, you know, my daughters have their input into this as we made preparation to go. The Journal and Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] sent a reporter with me, Marilyn Geewax, who went and spent the entire time with me while there in China. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was--the Atlanta newspaper [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] did this article about power couples in Atlanta [Georgia]. So, you know, at the time, I was at C&S Bank [Citizens and Southern Corporation] and they, they did one on me and my husband, Franklin. And, and he made the comment that he doesn't try to be a banker and I don't try to be a lawyer and that's why the marriage works (laughter)..