 Story_ID: 85094 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Amy Loretta Tate Billingsley, A-M-Y, my middle name is Loretta, L-O-R-E-T-T-A, my maiden name is Tate, T-A-T-E, and Billingsley, B-I-L-L-I-N-G-S-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 29, 1936, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a consultant. Speaker 1: Okay, consultant in what? Speaker 2: I do management marketing and events planning. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 26, 19 oops, 2003. Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at 1227 4th Street, South West in Washington, D.C.; this is my home. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85095 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you. The first one is, and they just require a short answer. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'll say bread. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It doesn't matter, you can't control what happens to you, you can only control how you respond to it. Story_ID: 85096 Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you about your family history. How far back can you trace your family and do you have any idea what they were doing in the nineteenth century? Speaker 2: Back in the 1970s Alex Haley used to come and sit in our living room and we'd have sessions in Berkeley [California] and he inspired many of us to go around the community and our families with tape recorders. And one of the things that I did when I came to Chicago [Illinois] was to tape record my then 80-year-old aunt, my grandfather's sister [Esther], who was kind of the family historian. And sat down with her and taped her for about a week, and organized her pictures and that kind of thing. So she told the story in a very systematic way of our family. And one of the stories that had gone back through our family for years and years was how her father was run out of Montgomery, Alabama by a lynch mob. So we--she told it in a very organized way and as a result, I did some roots-type history and have traced back Jessie Chisholm Duke who is my great-grandfather. He was born in 1853, he was born to a slave woman and a father, I guess, 'cause he--his mother and father were Easter and Abner Duke, who were born around 1825, 1830. Easter was born of a slave woman and her master. So, and Esther says that this was the case so that our--we can basically trace back to about 1800, I guess, more or less, that side of the family. Easter and Abner Duke gave birth to three children, one of which was Jessie Chisolm Duke, who was born in 1853. He married Willie Evelyn Black, who was born in 1861, so both of them were born as slaves. Jessie Chisolm Duke was a--his mistress at one point, taught him how to read and write, so he learned how to read and write during slavery and worked that skill to his advantage. He was a mail clerk in Selma [Alabama], I guess during the time, let's see, during the Civil War. He was a teacher--I believe just after the Civil War, I'm sorry. He was a teacher and a mail clerk and at one point was a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1884, I guess it was. Speaker 1: Was this in Alabama? Speaker 2: Well he was a national, this is national, but he was elected as an Alabama delegate. I think the convention was in Chicago [Illinois] actually. He came to Chicago to do that. Speaker 1: In 18--what was it? Speaker 2: It would have been 1884, I think. Story_ID: 85097 Speaker 1: And at that point he [Jessie Chisholm Duke] had married and had children. My grandfather was his first born. He had eventually eight children. He founded the Montgomery Alabama Herald, his newspaper. And the story that has gone through the family, even before I heard it systematically from Aunt Esther was that he wrote an editorial against lynching. There was a woman, a white woman who frequented the slaves, well the black neighborhoods, and was going around with a black guy and somebody saw her there and she called rape and accused this man who she had been--had consensual relationship with and they lynched him. They dragged him through the street and lynched him, and he took exception to that and wrote an editorial about that. And they came to his house looking for him. He hid in the piano, they couldn't find him. Speaker 2: Hid in the piano? Speaker 1: In the piano. Apparently they had a piano that was big enough for him to hide in. So they couldn't find him and then the mayor of the town who was fairly friendly helped him escape in women's clothes and drove him to the train station. Was interesting because a professor at Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama], when we were researching my grandfather and went to Montgomery [Alabama], could not find his newspaper in the archives of Montgomery, they had been taken out, and we were very unhappy about that, got home found out that the person who took it out was Allen Jones, his name, was the professor at the Auburn University in Auburn, Alabama. And he says, your grandfather, we've been researching him for three years. So they had been researching Jessie Chisolm Duke and gave me lots of information, including video--microfiche of newspapers where, for a whole week, running the white newspapers in Alabama, talked about how Jessie Chisolm Duke was uppity and he was--he wrote this editorial, and a committee went to call on him and they could not find him, and they just really, of course, wanted to discuss with him and that they couldn't find him and so--then there was correspondence back and forth. And I actually found some reference to him in a book about Booker T. Washington. Now apparently--I don't know if you want to know all of this. Speaker 2: Yeah, go ahead. Speaker 1: But apparently what was interesting is that Jessie Duke was encouraging what is now Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] to come and settle in Montgomery, Alabama. And Booker T. Washington whose new institution, Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], was not too far away, was really a little nervous about the fact that Alabama State, what is now Alabama State, would be so close to Tuskegee. He was afraid that it would somehow be detrimental to his institution, so this was kind of a dialogue that was going back and forth between the two men. And in the newspapers that were talking about this uppity Negro who had this newspaper and was talking all this stuff, they talked about how--they talked about this controversy. And it's interesting to me because there was a letter from someone called Progressive or something like that, who said it's no problem, we can have a new school come and settle in our communities, said it'll make for jobs for our brick masons and our bakers and so forth, and we know how to take care of Negros. We've taken care of that for a long time. Part of the controversy was they were afraid that if a school came to Montgomery then black men would become educated and desirable to white women. And they said we can certainly take care of that. So this is--this is part of the traffic that was in the Montgomery Advertiser at the time. Well Jessie Duke left on the train, went to Memphis [Tennessee] where Ida B. Wells sheltered him for a time. And then he finally settled in Pine Bluff, Arkansas where he started another newspaper, and he was the Grand Chancellor of the Grand Knights of Pythias. And Aunt Esther said he would go out on the road on speaking engagements and would come back with so much that he had to have security guards come with him and they would sit on the dining room table and count out this money. Also, in Montgomery he was a deacon, I guess, on the Board of Trustees of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, which is where [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] started out. And he also was involved in the founding of the University of Ala-Arkansas [at] Pine Bluff. Story_ID: 85098 Speaker 1: He [Jessie Chisholm Duke] had eight children. His--my grandfather, Charles Sumner Duke was the oldest. Charles went to I think it was called Normal School [sic, Branch Normal College] at that point which was the forerunner of University of Arkansas [at Pine Bluff]. He went there as did many of his brothers and sisters, and then he came to Washington [D.C.] as a page, did some time at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. They told him that he should really apply to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but he was turned down by Harvard, they thought he wasn't quite prepared. So he went to Phillips Exeter [Exeter, New Hampshire], and then he went to Harvard and was accepted at Harvard. He graduated Harvard in 1904 which was just a little bit after, I guess, [W.E.B.] DuBois got his PhD from Harvard around that same period. They told my grandfather that black people couldn't go into math. They didn't have the aptitude for math. My grandfather said well I'll show you and he majored in math and finished in math. After Harvard he couldn't find a job in, you know, the scientific field. He was a principal of a school, I think it was in Detroit [Michigan]. Anyway that's where he met my grandmother [Estelle Duke] who was a teacher. They married and he moved eventually to Chicago [Illinois], where he worked on the--for the Chicago city, City of Chicago doing engineering. He was involved in building their sanitation system, the underground cribs and things where they you know were part of that sanitation system, he was involved in the building of Michigan Avenue Bridge. There was some controversy. They accused him of something, I think, and he decided he was gonna go off and get another--to get a degree specifically in engineering. So he got a degree in engineering at University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] then came back to Chicago and had at one point a thriving engineering architect--he was an architectural engineer, which I gather is rather unusual for that time to have an engineer who was both an architect and an engineer. He built several buildings in Chicago and had a thriving business. He was always very community conscious was what they called a race man. He was involved in Hyde Park--an organization in Hyde Park that worked on fair housing in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. He was always very interested and concerned about poor people and how they had to live and so he was very much of an advocate for public housing. He started in 1925 the oldest black professional organization, National Technical Association [NTA]. He and several others started NTA because they didn't want--they wanted to help young people that were coming up that were in the scientific field. It was very difficult at that time for them to get jobs and for them to find their livelihoods in those fields so they did that. My grandmother was always very active with him. She did a lot of support services for him. And my grandmother, they tell me, was the one who discovered and did research on the fact that Jean Baptiste Pointe DuSable was the founder of Chicago. And at the World's Fair, I think it was 1935 [sic, 1933], my grandfather, my grandmother built the little cabin which was a replica of his home. Speaker 2: So your grandfather actually built a replica, in the Century of Progress [World's Fair] in 1933? Speaker 1: I guess it was 1933, yeah, uh-huh, that's right. Story_ID: 85099 Speaker 1: At that point, let's see, 1910, my mother was born, my mother was their oldest child. Then she had a brother, her brother Charles Sumner Duke, Jr. was born in Madison, Wisconsin, and in fact they were twins, but one of the twins was dropped on his head and he died, so it was my mother in 1910, Charles, I guess, was maybe about 1912 and then Jessie Chisolm Duke who lives still in Atlanta [Georgia] was born in 1915. My grandfather was a very jovial guy, but very kind of dictatorial within the home, I gather, so that left a few scars on some folks, on his children. But he not only built several buildings in Chicago [Illinois] and we have some pictures. I don't think any of the buildings--no, one of the buildings does still stand because my cousin, Geraldine McCullough [HM], showed me a building in Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] that he built, so I guess that still stands and some others. Unfortunately, I don't know all of the buildings that he built. He designed and named the Ida B. Wells Public Housing Project, 'cause he continued to push and push and push for public housing. He's written lots of articles and things about public housing and continued to push for public housing and designed Ida B. Wells Project, which was kind of garden apartments I understand. But then because of some kind of political problems, they took that contract away from him. They still named it Ida B. Wells, but they didn't use his design, I think. That was during the Depression. He lost his business. His business wasn't faring well during the Depression. So that's when he came to Washington, D.C. to be--to work in the, is it Farm Security Administration [FSA], I believe it was in Washington, D.C. So he managed the largest group of black engineers--architects to build what is--continues to stand as our Aberdeen Gardens in Newport News, Virginia. In fact they just had a celebration down there, they opened a museum. He built that and they say that it's still very--said that it was very foresighted that he built that in a way that the buildings are still standing when some other buildings have fallen down and there's a way that he built the sanitation system so that they are, what do you call it, in front of the houses there's like a ditch where the water runs, so therefore the houses don't flood because the water is running there which seems to me at some point maybe they'll put--I think now a days, they put you know big pipes to hold it, but anyway. That was one of his things. And he also after--this would have been in the '40s [1940s], late '40s he went to the Virgin Islands and he worked with the Governor [William H.] Hastie, again I think with the Farm Security Administration, I think, to build the sanitation system in the Virgin Islands. In fact my sister was on the airplane with a white woman and she said something about--they just happened to start talking about Charles Duke, she said, well, Charles Duke is my grandfather, she says your grandfather, she said do you know--she owned a hotel I think--she said do you know that we would not have the development in the Virgin Islands that we have today if it weren't for your grandfather, what he did to build the sanitation system in those three islands. So that was sort of interesting. He came back to the United States 1952. I think he had colon cancer, and so he died in 1952. So that's--that's my grandfather. And my grandmother-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Was of--his wife was of Indian descent and was a school teacher and just was really very much his support system there. Speaker 2: That's on your mother's side, right? Speaker 1: That's my mother's side. Story_ID: 85100 Speaker 1: And your father's side? Speaker 2: My father, my father [Herman Tate] was one of ten children who grew up in Arkansas, near Conway, Arkansas--a little farming village. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. What was your father's full name and can you spell it for us? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. My father's name is Herman Tate. I don't think he had a middle name, Herman Tate. He was the son of Salina Amy Harrison Weaver Tate Veasey, she had three husbands too, two of them died. Speaker 1: When was he born and where? Speaker 2: He was born in 1907 in the rural community near Conway, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By the way Charles Sumner Duke was born in Montgomery, Alabama. He was maybe about the fifth of 10 children. His mother had four children by Mr. Weaver, who passed and then she had five children by Haywood Tate who died at 33 of pneumonia. He was fixing a roof or something and died of pneumonia. And then after that she married Veese, and had one child by that man. Then she came to Chicago [Illinois] and lived with my mother and father so she was in my home from the time I was about--from the time I was born really until my father died when I was 15. Story_ID: 85101 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your father [Herman Tate] like and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: My father graduated University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in 1935. He was the first one in his family to even finish high school, but he couldn't find a professional job, he worked in the post office for most of his--for all of his life. He was a postal clerk and--but in the meanwhile he was very much also a race man, he helped found and organize coop, cooperative grocery store, credit union and camp in Chicago. The camp still continues, Circle Pines Center, in Cloverdale, Michigan. And that was very unusual at that time for there to be any interracial activity, and this was an interracial camp in Michigan which was quite unusual. So he was very much the mainstay of his nine brothers and sisters and his mother. We used to have family gatherings all the time, Thanksgiving, Christmas. We would get together as a family and--with all of the brothers and sisters, most of whom lived in Chicago [Illinois]. One of them lived in and still continued in Arkansas, one of them was in Minneapolis [Minnesota], but basically, you know, we were sort of the gathering place of that--of his family. Story_ID: 85102 Speaker 1: Now what about your mother, can you state her name--give her name and spell it for us and her date of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was Inez Duke Tate. She was born Inez Estelle was her middle name, Duke Tate, I-N-E-Z. She was born July 17, 1910 in Chicago [Illinois]. She finished the University of Chicago in 1933. Of course both her mother and her father had college degrees. She was a school teacher. She taught school in Chicago. When we moved--we were in the Rosenwald [Apartment] Building when I was born there at 47th and Michigan and then we moved out to Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] in 1945, I believe, just as the war was ending. And she taught school in our neighborhood school that my sister and I went to, [John D.] Shoop [Elementary] School. Speaker 1: Shoop? Speaker 2: Shoop School. Emil Jones [HM] who's now president of the Illinois State Senate credits her with turning him around from a bad little boy to deciding to make something of himself, which I don't know if that's true or not, but that's what he said, that's what he says. And Barbara Sizemore [HM] was her student teacher. Barbara was practiced-taught under my mother. She came to Shoop when she was about 19 years old and was a breath of fresh air right there at Shoop. She was--has always been ahead of her time. So my mother and my father [Herman Tate] were very community-oriented. My mother led Brownie Troops and Girl Scout Troops, and my father led Cub Scout Troops. Our home was the center of a lot of community activity. Story_ID: 85103 Speaker 1: Now how did they meet? Did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They met at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't know the story was much more than that, at least I haven't heard it. But they met at the University of Chicago and I know that they--this was a time when ladies--it was almost scandalous for ladies to show more than their ankles and even though they were in their 20s they had to have chaperones when they went out on dates and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 85104 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the--tell me about the neighborhood you grew up in and what the different sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Grew up in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] at 109th and Loomis. We had a two-bedroom--we had a three-bedroom house, which seemed awfully big to me then. I went back it seemed kind of small. My grandmother [Salina Veasey] lived on the--there's one bedroom on the first floor and my sister [Eileen Cline, HM] and I shared a bedroom on the second floor and my parents lived on the second--you know shared a room on the second floor and there was one bathroom. And we had a basement, which actually was, at least half of it was full of my grandma and grandpa Duke's stuff cause they had at that point were in Washington [D.C.] and the Virgin Islands and you know had things that they wanted to store, but the other half was what we used for parties and things. We did Kool-Aid parties, we painted the light bulbs with tipper colors and had parties there. I was gonna tell you my father [Herman] migrated from Arkansas. His family sort of migrated from Arkansas. His older brother and sister came up and then you know various ones would come up and stay with them until they got settled and then they would, you know, move out on their own. So my father actually came up when he was in grammar school and worked to support himself all the way through college which is why he finished college after my mother [Inez Duke Tate] did, actually. So with his ten brothers and sisters, they all eventually came up to Chicago at some point. My sister and I, my sister was born in 1935 so my sister and I are about 18 months apart, and we had a vacant lot next to us where we grew--we had a garden, and we had chickens. My father's brothers and sisters and his mother, would you know all come out and work the garden. We had fruit trees. In the summertime the only thing we went to the store for was milk. We didn't have a cow, but we grew all of our food, and the chickens were one of my jobs. I raised the chickens and collected the eggs and raised tomato plants and bought my first bicycle that way. My grandmother would go out for Sunday dinners, she'd go out and wring the head of a chicken and he'd flop all over the yard and then we'd pluck him and eat him. Story_ID: 85105 Speaker 1: So let me see, what else, sights and sounds. Speaker 2: Morgan Park was kind of rural? Speaker 1: It was more suburban than rural because there were houses. They weren't like fields, but there were houses and there were some vacant lots. There was a vacant lot that we used to play baseball on in the next block. So it was--it was not rural per se, but it was sparse you know it was not dense--as densely populated as it is now. And we had--we walked to school. There was--we walked past the house of an old man, he must have been 90 years old. We used to call him Mr. Snake. He had a house that you know had no running water or anything and he would sit out on his porch. And one time my grandmother walked by there with me and he said to my grandma, "hello there girl". She was flattered and embarrassed. That was kind of funny, I remember that, it's one of my memories. And we knew all the neighbors. You know we would always go in and out of each other's homes and be--it was a community. If we did something wrong on the way home from school, my grandmother would know it before I got home so it was--we had--there was a grocery store about three blocks away that was owned and operated by one of our classmates, and we would go there and get milk. That's where we would get our milk. There was a store across the street from the school, we would go and get broken up bags of potato chips for a dime. And we'd get a pickle and stick a peppermint stick in it and suck that. That was a treat, play on the playground. Speaker 2: Have little girls done that from time immemorial or what, you know pickles like something along with it? Speaker 1: Pickle with a peppermint stick. I guess so, I guess so, you know, so. Story_ID: 85106 Speaker 1: Okay now well--what did you-now you went to [John D.] Shoop [Elementary] School. Did you start school there or did you start before your family moved? Speaker 2: I started kindergarten at Shoop School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, it seemed like my sister [Eileen Cline, HM] started kindergarten there too, so she would have been a year ahead of me. I remember they had a big circle that all the children would sit around the circle, and I remember there was one girl who had ringlets which I thought was very interesting. I would run across--I remember running across the circle to finger her ringlets. She's a girl who is an artist now in Connecticut. We had--my sister was more of a loner than I was, but I had a little group of about, I don't know, six girls that we were Brownies together and we would do sleepovers and various things so. My mother always made sure that we had piano lessons and ballet lessons and--my sister was very gifted in piano. From the age of five she had perfect pitch. Her piano teacher would come and hit a note on the piano. Eileen would go in the kitchen, she had note the piano and Eileen would tell her what the note was. So she was always very good at that. In fact she retired recently as Dean of Peabody Conservatory of Music. She had a PhD in music and her daughter [Dr. Joy Cline Phinney]'s a professional pianist, lives in Boston now, her son [Dr. Jonathan Cline] is just getting his PhD in Environmental Biology. She, in 1956, my sister and her husband went to Boulder, Colorado for six weeks and stayed 25 years. So basically they grew up out there and raised their family out there. I went to--when I finished Shoop School in 1949-- Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about school. Speaker 2: --Okay. Speaker 1: How did you like school? Did your mother [Inez Duke Tate] teach at that school? Speaker 2: My mother taught at that school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had to call her Miss Tate, which was a little strange. Not too many times I'd slipped and called her mother, but she never actually--I was never actually in her class, but sometimes she would substitute because she was, what was she, she was like an assistant principal at one point and did different things, so you know one of the students that floated. But I liked school. It was K-8. And actually I have not had a black teacher since I left Shoop School. But the teachers were very influential. There was one teacher who, Miss Evelyn Jackson, who was very much prim proper old maid, who would say, you do not call yourself Negro, you call yourself Afro American or Ethiopian. She didn't like the term Negro. Speaker 1: Did she tell you why? Speaker 2: Yeah, because that was a term that other people called us and we wanted to call ourselves those other terms were names of pride for us, not those--not Negro, was not a term of pride. I remember Mr. Stewart who was a musician, and he--in fact he used to play with my--my aunt's husband was a musician, but he taught school and he was just--these I think the two most influential teachers for us because they were just very much into our history and were determined that we were gonna succeed and go through the rigors of life, the hurdles that life puts ahead of you. Speaker 1: They were teaching black history in-- Speaker 2: They probably weren't supposed to, but yeah, they did. I mean they taught us about our heritage. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, which is something that sometimes we miss in this integrated world of ours, yeah. Story_ID: 85107 Speaker 1: Okay, so well what kind of little girl were you, what did you like to do and how would you characterize yourself in those days? Speaker 2: I liked to read, I liked to play with my friends, I didn't like to practice piano. My mother [Inez Duke Tate], I think, finally gave up and then she gave me dramatic lessons so I did dramatic readings, various places, including in the assemblies at school. We would do ballet and recite poems and readings, that kind of thing. That was one of the things that we--that we would do as, you know, you put on shows and that kind of thing. I guess I know I remember going out in the backyard hiding from my mother, because if she would see me not doing anything productive, she would give me something to do, so I'd go out in the backyard. We had a catalpa tree out there. One time my mother looked out the window and saw this book coming up the catalpa tree and that was me hiding in the catalpa tree and bringing my book along with me. So I guess I liked to read. I got into devilment, my sister and I would get into fisticuffs from time to time. My grandmother [Salina Veasey] was very handy with the switch. My grandmother sewed all of our clothes and cooked dinner, meals and basically was you know, a support system for my mother as she was teaching and stuff, so. Speaker 1: Well that's creative, but anything else? Speaker 2: I remember one time we would go down to Mildred Hessler's Ballet, which was right across the street from the Rosenwald Building and my mother would hire a girl to go with us. And one time it was very cold and the girl left us on the street corner 'cause she was cold and she wanted to get out of the cold, and my mother was very unhappy about that. She didn't use that girl anymore. So we used to go to--we used to do a lot of things in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Our church was in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. I was raised Christian Scientist, and we went to church at 44th and Michigan. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Hold on one second. Speaker 2: Forty-fourth and Michigan? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: If she could just start that sentence over again about the church. Speaker 2: We went to the Eighth Church of Christ Scientist on 44th and Michigan, so we traveled a good ways to get to church every Sunday and we went every Sunday. We were in Sunday school classes and youth groups, which my mother [Inez Duke Tate] organized youth groups at the church. And let's see, so we would always have as a--I guess when I got to be a teenager, we always had parties. I did say we had parties at our house and we would invite--sometimes we'd have people from down in town to come out, sometimes we'd have the neighborhood children or a mix of both. My mother was very active in something called the Mother's Club where the middle class black mothers would get together and, I guess once a month, and study to see how--whether they were raising us right and we would do various things, you know, along that line, culturally and we still--Barbara Sizemore [HM] said something I think is kind of interesting, she says that Chicago had a large--one of the larger middle classes because there were two sources of achievement in Chicago, blacks could work in the post office and so that was you know a group of middle class--a source of middle class status and then blacks could become school teachers. And I gather that there other cities like New York, you know, blacks couldn't really be school teachers or some other group had the post office locked up, but blacks were postal workers and school teachers and Pullman Car Porters. One of my uncles was a Pullman Car Porter, so that there was a large body of middle class families in Chicago, and we were very much a part of that you know, studying the child, study group and many of those--many of the children of those families have done extremely well, have done--gone onto PhDs and leaders in their fields. Story_ID: 85108 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of high school, now where did you go to high school and--? Speaker 2: Well, this was a time of integration. And my mother [Inez Duke Tate] and father [Herman Tate] decided that it would be a good thing for us to go to the integrated high school. So the University of Chicago Laboratory School was just opening up to black people. And my sister [Eileen Cline, HM] graduated from [John D.] Shoop [Elementary] School and went to the Lab School. They put her back from--into eighth grade and she went there which means that you know she had, and then two years later I had to go to travel on the bus, the street car and so forth and walk across that cold midway every day to the Lab School. So we traveled from Morgan Park to the Lab School every day. That's what I did in 1949. I went to the Lab School. They again, they put me back from the ninth grade to the eighth grade which did not make me very happy. All of my friends went onto Morgan Park High School, but I went there, and it was a good experience. We learned a lot, did a lot of things that we probably wouldn't do otherwise. That would have been my first time getting swimming lessons except that I didn't really want to--I didn't really want to go swimming because I didn't want to get my hair messed up. So I can't really swim very well to this day because I didn't like getting my hair messed up. Speaker 1: Now that's the kind of thing I hear a lot of black women say that they missed out on the chance to swim because they didn't want to mess their hair up. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, 'cause you had to spend all that time in the beauty parlor getting your hair straightened, so. I made sure that my children learned how to swim when they were a year and a half, eighteen months old, they were in the swimming pool, and they swim like fishes. Speaker 1: I notice you wear your hair natural now. Are you glad now to be rid of that? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I have had a natural since the early '60s [1960s]. So I've had a natural for a very long time, would have had one then if it was available 'cause I never liked to take the time to sit in the beauty parlor and you know fuss with it, so no. Story_ID: 85109 Speaker 1: Did you have any particular teachers or mentors at Morgan I mean at University of Chicago [Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: At the Lab School? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I had good teachers. I don't--they weren't the mentor types like the ones at [John D.] Shoop [Elementary] School were. But they were good and they were helpful. We had something called the girls club which--they had girls club and boys club which organized the you know student activities and there were a lot of things from that--just from that organization that I carried with me through the years, you know, how to organize and how to keep track of stuff and how to, you know, just what you do and I've done a lot of that. A lot of those lessons I carried with me, that (unclear). We were probably about sixty kids, I guess, in that. And we've had two reunions that I have gone to, one was in 1988, I think. In fact 1988 I went to a reunion of the Lab School and also a reunion of Shoop School where those two teachers I told you about actually were still living then. I think neither one of them are living now. But I would say that Shoop School was really kind of my--the most significant experience in terms of relationships. They are the ones that I keep most in touch with. So I was eighth, ninth and tenth grade at the Lab School. Girls club, was active in the girls club, had some friends from there. There were of those sixty kids I guess there were five girls and three boys that were from our community, our African American community. Story_ID: 85110 Speaker 1: When I graduated from the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois] at the tenth grade, you graduated at tenth grade at those times, my grandfather, [Charles Sumner] Duke, my mother's father had just died. My father [Herman Tate], mother [Inez Duke Tate] and so forth went to my graduation and then that Sunday my father had a heart attack at church, at the Christian Science Church [Eighth Church of Christ Scientist], so he--they brought him home. I remember them carrying him up the stairs and he was you know, just kind of, and they prayed over him, he passed that evening. So my fifteenth year was a traumatic year, my grandfather died, my father died, my grandmother, who had stayed, you know, had lived with us for all that time felt that she shouldn't live with us if her son wasn't there, so she moved into town to live with her daughter, one of her daughters. My sister went away to Oberlin, my mother's mother lived with us for a couple of years, my grandmother then died, maybe three months later. So you know 1952 was a very significant year. And my sister who had gone to the University of Chicago, when you graduate from Lab School, you could either go to the University of Chicago or you spent two years at another high school. My sister [Eileen Cline, HM] went to the University of Chicago and then went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio]. But my father dying and so forth, we didn't have the means to send me to the University of Chicago where all my friends were then. So I went to the neighborhood high school, Morgan Park High School. And I was of course a year behind my friends, but they moved me up a semester. So I was--I graduated Morgan Park High School in February in 1954. I worked for a semester and then I went to the University of Chicago, entered there in 1954. I wanted to live on campus. I've always wanted to go away to school, wanted to live on campus, and I did. My mother arranged for me to live on campus. The room that I was initially assigned to had two white girls in it and they didn't want to room with me. So all of that was rearranged and then I lived with another girl who--white girl, who was sixteen years old and a senior in college because she had done the tenth grade thing. [Robert] Maynard Hutchin's theory was that kids could do a whole lot more than we give them credit for you know. So they could really enter college at the 1lth grade and in fact many did and many did very well with that. This girl, Annadale, Annadale Snyder (ph.) I think her name was, finished the University of Chicago that year. And she was very smart, but she didn't have you know, she missed the whole thing of how you grow up, you know, she missed the whole piece of her growing up. I think that was a problem that I think that kids can be intellectually ready for college at eleventh grade but maybe need some other things that they don't necessarily get. But anyway that was--I was at the University of Chicago for that first year, I lived at home the second year I went to school. I spent my junior year at Reed College in Portland, Oregon and then I came back to University of Chicago. Story_ID: 85111 Speaker 1: What was going on in Portland [Oregon]? Speaker 2: I just had always wanted to go away to school. And there was a guy at--at the law school at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] that was saying Reed College [Portland, Oregon] was a little University of Chicago, but only on the west coast. And so I said, well that sounds interesting so sight unseen, I went out to Portland, Oregon. I was the only black. There was me and one other girl that was black at Reed College. It was a complete culture shock for me out there. Speaker 1: Was it like the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, it was in that it was very intellectual. One of my best classes I ever had was out there. It was a humanities course where they took a timeline and studied sociology, history, art, music, novels, you know, all during that timeline so that if you took say the 1850s you got you know all of the different things that flowed into that time period, which was a fascinating course. That was really a wonderful course and it has really heightened my appreciation of history and how all of history and culture goes together. So it was good in that sense, but it was very difficult for me and I couldn't get home. And I got home at Christmas time the whole time, that was it. So I came back home and went to [University of] Chicago and stayed on campus the next year and went--I took a one-year course in education, elementary education, that last year. So I finished that, but the funny thing is that the one course that I placed out of at the University of Chicago 'cause you could place out of courses if you, you know, passed the test and you wouldn't have to take that course, American History. I placed out of that, but when I came back they said, no you have to take American History, you're deficient in this area. So I went to Madison, Wisconsin and took American History course and graduated from the University of Chicago in August of 1958. And then I went back to Madison, Wisconsin and worked for a semester then came to Chicago and worked in the American Friends Service Committee at a settlement house, Henry Booth House on the South Side of Chicago. Story_ID: 85112 Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors that you remember at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? We were talking off camera about some of the other students. Speaker 2: At the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School]? Speaker 1: No, at the University of Chicago. Speaker 2: At the University of Chicago? Well, one of my classmates was Janice Porter [now Janice Gump], she was at the Lab School with me and she became the first black queen at the University of Chicago. She was queened Miss University of Chicago which was quite a thing at that time. But you know when I went to--back to the University of Chicago, my friends who were at the Lab School with me were in a whole different setting, so I didn't interface with them quite as much. I had some friends that were--worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so I did some of that there, humanities was--I remember the humanities course. I missed the sociology course which was news that people shall judge, that was the one I placed out of and that was a really good course, but I missed that one. Speaker 1: Was St. Clair Drake there and Horace Cayton? Were they at the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: They probably were but they weren't teachers of mine, yeah. I don't remember my teachers that well from the University of Chicago. The classes, we had math classes which there was Isaac--I sort of remember my math teacher. You know University of Chicago was such that at that time you sort of went to class if you wanted to and I did go to class you know most of the time. But the only thing that counted was your taking your comprehensive at the end of the year so that if you basically studied for those comprehensives. I remember math and we took kind of a generic science class which is more of the history of science than anything else. It was good, good education but I don't--I just don't remember those--either the people or the teachers that well. I was friendly with a guy that was kind of an upperclassman and we went around together a fair amount. But I remember being kind of torn between the University of Chicago and my friends in the wider community which is one of the reasons I had wanted to go away to school so that my sister [Eileen Cline, HM] went away to school and when she came back, I would have parties for her and stuff you know, she was kind of the conquering hero, but there I was, you know, there all the time. And it was not the greatest time of my life, but it was interesting and you know we got lots of--we did lots of things there. Story_ID: 85113 Speaker 1: Went to Reed College [Portland, Oregon], that was, that was interesting. One of my roommates was the daughter of Lawrence, Lawrence Livermore Labs. And she, during spring break we went--traveled with her to her house in Berkeley which was interesting. Reed College was kind of a shock to me, it was--the place was so clean. Portland, Oregon is so clean, the grass is so green you know, it was like, wow, this is a whole, it was like a whole 'nother, it was like culture shock to me and so--people would queue up to get on the busses and in Chicago you know you sort of elbowed your way, you know where people would stand in line, it was very interesting. And then going to California the houses were green and blue and yellow, it was really pink, that was really kind of interesting. Story_ID: 85114 Speaker 1: Now what did you major in? Speaker 2: --Elementary education. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you were going on to teach after-- Speaker 2: I was going to teach but I didn't get a job in Madison [Wisconsin] teaching and that's when I came to--I decided to do this--join the American Friends Service Committee Project at the Henry Booth House. We lived in a group home and worked in various projects, you know, social action, kinds of projects. So I did the group work at the Henry Booth House. One of the things I remember most about that time period was "Raisin in the Sun" came out and that was like wow, you know, to see--it was very unusual to see black people on stage and it was just a wonderful experience. And we, you know we did a lot at the projects cause Henry Booth House was in the middle of these high rise projects. I think they've been torn down by now. We worked with the kids there. Story_ID: 85115 Speaker 1: But then I went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. I went to Ohio State. I was able to get a scholarship as counseling psychology so that's what I did for the next two years. Are we stopping? Speaker 2: --No. Speaker 1: Okay. So for the next two years I was at Ohio State in Columbus, Ohio. I was a graduate resident in the dormitory as I was working on my counseling psychology degree. And across the hall from me was Jesse Owens' daughter Marlene [Owens Rankin, HM]. And one of the interesting things about that period was that Marlene decided to run for Ohio State--Miss Ohio State. And she ran for Miss Ohio State and she won. So we were all very involved in that campaign. And it provided a little dilemma for the University because they never had a black girl to be Miss Ohio State before and the tradition was that the president would kiss the queen, you know, crown the queen and kiss her, and that wouldn't do in 1960 for a white man to be kissing a black woman in public, so. They solved the dilemma by having her famous father crown her and kiss her so that's how they worked that out. Speaker 2: Ohio State was the most high profile big ten school then because of the basketball teams. I remember they went to the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] Tournament three years in a row. Speaker 1: And they had a good football team too, they was big on football, yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly. What's his name, Woody Hayes was the coach. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Bob Ferguson was the fullback. Those were the big days at Ohio State. Story_ID: 85116 Speaker 1: Yeah, so did that, went to a Circle Pines [Center]' reunion, this is Circle Pines Camp, a camp that my father [Herman Tate] you know helped found and was active in, and that's where I met Andrew Billingsley at this reunion. And the next year I was going to Ohio--I was going from Ohio to New York to visit friends, and there was this huge snow storm that closed down the Pennsylvania Turnpike and so for two days we were--we sat at a Howard Johnson and were just you know kind of snow bound there and so I wrote letters to everybody I could think of including Andrew Billingsley and his wife Patty. And that's how you know, he and I--he wrote back and said well there's no more Patty and he started you know visiting and we eventually married in 1961 when I finished Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. That summer though I went to Operations Crossroads Africa. James [Herman] Robinson was the head of that then and it was very exciting. The--we went and he you know prepped us all about how you know you're ambassadors to Africa and that kind of thing, and we went to build a schoolhouse in a little fishing village not far from Dakar. We met--we were joined by some Senegalese students and some students from Gambia and we traveled to Mali and back and it was just a very interesting time for a little girl from Chicago [Illinois] that had only been--had never been out of the United States before. Speaker 2: Could you speak French? Speaker 1: A little bit, a little bit of French, yeah. I spoke a little bit of French. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Were they independent yet? Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 2: Sixty-one, yeah, '61 [1961], okay. Speaker 1: I think they had just gained their independence. But it was shocking to me to see-- Speaker 2: [Leopold Sedar] Senghor was president [of Senegal]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Senghor was president. But you know you'd see bank presidents that were--looked like me you know and airline pilots and it was--that was really sort of amazing. It was very--it was very exciting. Came back from there and that's when our group went to Boston [Massachusetts] for a--you know shared pictures and slides and things. And that's where I met up with Andy and we started dating and married that December. So we married December 1961. Speaker 2: Okay. Now Andrew Billingsley was a sociologist, right? Speaker 1: When I met him he was a student at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] and he finished his PhD in '63 [1963] from Brandeis and that's when we moved to Berkeley, to California. He was at the University of California, Berkeley in the social work department there, School of Social Work [now School of Social Welfare]. Taught there for a time, I guess, for two years and this was--you know the '60s [1960s] was--everything was a whole lot of ferment, you know that's when a lot of things were happening. Story_ID: 85117 Speaker 1: [President John F.] Kennedy had been shot. We were in Boston [Massachusetts] actually when Kennedy was shot and--that was '61 [1961], that was '61 [1961, sic, 1963]. Speaker 2: Were you really impressed by Kennedy. Did you vote for him? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. It was a hopeful time, you know. Kennedy, "Ask not what you could do for your country". So we were, you know, just really gonna really change the world there. So that was yeah, that was really very discouraging Medgar Evers and Kennedy being shot. Speaker 2: I think Kennedy's famous speech on civil rights--on voting rights in the South was made the night Medgar Evers was shot, then later on Kennedy. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. We actually, in Boston, we actually changed our registration to Republican in order to vote for Ed Brooke [Edward Brooke] who became senator and that was exciting. But then we went to Berkeley [California] and Berkeley was--we were in Berkeley from 1963 until '70 [1970]. Now my daughter, Angela, was born in '63 [1963]. She was born in Boston. My second daughter, Bonita, was born a year and a day later and then we were in Berkeley at that point, so she was born in Walnut Creek Hospital, and we were very much the center of social-cultural-political activity at that point. Our living room was always full with sessions where we would you know solve the problems of the world. Ron Dellums [Ronald Dellums, HM] decided to run for office--for political office, sitting in our living room. There's a guy name Otho Green (ph.) who ran for state legislature, we were very involved in his campaign. He didn't win but we were, you know, we were just very involved in that. Huey Newton's brother was one of Andy's [Andrew Billingsley] students at the University of California, Berkeley. Melvin Newton was a really sweetheart. And we were--one of the advantages of being in a small town, you know, people come in and out so B.B. King and Alex Haley and the ambassador from this and the president of that would all come in and out and we would always have soirees in our living room which was--which was kind of fun. Story_ID: 85118 Speaker 1: We went, in 19 gosh, 19--when was [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] killed? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight, okay. So it was 1968 Andy [Andrew Billingsley] was asked to come to, by Ken Clark [Kenneth Clark], to (unclear) in New York. So we spent a semester in New York City, and in fact that was the year his book was published. He and I wrote "Black Families in White America" which was kind of a landmark book on black families. And we traveled to Chicago [Illinois], we had a book party in Chicago. That's when I spent time with my Aunt Esther you know doing her book and organizing her photographs and everything. And we went to New York. We had just gotten to New York when King was shot. So there we were in New York, we were--we had no television set, we had no furniture, we had nothing, and there we were you know kind of isolated from all of our community so, and sort of made up community. (unclear) people across the hall. This was a time where all the white people were you know wanted to embrace all the black people, so we had--we had people across the hall that were feeling so guilty and just eager to fraternize with us. My kids say that's the first time that they ever saw me crying, that was when he [Dr. King] was shot. I think they must have been three and four at that point. Story_ID: 85119 Speaker 1: You were just in Berkeley [California] what they called a free speech movement [Free Speech Movement]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, yeah. In fact-- Speaker 1: You really got serious in Berkeley. Speaker 2: It was during that time when-- Speaker 1: Mario Savio, I think was head of the students. Speaker 2: --The chancellor of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] had a meeting with Andy [Andrew Billingsley] in New York and asked Andy to come back to University of Chicago--god, University of California, Berkeley to be assistant chancellor for academic affairs and basically they asked him to be there to set up these various ethnic departments. So he set up Afro American Studies Department, Ethnic Indian Studies, Asian Studies, there were four of them, I can't remember what the fourth one was. But he set up all of those departments and we were very much into you know the culture of our people, of our various peoples and that's another time when you know we were very much into the whole culture thing. We had cultural parties and you know we had different people come and meet and talk and solve the problems of the world. We just knew we were going to solve all these problems if we just worked a little bit harder. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you were there at the time when all the Black Panthers were arrested-- Speaker 2: Black Panthers. Speaker 1: --They were put in jail. There was a conflict between the US Organization and the Black Panther Party fueled by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] you know. Speaker 2: All that. Speaker 1: --And all that was going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. The Free Speech Movement we were tear gassed and it was--it was quite a time, it was quite a time. That was 19, was it--that was the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so '68 [1968], when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is killed (unclear) of people pouring of sympathy around a lot of people that you knew. And riots sprung up all over the country. Speaker 2: All over the country, yeah, yeah, yeah. And we were in New York. Andy was you know involved with Kenneth Clark and with--the head of the Urban League. Speaker 1: Whitney Young? Speaker 2: Whitney Young, yeah Whitney Young. In fact he was killed during that period, I think, wasn't he? He drowned in Nigeria during that period? Speaker 1: Yeah, he drowned off the coast of Nigeria, right? Speaker 2: But in the meantime we were active with John Henrik Clark and Kenneth Clark and John Killens was one of my uncle's friends actually who became our friend. And all of the New York you know all the New York intellectuals. Speaker 1: Did you ever-- Speaker 2: Nat Hentoff, Hentoff. Speaker 1: Yeah, the jazz critic? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Malcolm X? Speaker 2: No, I didn't meet Malcolm X. Speaker 1: I know that's earlier in '65 [1965]. He was there about '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Didn't meet Malcolm X, didn't meet Martin King, although I met all of Martin's family, you know Coretta [Scott King] and his mother and his father and Minnie May (ph.) s and all those we were you know had evenings with Howard Thurman and his wife Sue Thurman, wonderful people. We were very close with Dan and Dareath(ph.) Collins. Dan was a dentist in the San Francisco area and he was on the California Board of Education. And we--we were involved in that and had, what was I, I was head of some--I was head of some organization that gave speeches around education and you know. The whole thing was you know to try to get equality for blacks in the educational system and the society at large and we worked real hard at it. Story_ID: 85120 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the Independent Black School Movement in New York with Les Campbell [Leslie Campbell] who became Jitu Weusi (unclear) school in Brooklyn, I think it was. That was like part of the Independent Black School Movement? Speaker 2: Yeah. We were very much interested in independent black schools. I didn't interface with those particular, but we spent a lot of time with Vincent and Rosemarie Harding. They would come out and we would go there and that kind of thing and we would talk a lot about you know building black schools. And although we didn't have a black school, but we did work on black activities, you know cultural and educational activities for our kids, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in fact in 1970 we were--Andy [Andrew Billingsley] was going to go on a sabbatical to Atlanta [Georgia] to work with Vincent Harding [HM] at the Institute of the Black World, and he took about six of his students with him, George Napper, who became of Chief of Public Safety in Atlanta, there were about five or six folk that migrated from Berkeley [California] to Atlanta. Well just as we were packing up and getting ready to leave, Jim Cheek called Andy and said why don't you stop talking about building black institutions and come and help us build one here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. So when we left Berkeley, we didn't--we thought we were going to Atlanta, but we were sort of in limbo, we weren't quite sure whether we were going to Atlanta or to Howard or Washington, D.C. We went to Aspen [Colorado], spent that summer--well spent, I guess it was three or four weeks at the Aspen Executive Seminar where Marian Wright Edelman [HM] was there and Bill Moyers and several intellectuals. It was a very exciting time intellectually. And then we went to Atlanta where we--we spent the summer in Atlanta with Andy going back and forth to Howard and then that September, we moved to Washington [D.C.] where Andy was vice president of academic affairs from 1970 to 1974. And that was kind of the highlight of black intellectual thought right through there. He was able with Cheeks' help to bring in a lot of black intellectuals at Howard. Ron Walters [Ronald Walters, HM] he brought who was there until just recently. John Killens they did kind of a black--black cultural series. So John Killens brought Ossie Davis [HM] and Sidney Poitier and just you know it just-- Speaker 1: Was Cicely Tyson there? Speaker 2: --It was very rich. Val Gray Ward [HM] was there and Cicely--some of it you know. Speaker 1: Haki Madhubuti [HM]? Speaker 2: Haki Madhubuti, yeah. He had Tony Brown as communications dean for a year or two. Speaker 1: Sam Yette [Samuel Yette, HM]. Speaker 2: Sam Yette, yep. Gosh, it was--it was rich, lot of--lot of very rich intellectual activity going on right through there. Joyce Ladner [HM], Bernice [Johnson] Reagon [HM] was there as a student. She credits Andy with encouraging her to go ahead and do her graduate study. So it was an exciting time, exciting time. We did--one of the things we did with our children, we had once a month I guess it was, we had something we called Kwanzaa where we gathered together parents and children and had a session where we would talk about the celebration of Kwanzaa but also black history, enacted various historical things and you know scenes and activities and that. So that was--that was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Exciting time. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was exciting until about '74 [1974] you said? Speaker 2: Yeah, until about '74 when there was some disagreement between Andy and Cheek and so he left the office of vice president and became a graduate scholar, a scholar in the graduate school. Story_ID: 85121 Speaker 1: And then Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] tapped him [Andrew Billingsley] to come to be president of Morgan so he came to be president of Morgan in 1975 until 1984. Speaker 2: That's Morgan State-- Speaker 1: Morgan State University in Baltimore. Speaker 2: --Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So he was president from '75 [1975] to '84 [1984]? Speaker 1: Seventy-five to '84, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And that was a time when Morgan was--became a university and had its own board of directors, its own board. Morgan is the only black college that has its own independent board of directors outside the Maryland State University system. So he was--he was heading it up at that time. Story_ID: 85122 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're engaged in other activities as well as raising your children? Speaker 2: Always. I was always very active in community things. I was president of the PTA [parent-teacher association] at Shepard School (ph.) and developing other programs. We had a program called Inside Out where we had children go to school--go to work with their parents, you know, just to see, to experience their parents' job situation, and I worked for a time with a group called the D.C. Citizens for Better Public Education where Nancy Harrison was the leader--the president and we worked on that to try to get better public schools. I'm always doing something. In Baltimore [Maryland] I was very active with the also PTA in my daughter's elementary school and junior high school and high school. And then my daughter decided that she wanted to go to boarding school. She decided to go to Northfield Mount Hermon, which is in [Gill] Massachusetts, kind of on the border of New Hampshire and Vermont. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And I organized the Black Parents Alliance there in Northfield Mount Hermon where a lot of very distinguished alumni, including Ann Dibble [Jordan, HM] whose now the wife of Vernon Jordan [HM]. And Ed Irons [Edward D. Irons, HM] who was the Dean of Business at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. So we just worked on trying to have a critical mass of parents to support the children that were there and this sort of foreign atmosphere, and that worked out pretty well. Then my second daughter decided to go to Milton Academy, which is in Boston, near Boston, Massachusetts, near Boston. And so then both girls were out of the house and I went back to work, I went to school and to work. I went to work on my MBA and I was manager of a bank, First National Bank of Maryland there in Baltimore. Speaker 1: You went to University of Baltimore, right? Speaker 2: University of Baltimore, yes--went there for my MBA. Story_ID: 85123 Speaker 1: You know, how did you get involved in political--now you started political organizing in California, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I say with lessons from the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois] and the girls club, but it started political organizing in California. I helped run Otho Green's campaign for California legislature. He lost by just a little bit, but out of his campaign grew Ron Dellums' [Ronald Dellums, HM] campaign and his political activity. A lot of the same people were involved. We went-- Speaker 1: Was that Tom Bradley [Thomas Bradley] too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, went down to work on Tom Bradley's campaign, Andrew Young [HM], when we were in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Can you tell me what it was like just getting started with that activity? How did you get involved in the first place, not just who, but how did you personally get involved and who did you have to learn from to figure this out how to be involved in a political campaign? Speaker 2: I think politics is one of the few activities where you can just show up and you can get as involved as you want to. If you--if you're steady you know and you know what you want to do then usually campaigns are so open that you can really do--you can carve your own--you can carve your own path with a political campaign. With Otho I think I got involved because he was a friend and you know it's sort of his campaign kind of grew out of our soirees in the living room you know. And so then it was a matter of mapping out the territory, finding out how do you get campaign lists and how do you, how do you work the campaign lists. I remember being shocked at what you wanted to do from some of the political operatives, you really wanted to target your people you know. You don't want to target everybody, you want to target your people and get your people out to vote for example. And it's really many of the same lessons that you do in working with the Parent Teachers Association [PTA] for example you know. Speaker 1: By your people you mean those who-- Speaker 2: Those who support your candidacy. Speaker 1: --Support your candidacy, yeah. Speaker 2: Your person's candidacy, yeah. Speaker 1: Who would be likely to-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --If they knew who he was and what he stood for-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --The theory being, I guess if you can't get (unclear), you can't get anybody else. Speaker 2: No the theory is that they're the ones that you want to energize. You don't want to energize your opposition, you want to energize the people that are going to vote for you. So you know, we get significant people in the community, Wilmont Sweeney was on of the city council [in Berkeley, California], Maudelle Shirek is still around, was active. You just get significant people and they get other people and they get other people, it's kind of like a snowball. It's the same--political organizer is the same as any other kind of community organizing I think. You know the same with the PTA you're passion about some objective, for example, with the PTA we're passionate that adults need to be involved in the education of their children and you figure out ways to do that. And you figure out other people that agree with you to do that and you, you know, you move right along. The same thing with political organizing, you find somebody, you know, your candidate wants to--is for equality of opportunity and you know whatever else they're for and you try to get the most articulate people that you can to present that point of view and you try to get as many people to hear that point of view as you can and you work on mailing lists and you work on flyers and you work on all of these things, so and you organize so that you pound the pavement when the time comes to get people out to vote, to encourage people, to hope that people will be as passionate about things as you are because a lot of times, people don't see the connection between their lives and the political process. And many times you know they get discouraged because they figure well it doesn't matter you know, it doesn't matter if it's tweedle dee or tweedle dum, it ain't gon' affect my life any, but many times it will affect your life and there's a matter of your trying to get that message out that it makes a difference. Story_ID: 85124 Speaker 1: Now, now do you have-are there techniques you use to--I know it's political education on one hand, but then on the other hand, don't you have to kind of agitate people around certain issues that they're concerned about to get them to actually do more than just say they're going to vote? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah. And you try to identify those people that are going to be most effective you know so that you know the thing ripples, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. You look for leadership in the community that can carry a message of strong leaders (unclear). Speaker 2: Absolutely, uh-huh. And I'm passionate about empowering people so that I've carried that passion over the years from wherever I am, you know, with the PTA [parent-teachers association], that's a thing, with both those campaigns, that's one thing. I was active in [Project] Follow Through, there's head start then there's Follow Through, so I was active in the Follow Through effort in Berkeley [California] where it was kindergarten through third grade where there were federal funds to help get lower income people involved with middle and upper income people to educate their children you know. And you know to me that's--that's another thing that you know you don't want to isolate, you don't want to just have people of one stripe in an organization, you want to try to learn from each other and put people together. So I've always been in the business of putting people together for, for a purpose. Story_ID: 85125 Speaker 1: So we did that, you know Follow Through is another thing. We went down and helped Tom Bradley [Thomas Bradley], his campaign, and when I was in Atlanta [Georgia], I worked with Andy Young's [Andrew Young, HM] campaign for congress and then coming to Washington, D.C. was kind of interesting to me, because as you know Washington doesn't have a vote. And in fact when we first came here, they couldn't even vote for city council or school board, that was a new thing. And I noticed that a lot of times people didn't really--you know I came from activist California where you know I mean you see something you didn't like, you just got together and you try to make things happen. And in Washington people were kind of you know you didn't like this but what can you do kind of-- Speaker 2: They can't even vote. Speaker 1: --Very apathetic, yeah. And that's really kind of a legacy, I think for Washington, D.C. What they concentrated on was--how low was your license plate number you know and how many mink coats you have. And that was sort of their focus it seemed instead of really trying to get together to move a process because they had no political process to move. So Washington still has a long way to go in that respect. Story_ID: 85126 Speaker 1: But then we went-when, when Andy [Andrew Billingsley] left Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], we went for a semester to University of California, Berkeley. He was a visiting scholar there. It's interesting because it was like the 20-year anniversary of the Free Speech Movement and there was Mario Savio in his three piece suit. It was interesting, it was an interesting time, but once again, we--I worked in the campaign, what was that the 1986, '85 [1985] campaign. The presidential campaign where Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro. That was--wasn't that, that was '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: Eight-four. Speaker 1: It was '84, yeah '84 campaign. Speaker 2: That was when [Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson [HM] ran for president. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, yeah. But I worked in the--I traveled over to northern California, worked in that campaign. Once again we did--we had a thing in California, we had--on New Year's Day we had something called down home doings where we got together an did pot luck and just got together to celebrate the new year and our African American fellowship, you know, kind of thing. We did that over the years in Berkeley [California] and then had something called, this was at Christmastime, we organized young people and older people to give gifts of music and dance and fellowship so we would get together with a pot luck again and kids from five to ninety-five would do something. One time we had a little kid doing "twinkle twinkle little star" on the piano and a 95-year-old grandmother who would play ragtime and different ones doing different things and that was always--I like to organize intergenerational activities because there's so much that young and old people can learn from each other. So we. we did that over the years. Story_ID: 85127 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now you worked the '84 (1984) campaign, now '88 [1988]-- Speaker 2: Eighty-eight. Speaker 1: --That's when [Michael] Dukakis ran against [President] George [H.W.] Bush. Speaker 2: George Bush, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you get involved in the '88 campaign at all? Speaker 2: Let's see 1988 I was here in the Washington area. When Andy [Andrew Billingsley] came from University of California, Berkeley, he went to University of Maryland [Baltimore, Maryland], first Afro American Studies Department and then the Family Studies Institute so--let's see during that period of time, I worked with NAFEO. NAFEO is National Association for Equal Opportunity and Higher Education, that's the association of black college presidents. And I worked with them as exhibit--their exhibit--I organized their exhibits around their national conference. I think that was the main thing I was doing during that period of time. I wasn't involved in the '88 campaign. Let's see '88 and then '92 [1992] was [President] Bill Clinton. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Did you get involved in that too? Speaker 2: I did not. (siren noises) Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Hold on one second. Speaker 2: Police car. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [1992], did you get involved? Speaker 1: I was not involved in Bill Clinton's campaign. But I was involved with people who were close to that campaign, so when he was elected, Alexis Herman was director of public liaison in the White House and I worked with her something like you know a day a week or something like that to organize her outreach to the African American community. I did a newsletter called Inside Out again, which went to--developed a database list of you know African American leaders and figure out other ways to make them knowledgeable about what it is that she and the president were doing in terms of the African American community. The different initiatives that were important to our community. So I worked with her on that and then I--1994 I went to join the staff of the White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities. And there was--that effort, Catherine LeBlanc was the executive director and that effort was to help the colleges be aware of governmental resources that can help them with their--with their students and their colleges, so. Worked on that, was president of the National Black NBA Association, that was I think from 1985 until about '88 or '89 [1989]. I worked with the National Black NBA Association, DC chapter and helped build that up once again building up databases and mailings and the ward systems and outreach pretty much, so that's the White House Initiative. Story_ID: 85128 Speaker 1: Worked a lot with the '96 [1996] campaign. I was at the '96 [Democratic National] Convention in Chicago [Illinois] and before that I did a lot of things with--President [Bill] Clinton's office had an arrangement called "At the Table" and we went around the country to a certain extent and just organized groups to talk about some of the Clinton initiatives that you know to build support for some of the Clinton initiatives. And '96 I worked on campaign some, '98 [1998], I really worked on the campaign at the Democratic National Committee working on once again outreach to encourage people to understand how important it was to go out to vote and it was kind of a sleeper in a way because as you know they were expecting the Democrats to lose a lot of seats and they actually won a lot of seats. In fact I think if other communities had worked as hard as we worked, we would have taken back the House in 1998. Speaker 2: Yeah, because the history was it '96 [sic, 1994], was called a Republican Revolution under Newt Gingrich and they [Republicans] took a lot of seats from sitting Democrats. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The first time-- Speaker 1: House turned over '94 [1994] yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --The whole thing had flipped. Speaker 1: Yeah. But we worked hard in '98 and won more than they ever expected us to win. So then in 2000, I really worked hard with the Democratic National Committee, we organized over a thousand people in about two months to go do speaking, you know, represent the government, represent their party and the president and various speaking arrangements throughout the country, and mailings and all that you do for a campaign. We worked hard. Almost won, did win-- Speaker 2: Actually did win. Speaker 1: --Did win, but it was very discouraging to see the outcome of that really I think against the will of the people, you know, the outcome of that with the--with the Supreme Court not letting the process continue. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the election where Al Gore ran against [President] George W. Bush-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --And the election soon to be snarled up in Florida where the vote count kept changing. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And couldn't be counted, votes were thrown away and a lot of accusations back and forth, finally settled by the Supreme Court-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --And some kind of unprecedented-- Speaker 1: The Florida Supreme Court said count--you know, go ahead and count the ballots again and they--the United States Supreme Court an unprecedented way jumped in and said, no, don't count them, because they were already tooled up to do a recount of the vote, they said no don't count them and it was really figured that if they had counted them and if it was a fair election, George W. Bush would not have won. But he did win and Al Gore conceded and-- Speaker 2: --Al Gore actually won the popular vote. Speaker 1: --He won the popular vote, that's right. And you would think that because of the close election that George Bush would be more conciliatory. In other words he would not be as extreme as I feel that he has been in overturning a lot of the things that we worked so hard to put in place for equality of people, I think equality of people. And so of course with 9/11, he really moved forward to do a lot of things which I feel are repressive, helping, giving benefits--more and more benefits to rich people and taking more and more away from middle class and lower-income people, which I think is a big mistake and it seems to me it's a mistake even for rich people to be so greedy that they--that they continue to line their pockets without being fair to other people because you can only--you can only keep yourself so secure. And there are only so many gates that you can put up. They're only so many alarms you can put on your car before people--people that are really desperate figure out ways to harm other people in order to get what they feel they need, so. I regret the turn of events, but we'll see what happens. Story_ID: 85129 Speaker 1: Okay now you, in the meantime, you started your own consulting business [Amistad Associates]. You have an MBA from the University of Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Baltimore, yeah. Speaker 1: And you have a consulting business. Now, what do you do? Speaker 2: Marketing, management, events, events planning. I have helped various people plan conventions and fund raising events and marketing of books, materials, help with financial planning, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I didn't ask you about the big scandal during the [President Bill] Clinton administration and you were working in the administration during that time, what was that like, the Monica Lewinsky scandal which was the (unclear) from 199--'97 [1997] through the end of his presidency. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was very discouraging, really. Because we felt that Clinton and his--Clinton, I feel is very smart, he's a very smart politician, he's a very smart man and his administration was moving in directions that I think were important, important directions to help people in general, you know, community policing I think is excellent way of helping communities build on the positive nature of communities. After school programs are very important. So just the various things that I think that he moved in the direction to help the average person I thought were very important. It was very discouraging that all of this scandal overtook all of the other efforts that he was doing, and I was in Kenya, I went to a wedding in Kenya around that time, and the people in foreign countries saying what is the matter with you Americans you know. And I feel very sorry that Clinton has the weakness that he has or that he had in this situation, but I thoroughly blame the Republicans for putting all that stuff out there, because I think that there is scandal associated with almost every politician that you can think of including George W. Bush, there's stuff that is said about him. But to throw all of that personal stuff into the public arena I thought was really very unwise and unfair. So I don't think that anybody condones Clinton and his activities, but I fault more the Republicans for putting all of that out there because I really do think that they, from the beginning, were determined to get him in something, not because of what he was doing but because they don't like his politics, so that's just my--that's my take-- Story_ID: 85130 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you know that the general public doesn't know about this that you can share with us? Speaker 2: Well, just that there are right wing groups that were--that continue to--that were then and continue to try to stop any, what I call progressive direction of this country, and I think it happens over and over and over again in different ways, I think. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s death I think is part--[Robert] "Bobby" Kennedy's death, Malcolm [X]'s death. But I think that they've gotten smart now, they thought that you know, well killing them doesn't do, because then that just makes them more powerful, so they figure out other ways to stop people from becoming powerful in a way that that will help progressive activities. I think that they figure out ways to handicap [Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson [HM] who was certainly, you know, moving in a progressive direction, I think they figured out ways to stop other political figures to encourage them to retire from their positions when they get too close to power, to encourage them to you know to stop doing what they're, you know, to stop fighting for what they believe in. I just feel very strongly that there's a pattern that is too strong to overlook, starting well really, I mean the first time that I'm aware of it is the Communist Party, you know for them to call people communist and to start clamping people down for communist because they believe in progressive legislation, you know, so if it's not the communist, it's the deaths, it's the you know the scandal, it's always some reason to keep a strangle hold on democracy. I think we do not have a democracy. Story_ID: 85131 Speaker 1: Now that leads to the question we always ask people, with all your experience in the political world and with all the discussions you've been privy to around this recent political life in the country, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, my hope is that the black community can be free to develop itself as it knows it can. I think that that has not been the case in a very long time. I think that integration has set us back a lot and although nobody wants to go back to the days where you had to--you had lynchings and you had be concerned about whether you could use a restroom in various places, what they've done with integration is take the schools, for example, take the best teachers from the black schools, put them in the white schools. We've lost so much of a sense of community, economic and cultural community that we really have to work hard to try to foster that and recapture that. So I guess one of the things that I would hope is that we could recapture our sense of community and empowerment and yet I think that everyday there's an assault on what we are. There have been--there is no people that have come over like Africans have come over, in chains, without any--without any means of making a livelihood. And even after slavery it continues to this day, there are various ways that if black people become too powerful, if they become too forceful, there are ways to cut them down. And I think that's unfortunate because there are a lot of--there's a lot of potential that is lost from not being able to bloom as we should be able to. Story_ID: 84619 Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling again. Speaker 2: Tulsa, Oklahoma [Tulsa race riot] for example. Speaker 1: Reparations, that's a discussion, I don't want to-- Speaker 2: No, my point is that when black people--whenever black people will have a level playing field, they can do all right, but whenever they have a level playing field and they begin to excel then the field is turned upside down. Tulsa, Oklahoma was a thriving community. They called it the Black Wall Street, people were doing extremely well, there was a lot of white resentment, they burned the town down to the ground, you know. I have a friend, a psychologist, who says that until America really comes to grips with slavery and racism, it will never heal. It's like a--it's like somebody who is a rape victim or incest victim, unless they actually cleanse themselves and acknowledge it and cleanse themselves the pathology comes out in other ways. And America is so sick around the race issue it's just outrageous to me. And people even to this day, if you get--if it looks like you're to achieve something which will help your people then they figure out a way to make sure that you don't. So therefore, I mean like affirmative action, we thought the Bakke decision [Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 1978] was horrible at that time because it said, you know, you can't have quotas, and so we said, that's horrible because if you got an all-white university or you've got twenty percent of the population and only two percent are going to the college, something is wrong here, something is wrong with this picture, so you ought to equalize that somehow, you ought to do something about that. So then you know affirmative action, well okay, we won't do quotas, but we'll keep it as a factor, so now they're trying to tear down the whole thing of affirmative action, which I think is outrageous because we know that in the white world, blacks are greatly discriminated against. It's kind of like, I think somebody use the analogy, if you're a fish in water you don't know that you--what it's like not to have water. So you're just used to being the privileged person and everything is fine and you can maybe get one or two people in, you know out, but you certainly don't want to compete on a level playing field with other people that you can discriminate against for some reason. So therefore I think, I agree with reparations because there have been so many awful things done to black people over the years that I think that there ought to be some kind of reparations to try to equalize some of the wrong that's been done. Story_ID: 84620 Speaker 1: As you look back over the things that you've done, what would you consider as your high points, what would be your legacy? Speaker 2: I have two lovely daughters, and I feel very proud about that. I feel proud about the work that I've done in the community over the years. I feel proud about the organizing that I've done over the years in various areas, did a lot of organizing around my husband [Andrew Billingsley]'s career in Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] and at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. The Democratic National Committee 2000, that was a lot of work, but we really got a lot of benefits from that. Know a lot of good people and I enjoy connecting people. I enjoy connecting people in resources because people don't always know what--I like to help people understand other people. People don't always know what other people can offer the world and I like being able to empower people, and I guess that's--I'd say that's probably one of the things I would like to be known for that I help empower people. Story_ID: 84621 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna throw out a couple of names, I know you know some people well that you might have interesting comments about or just get some little reaction to the names. You've mentioned off camera Dorothy Height [HM]. Could you tell us a little about Dorothy Height? Speaker 2: Dorothy Height is an amazing woman to me. She just had her 91st birthday. She doesn't wear glasses, either to see or to read, she has a memory that is sharp as a knife, she's a good storyteller, she can tell you stories about her associations with Marcus Garvey, with Whitney Young, of course, with A. Philip Randolph, with Bayard Rustin, with [President] Bill Clinton, with [President] Jimmy Carter, with [President] Ronald Reagan. Of course she tells a lot of stories about Mary McLeod Bethune who was an advisor to Eleanor Roosevelt. She's just a remarkable lady and her book is just coming out, I guess, next month it will be out. And that's--she's just a walking history book, and she's a very fun lady, very caring and very, very sharp. Story_ID: 84622 Speaker 1: What about Alexis Herman? Speaker 2: Alexis is amazing to me. She is very smart, very strategic, can bond with people very quickly. She--you know I never--I never said on the tape that when I was at the White House Initiative [on Historically Black Colleges and Universities], she called me and asked me to come to help her when she went in and she finally got her confirmed as Department of Labor Secretary, and I helped her as her executive assistant and then confidential secretary and did a lot of outreach for her. She's--I say she's very strategic in that she knows what she can do and she knows what she can't do. And she keeps things in perspective, she's a lot of fun, she likes to entertain, she likes to laugh, she tells wonderful stories, she's just a neat lady. I enjoyed, I enjoy being with her a lot. Story_ID: 84623 Speaker 1: What about Ron Dellums [Ronald Dellums, HM]? Speaker 2: Ron Dellums. When I first came to Washington [D.C.], I worked with Ron Dellums on the Hill for a time, and he's a very interesting guy. He's very--he can tell--he can educate you, he can take a very complex subject and break it down so that the most simple person can understand it. He's also strategic. When he became chairman of the Armed Service Committee and that's unprecedented for a peacemaker like Ron Dellums to be chairman of the Armed Service Committee, but he was strategic enough so that even the war hawks respected him. He was able to work with and get respect from even the war hawks on that committee and in many cases turned them around to his point of view. So he's, he's extremely talented. Story_ID: 84624 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, slightly different from legacy, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I'd like to be remembered as someone who is able to get along with almost anybody and bring together disparate individuals and groups to work toward a common end. That's what I like to do, that's what I enjoy doing and that's what I'd like to be remembered for. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 84625 Speaker 1: That's my mother, Inez Duke [Tate]. It was probably--she's probably about 20 years old there, so that would have been about 1930. I think that was before she was married, so 1930, she would have been about 20 years old, that's my guess. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: That's my father's mother, Salina Amy Veasey. She was probably about 60 years old there. That would have been around the '50s [1950s] I believe, maybe earlier than that, maybe '45 [1945], 1945 or so. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right. Next? Speaker 1: That's my father Herman Tate. That picture, he probably was around 30 there, so that picture would have been around, let's see, probably about 1937 or '8 [1938], late '30s [1930s] early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: That's my grandfather, Charles Sumner Duke, in his office. That picture would have been taken around 1951-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: --Shortly before his death. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: That's a younger version of Charles Sumner Duke. He looks like he's about 17 years old then. He was born in 18, what did we say, 1879, so that probably would have been around late, late--early, early 1900s probably. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, my mother's mother as a young woman. My guess is that probably would have been taken around 19--, let me see, probably 1910 or so, early 1900s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother again, Estelle Taylor Duke. That picture would have been taken around 1950s, 1950s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next? Speaker 2: That is my great-grandfather, Charles, I'm sorry, Jesse Chisholm Duke and his wife Willie Black Duke. The girl there is Esther Pauline Hamilton Duke who is the mother of Geraldine McCullough [HM] and the other child there, I'm not quite sure which child that is, maybe David Duke, I'm not sure which one of the brothers that is. (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: That's my mother Inez Duke Take. That probably would have been around the '80s [1980s], 1980 something, let's see it might even say on here, 1973. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: That is Andy [Andrew Billingsley] and I at our wedding, December 28, 1961. If you give me the other picture I'll take it out the frame, the one that's the problem. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That is our family back in the '70s [1970s]. That might be when we went to Morgan, yes I think that's when we went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] which would have been about 1975, Angela, myself, Andy and Bonita sitting on Andy's lap. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: This is my father's family probably at Thanksgiving. My father is here, my mother is here, that's me and my sister [Eileen Cline, HM] and you want me to name the aunts and uncles? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can. Speaker 1: Okay. Aunt Bessie is here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you can point. Speaker 1: Okay. Aunt Bessie, Aunt Ora, that's Lambert who is a cousin, one of my father's cousins, this is Hugh, you can't see Hugh, that's the Pullman Porter and that's his wife Iona, that's Uncle Feedy(ph.), that's Paul, who is a cousin, that's Aunt Bessie's husband, that's her husband, Mr. Sanders. We always called him Mr. Sanders, that's Count, he's the husband of Earla (ph.) Mae, here, that's Aunt Alma, and Alma is the one who was married the musician, that's Dorothy. Dorothy is one of Aunt Bessie's daughters. I think I got everybody. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ora is spelled O-R-A? Speaker 1: O-R-A. She's the oldest. She's the oldest, Ora and Hugh are the oldest. Ora is the oldest and Hugh is number two. There were ten. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Bessie is spelled B-E-S-S-I-E? Speaker 1: Yes. There were ten children. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. All right, next? Speaker 1: That is our family, Angela, me, Andy, Bonnie and our dog, Flip. That's outside of our house on Argyle Terrace and that would have been 1974. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next? Speaker 1: That would be 1952 [sic, 1954] when I was a freshman at University of Chicago, entered the University of Chicago in 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next? Speaker 1: Is that right, no, I'm sorry. It's not 1952, it's 1954. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. That's fine. Next? Speaker 1: That's about 1972. That's me on the right, [Leola] "Roscoe" Dellums [HM] on the left and Clarence Robinson who was a Washington [D.C.] realtor, man about town. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Next? Speaker 1: That is Andy and I. It would have been about 1972. We were in our house on Geranium Street. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Next? Speaker 1: The little one is my father and his brother. That would have been about 19, let's see he looks like he's about three or four years old. That would have been about 1910, 1911. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next? Speaker 1: That's my sister and I. That would have been about 1999. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: That's me with Maya Angelou [HM] at her house. The African American Leadership retreat family had a dinner at her house and that would have been 2001. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: That Zina Pierre [HM] who was in the [President Bill] Clinton administration, Mrs. Coretta Scott King, me at another (unclear) leadership retreat event and that would have been about 2001. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: That's me with Hillary Rodham Clinton. She was at the Washington Hilton, and that would have been about 1999. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go back a way it's a little bit. Okay, next? Speaker 1: That's me and my daughter with the Clintons. That would have been a White House event about 1999. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's outside the library, I believe with acting president Joyce Ladner [HM] and he was coming out. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: That's Alexis Herman and me with, this youngster is still in the Howard University School of Engineering Library, that's Geraldine-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and give the description first? Speaker 1: That's Alexis Herman and I at a Welfare-to Work event. This young woman is one of the Welfare-to Work success stories. She came from being a welfare mother to being quite successful in, I think, it was NASA, a NASA project. Speaker 2: Now this would have been about 1955 or so. That's at the Howard University School of Engineering [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you move it back just a touch. Speaker 2: --Howard University Library picture. That's a painting by Geraldine [McCullough, HM] of my grandfather who was credited with saving the School of Engineering, Howard School of Engineering. There's Geraldine as a young woman, that's her mother Esther, my grandfather's sister, that's her husband Hugh Hamilton, this is my uncle Jessie Duke, that's my grandmother and these are other people who were probably with the National Technical Association. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Go ahead. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my sister and I in our new house in Morgan Park, 1942. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: High top shoes and all. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is four generations of Dukes. Charles Sumner Duke, his mother, Willie Black Duke, Mrs. Jessie Duke, this is my mother Inez Duke Tate and that's my sister Eileen Tate. That would have been about 1935. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Next? Speaker 1: That's my mother, Uncle Hugh's wife, Iona, this is Eileen, this is me and these are other neighborhood children. That would be 1938 in the Rosenwald [Apartment] Building. Speaker 2: Chicago high society, some event, it's probably something like the Snakes, this is my mother and my father, this is Deborah Raines, this is Taft Raines, who was a prominent physician at that time, and I'm not quite sure who they are. That would have been about 1940. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's my mother as a--that's my mother as a young woman and it would have been about 1929, I think. No date on here. My father as a young man, that probably would have been about late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: That's Eileen and Amy, ballerinas from Mildred Hessler's Ballet School, 1947. Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: In Chicago. Wabash Avenue, 47th and Wabash. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: Grandmother Veasey, my father's mother, my Aunt Alma, whose husband Cecil Irving was the musician with [Earl] "Fatha" Hines Band and this is our dog, Pal, 1949. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: Graduation day, June 1949, [John D.] Shoop [Elementary] School. This is--I'm here, Emil Jones [HM] whose now president of the senate--Illinois State Senate is here and these are various and sundry classmates. This woman is an artist in Connecticut, Ionis Grace C. Martin (ph.). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 2: My father and David Songcrest (ph.) who was the executive director of the Circle Pines Center in Cloverdale, Michigan. This would have been in about 1949. Geradine McCullough who is an artist in Chicago, lives in Oak Park [Illinois] now. That's--that must have been about 19--no date on here. I guess it would have been about 1950s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 2: That's my grandma Veasey and that would have been about 19--late 1940s, early 1950s. She died in '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Spell Veasey please? Speaker 2: V-E-A-S-E-Y. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thank you, next? Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother Estelle Duke. You can kind of see her Indian blood in this picture. She looks to me like she would have been about 40 or 50 in that picture which would have is that Estelle Duke she probably--that probably would have been late '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe early '50s (1950s). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is my great-grandmother, Willie Black Duke. That picture would have been probably late '40s [1940s], maybe mid '40s..