 Story_ID: 638582 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Regina Koehler. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Yvette, Y-V-E-T-T-E, McGee, M-C capital G-E-E, Brown, B-R-O-W-N [HistoryMaker Yvette McGee Brown]. No hyphen between the McGee and the Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 1, 1960, Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a justice on the Supreme Court of Ohio. Speaker 1: All right, since-- Speaker 2: January 1, 2011. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April 6, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: The Supreme Court of Ohio [Columbus, Ohio]. Story_ID: 638583 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I like all food (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, my, my favorite saying is: it doesn't matter where you start in life; it matters where you finish. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638584 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's side, but we're going to ask about them separately, so we don't get them mixed up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then, we'll put, we'll put them together. We'll talk about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know much about my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We'll just, so well, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure. My mother's name is Sylvia, S-Y-L-V-I-A, Ken- Lorraine, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, Kendrick, K-E-N-D-R-I-C-K [Sylvia Banks Kendrick]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 23, 1941, Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can trace them back to my great-grandfather. His name is Alexander Bailey, was Alexander Bailey. He had a total of seventeen children by two wives. My grandmother was the seventh child, I think, of his second wife, but I'm not sure. And she was born in Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: What's your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Eunice Banks, E-U-N-I-C-E, Banks [Eunice Bailey Banks]. Speaker 1: Okay. She was born in Macon, Georgia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about your great-grandfather that--? Speaker 2: None that I, I really remember. I mean, he was a hardworking man. He had a sharecropper's plantation is what my grandmother told us. We started about maybe twenty years ago having reunions with all of the, the living descendants of the Alexander clan. They're spread out across the country, so every two years we try to assemble somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there's still a group in Georgia? Speaker 2: No, I do not believe so. They're in the Maryland/D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area, California, Ohio, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638585 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] or your grand- did your [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] migrate to Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: She did. My grandmother came to Columbus when she was seventeen to join her older sister. And I remember her saying to me once, you know, coming to Columbus--now, my grandmother was born in 1906, so when she came here at seventeen, she said, you know, the North was no different than the South, there just weren't signs. Speaker 1: Now, that's, yeah, that's (unclear). So did she have stories about that? Speaker 2: She talked about, you know, that you were still expected to sit on the back of the bus. She talked about, you know, everybody had told her coming to the North there wouldn't be segregation and yet, she found it to be so. I mean, she, she took jobs, like everybody else, doing, you know, menial labor. She cleaned, she took in laundry, she worked in restaurants, she was a cook. But, you know, there was something just special about my grandmother because she never complained. I, I never once heard my grandmother complain about where she was in life or life's unfairness to her. She always just encouraged us to get a good education. She just believed that, that somehow we would fulfill what her prayers had been. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: She finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, in all candor, I honestly don't know. I always assumed she finished high school, but I don't know that I've ever asked her that. Speaker 1: Did she grow up, I mean, did she live on the East Side of Columbus or? Speaker 2: Yes, she grew--they started on the near West Side on Stewart Avenue, and then moved over to Hamilton Avenue, and then the Mount Vernon area [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Mount Vernon seems to have been the hood back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was--it was the place. I mean, I can still remember as a kid, her taking us--there used to be this big like farmers market. It was a big building and everybody would go on Saturday, and it was the social event, you know, you just walk through there, and you'd buy, you know, cabbage or greens or corn, but it was the gathering place where, you know, you saw your neighbors and friends every Saturday morning. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638586 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] have any stories about growing up in Columbus [Ohio], or did, did she grow up on East Side (unclear)? Speaker 2: She did. My mother is one of eight children. She's the seventh of eight and so, she talked a lot about how strict my grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] was. There were three girls and five boys. She went to--graduated from Central High School [Columbus, Ohio]. She worked part time at Swan's Cleaners [Swan Cleaners, Columbus, Ohio] growing up and, you know, had a pretty typical, pretty typical childhood. You know, she'd tell stories of my uncles. My grandmother used to buy live chickens and wring their necks in the backyard. She had very strong arms and when the, the chickens would run around without the head, my uncles would take the headless chicken and torment my mother with it. And so, my mother didn't eat chicken for years because she was terrified (laughter). Speaker 1: So, that's quite a story. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, chickens in the heart of Columbus. Speaker 2: That's right (laughter). Speaker 1: Just, okay. Speaker 2: She would just, she'd just wring their neck and I, I assumed it must have been cheaper to buy them live, I don't know, but that was one thing I thought was pretty unique and (laughter) my grandmother ruled with an, with an iron fist. My grandfather [Oliver Banks] was part Blackfoot Indian [Native American], and he suffered from alcoholism. And my grandmother divorced him--I think it was in the early '50s [1950s] at a time where, you know, you didn't see women stepping out on their own. But I remember my grandmother saying to me, you know, if she didn't meet him at the plant door on Friday to get his check, he would be gone on a weekend bender, and she wouldn't have any money to feed the kids. And so, she decided if she was going to have to try to trace him down, it was easier just to go at it alone. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. They say he was a Blackfoot Indian. Is there any information, other information about that? Speaker 2: Was kind--my grandmother has a--my grandfather has a pretty fascinating story. And my, my mother has, has reconnected with his side of the family. This is how the story goes as I understand it. My grandfather's mother [Laura Cordell Banks] who I, I wish I could go back in time and meet her, she was white. She married a Native American in Gallipolis, Ohio, so think about Gallipolis, Ohio. This would have been--my grandfather was born in the early 1900s, so this woman, when she decided to marry my--would have been my great-grandfather, her family disowned her. She married him, had my grandfather, and then he mysteriously was killed on the steps of the post office is where they found him. Nobody was ever arrested for his murder, but this is what I find so interesting about my great-grandmother. Then, she turned around, and married an African American man (laughter), not to be deterred (laughter). And so a, a few years ago my mother and her surviving siblings actually went down to Gallipolis for a family reunion of my grandfather's side of the family. They had never met them and my, one of my aunts found out that they were having this, and they were very warmly welcomed, but it was all the white side of, of my grandfather's family in Gallipolis, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's supposed to be one of the early spots of black settlement. Speaker 2: That's right. It was on the Underground Railroad. People went through there so, yes. Speaker 1: And I've heard it, (unclear) Gallipolis police, Gallipolis, I'm not sure now, but that's the, yeah, that's the spot for early Underground Railroad-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear). It's true so, well, that's quite a story. Speaker 2: It is (laughter). Speaker 1: She's determined to-- Speaker 2: Well, it's funny, I know, I mean, 'cause think about what chutzpah she must have had in the 1900s to, to be willing to leave her family and to, you know, take off first with a Native American. And my grandfather was so handsome. He had this slick black hair and these chiseled features. He was just a very attractive man. Speaker 1: You know, yeah, there are, these small town Ohio stories are interesting because, you know, there's a rumor that Harding [President Warren Gamaliel Harding] was black, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: (Unclear), you know. Speaker 2: Oh, really, I didn't realize that. Speaker 1: But after a generation, people just didn't care anymore. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, you know, at any rate, that's a long story. I don't (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, that's, so your--that's, so any other stories about that side? Speaker 2: No, that's really all I, I know, except, you know, my mother said when they went down for--it was a big picnic for the family reunion and that, you know, everybody was saying, "Now, who are you related to?" But they were all gracious and they introduced them, and it was very fun. Story_ID: 638587 Speaker 1: So, your mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] came out of Central High School [Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did she go to work right away or did she go to college or what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my mother, she graduated high school. She was working as a counter girl at Swan Cleaners [Columbus, Ohio] that was owned by a local family here in town. And she got pregnant with me. My father was six years older than her. And as my mother said, she had no business being out in the streets, you know, running after--she was hanging out with my uncle. And she got pregnant with me and the cleaners fired her. It was 1960 and they were just, once she started to show, they said, "It's just not proper to have you here, unmarried and pregnant." So, you know, my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] was strong and, and she helped my mother, but she told her she was going to have to find a way to take care of me, that she decided to get pregnant and not be married, and she's going to have to find a way to support me. Story_ID: 638588 Speaker 1: I'm going to go to your father's side, and though there may not be much as you said, we'll get what we know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: I would really prefer not to. Do I have to give you his name? Speaker 1: Well, you don't have to. This is voluntary, this is all voluntary (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I really don't, I don't ever talk about him or identify him by name. I only met him a few years ago, so what I can tell you about him in broad strokes is that I am the second of six children that he had with four different women. And I met him as an adult when I sought him out. Speaker 1: Is he from Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, he's from West Virginia, but he has lived his adult life in Cleveland, Ohio as a--he was a high school teacher. He married a woman with whom he had no children. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. He, you know, so he's a high school teacher in Cleveland, but had four different--would it be wives or just four different women? Speaker 2: Just four different women as I understand it, yeah, and never, never provided any support. And, and because he's not part of my life, I just don't ever identify him. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you have met him and-- Speaker 2: I met him and, it was interesting, you know, the journey to meeting him was from church. We were--I was with a friend, and we were reading 'The Purpose Driven Life' ['The Purpose Driven Life: What on Earth Am I Here For?'] as part of our, our worship. And, you know, the first sentence of the book, 'The Purpose Driven Life' by Rick Warren, says it is not about you. And then, you get to the second chapter, and he talks in there about how, if you're a person of faith, you must believe that God uniquely chose your mother and your father to bring you forth, that whoever you are, that the attributes of both your mother and your father make up the totality of who you are as a person. And a friend really challenged me on that and said, "You know, you, you need to find out who your, your father is." And I said, "Why?" And she said, "Because he has responsibility for who you are. I mean, he, he's--part of his DNA helps make up the person that is [HistoryMaker] Yvette McGee Brown." And so, I decided at that point to be very intentional about finding him. And my uncle knew some of his own friends, and we just kind of tracked him down, and I just called him one day. Speaker 1: Now, is there--what was his story? Speaker 2: He was very emotional. You know, he's a man now of seventy-six, seventy-seven years old. And he said he had been waiting for that moment, could never, I think, really to my satisfaction, articulate why he had never sent any money, made sure I had shoes when I was growing up, or food to eat, or a roof over my head. He claimed that my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] didn't want him around, and I listened to that for a minute. But what I said to him, and I believe this is that my grandmother was a strong woman. I, I will give you that, but she would have respect for anybody that takes care of their responsibilities. You know, he, he doesn't really have an adequate excuse. I think there's regret, though, I'm sure of that. He's followed my career from afar. He knew when I got married [to Anthony Brown]. He knew when I was first elected [to the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch]. He knew about my children [Belinda Waters Brown, Laura Brown and David Brown], so he had followed me, but had never really, I think, had the courage to kind of step out and say, you know, I'm your father. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he would have been at the time that you were born-- Speaker 2: About, let's see, he was twenty-four. My mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] was eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you would think that he would have been more mature at twenty-four? Speaker 2: Right. I mean, he was a, he was an African American man in 1960 working his way through college. He already had one child; I was the second of his sixth children. You would think he would understand that, you know, children need diapers and shoes and food, and all the things that come with raising a child. You don't just leave. Speaker 1: So, he never, he never made any attempt to contact you when he was, when you were growing up, or, or? Speaker 2: He, he never made any attempt. I did reach out to him when I was a senior in high school [Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio] because I was the commencement speaker for our senior class. So, I did send him a letter asking him to come to my graduation, which I'd never heard a response to, but after commencement was over, and I was walking out of Mershon Auditorium [Columbus, Ohio], my mother showed me that he was there. And so, I spent, you know, twenty minutes or so talking to him after my graduation. And then I never saw him again until a few years ago. Story_ID: 638589 Speaker 1: Did you ever meet any of his relatives, or di- or are any here in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, I--it's funny, I was in Cleveland [Ohio]. I was speaking at a church in Cleveland in 2010. And the usher came up to me after I sat down and said, "There's a woman in the back who said she's your sister, and she wants to meet you." Those two statements don't really go together, do they (laughter)? And I, and so, I said, "Well, I can't talk to her right now. Tell her I'll see her after church," so I met her briefly after church. I talked with her for a few moments. She's his firstborn, and she said she recognized me right away 'cause we all have these eyes that come from him. And I've talked to--she's called once, and I've not met the others. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've not--he asked me if I wanted to meet the others, and I've declined. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the eyes because when I saw your picture, I said, she looks almost Japanese or-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --something, you know, but is there a story behind (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't know. They really, they come from him. He has--I, I look a lot like him, so I don't know because I really don't know much of his family history. He's from West Virginia, so I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, there's no story about what racial mixture is his background-- Speaker 2: No. Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Are you about the same color as your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638590 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met that your mother--? Speaker 2: They met in a bar (laughter). My mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] was underage in a bar following behind her older brother. And he was a friend of my uncle's and, you know, one thing led to another. Speaker 1: So, is there an actual relationship over time or just a matter of-- Speaker 2: They had a brief relationship, I think, until I was born, or until she told my, once she told my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] that she was pregnant by him, my grandmother actually tried to have him criminally charged with corruption of a minor. And, actually, it's so funny that she took him to court for corruption of a minor. And it's the same court I ended up serving on as a juvenile court judge [Franklin County Court of Common Pleas]. So, his parents, he said to me that his parents told him after my grandmother filed charges, he needed to get the heck out of Columbus [Ohio], and that's when he left and went to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638591 Speaker 1: Considering your parents' looks, their mannerisms, their habits, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I, I think a lot of my intellect comes from my father, my sense of humor. I, I could see that he was probably the life of the party. Even meeting him on the few occasions I have, he's a very humorous guy, got a lot of charisma. My mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] always said she thought that I took my intelligence after him. She, she used to always joke and say, "I don't know where you came from. I think they switched the babies in the hospital," (laughter) so. I think what I get from my mother, I think, is, is strength, you know. As you grow up with a single mom and, and you watch her, you know, working two jobs, trying to raise three kids, I got my, my fortitude from her, my, my work ethic, my, my strength from her, not being afraid to take on any cause. But I think those, those intrinsic qualities that you can't, you can't really purchase, you know, the, the ability that to meet people and immediately engage with them, the, the warmth of personality, the, the ability to, to remember large quantities of information, to have a love for learning. I mean, I think some of that came from my father because he was, he was excellent as a student. I mean, think of the--1960, how many African American men had college degrees, you know. He just was somebody who worked, he worked full time and went to college. Speaker 1: Where did he get his degree? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: So you don't know where he was going to school at that time? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I'm sure he told me, I just don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638592 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, then your household consisted of your mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] and you-- Speaker 2: And my two younger brothers. Speaker 1: --two younger brothers. And so, did your mother remarry (unclear)? Speaker 2: She, my mother remarried briefly twice. She married--or actually, excuse me, three times. She married my middle brother's father who I have no memory of. I was two years old. His name is Lawrence McGee [ph.]. He has since died, but he was abusive to her. And she had my brother, Larry [ph.], and then, so that would have been around--my brother is two years younger than me, so he was born in 1962. Then, in 1969, she married, 1969, 1970, she married my youngest brother's father named John Porter [ph.], and they were married only a couple of years. He, he happened to father twins that are a few months younger than my brother or a few, yeah, a few months younger than my brother. (Laughter) So, and then, my mother does not always pick great men. And then, when I was sixteen, she married briefly to a man named Damon Kendrick [ph.], and that relationship only lasted two or three years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638593 Speaker 1: In the household, did your [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] live with you (unclear)? Speaker 2: No--my, my grandmother did not live with us, except when my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick]--when I was twelve, my mother got what's called Guillain-Barre syndrome. It's a f- a rare form of polio that attacks the central nervous system, so my mother was in the hospital for six months. They had said she'd never walk or talk again. So, I was twelve, my middle brother was ten, and my baby brother was two. She was literally sitting in bed at home, and she dropped something and within a matter of minutes was paralyzed from the neck down. So, the ambulance, all of that drama, they had to put a trach [tracheotomy] in. We almost lost her three times, but when she was in the hospital, my grandmother closed up her house, quit her job at the [U.S.] Social Security Administration, and moved in with us. She lived with us for about a year. My mother was in the hospital for six months, then it took my mother about two years to fully recover. I mean, she had to learn--she spent--in the hospital they had one of those, and, and it was a halo, but not the kind you see now. It was a horrible looking contraption for a child to see. It was like this thing that was on her head and then it came down. It was all aluminum, but just to hold her head and neck in place, so that she wouldn't further injure herself. But once she got back to where they, they really had gotten the virus out of her system, she was moved to a rehab facility at OSU hospital [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio] where she had to learn to feed herself. She had to learn to write. She had to learn to walk. So, during that period, my grandmother was the pivotal point for us from about age twelve to thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is your mother all right now? Speaker 2: She's fine--it's amazing. The doctor said she'd never walk or talk again, but she does both. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 638594 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory. (Pause) My earliest childhood--never really thought about that before. I think, the thing I remember probably most vividly as a child, I had this, I loved to read. It's hard for people to realize that I was a painfully shy kid growing up. I wore--I had the cat eye glasses. And I was a little chubby kid, so I would always read. And I can remember at our house, we lived in, early on, when I was about five or six, we lived on this--it was like a house, but the, there were two apartments, and we lived on the upstairs apartment. And my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] used to fix us mayonnaise sandwiches. We never, never knew meat was supposed to go in them, right? You put mayonnaise on the bread, little bit of sugar, and that was your sandwich (laughter). And so I would always sit and read, even at five or six years old. I just loved it. I, I didn't go outside like the normal kids. And one time, a friend of mine, some kid in the neighborhood, we were walking to the carry out, Dimler's carry out [ph.] at Fairwood [Avenue] and--Fairwood and Livingston [Avenue]. And as we walked behind the alley, and now this--I'm a sheltered kid, didn't go out much, was always an introvert--and I remember this old drunk man exposing himself to us, and being terrified. And, you know, we just ran all the way home. And I don't know if that had an impact on how, how much work I give now. I'd actually never thought about it before now, how much attention I give to kids and abuse issues. But I'll never forget being so terrified of that person and, and never really walking, feeling safe to walk to the store again. That would probably be the earliest memory, and the mayonnaise sandwiches. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we always ask this question. Now, so did you grow up near Livingston you were saying? Speaker 2: I did, when we were young, I grew up at Fairwood and Livingston. I went, Fairwood Elementary [Fairwood Elementary School; Fairwood Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] is where I went to kindergarten, and we had an apartment there. And that's probably where I spent--until I was nine years old that was the community we lived in. And then, when my mother married John Porter [ph.], we moved up to the Brittany Hills area [Columbus, Ohio], where Ohio Dominican College [Ohio Dominican University] is. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now is that a move up in the neighborhood or? Speaker 2: It was, we got a house. John, she married John, and he bought a house so, you know, it was probably about a thousand square foot house and three bedrooms, no air conditioning, but it was a house. We had a basement. We had a backyard. We really thought we were moving up. I actually thought we were middle class until I got to college [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], and they told me I was underprivileged so (laughter). But, you know, I, I want to go back to that. I don't want that childhood memory to be at that pedophile. I should think of something happy of a childhood memory 'cause that's a bad one, but it's odd-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) earlier than that? I mean-- Speaker 2: Earlier than when I was five? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I honestly--I'm not somebody. This is something you should--I'm not somebody that spends a lot of time thinking about the past, which is probably not okay. I don't, I probably can't tell you half the people I went to high school with 'cause I'm always moving on to the next thing. I'm a very task oriented person, so I've not really ever thought about a favorite childhood memory. I mean, there were, there were some memories that I will, I will never forget from childhood, but they weren't, they weren't happy, okay. I, I know that, I'll give you a happy--my mother used to take us to Cedar Point [Sandusky, Ohio]. This was, 'cause we had no money, so this is one of the good memories. We would go to Cedar Point, and she would always cook, like, you know, what my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] probably taught her. We'd always take a cooler in the trunk, and we'd have deviled eggs and fried chicken, and all the fixings 'cause we would go into Cedar Point, but we could never afford to eat in the park. So, we would go in, and we would ride and have fun, and then we'd have to come out (laughter), pull out the lawn chairs, sit at the trunk, have our lunch, and then go back in. And, you know, those times, and my mother would have time to spend an entire day with us, those were really special because she was working all the time just to take care of us. And so, that would probably be one of the happy childhood memories when I was like seven or eight. That was before, that was when it was just me and my middle brother; it was before Michael [ph.] had come along. Story_ID: 638595 Speaker 1: I was just going to say, you know, I, I do have great memories growing up with my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks]. Her--she was the, the pivotal place for our family. You can imagine, she had eight kids, all the grandkids, I mean, holidays were always at her place. And one memory I do have is my grandfather [Oliver Banks] would, he would give us new money for Christmas. Even after they divorced, the, the only time we saw him was at holidays. And I can always remember my grandfather coming in with new money on Christmas day. And that's really what I knew of him because he died when I was still very, very young. I think I was seven or eight years old, but my grandmother's house was the family house [in Columbus, Ohio], it's where we gathered, it's where we spent time. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 638596 Speaker 1: As a little kid, you grew up during the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --from 1960 actually all the through the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. You know, I can remember when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. It was--my, my uncle picked us up from school and took us to my [maternal] grandmother's [Eunice Bailey Banks] house where we all gathered. It was like, a member of our family had been assassinated. I mean, I, I can remember it vividly. I still remember the song on the radio, "War, what is it good for" ['War']? Remember that song that was out? And all of us being there and just the, the heavy heartedness--I mean, people felt like it was over, you know. When, when he was killed, we--it was done and, and I can remember listening to the adults talking and we were, we were terrified. We didn't know what it meant, but the solemnness of that is a memory I'll never forget. The, the whole Vietnam War, hearing my uncles talk about it, hearing them talk about people who came back from the war crazy, watching the black and white TV and seeing the demonstrations. Even being a kid and, and this is something I think you'll never forget. I remember it--you saw the footage of what was done in the South when they were hosing people, the Freedom Riders. And you would see, though, that footage come up on the news in a historical way 'cause I wasn't alive when that actually happened. But then, I remember having that same feeling when the bus- the busing cases came up. So in 1974, '75 [1975], when the Boston busing riots were happening, it was the same feeling. I can remember saying to my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick], "Why do they hate us so much?" Because watching the news, and seeing those parents rocking those buses in Boston [Massachusetts], saying, "We will not have busing here!" And it was before busing had started in Columbus [Ohio], but I remember having the same horror. And then, I was fifteen that I felt as a young kid watching the footage of the hosing and, and all the things that were done in the South when the Freedom Riders were there. I think it's something that imprints on a young person's mind that adults don't think about at the time when they're doing and spewing all that ugliness. We're seeing it. We may be little people, but it's imprinting on who we are. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the man that attacked with the flag in Boston--you may not remember the flag. Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I just remember, I could almost see the face of the, the woman and this ugly expression on her face that she's shaking the bus and saying, "No busing, no--." It, it's just something I will never forget because as a, you know, we're just kids. We don't--you can't understand that level of hate. It, it was something that was not easy for us to process. Speaker 1: Now, is there busing going on in Columbus during (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, busing in Columbus started in earnest in 1976, '77 [1977]. So, I was not bused because I was going into my senior year of high school [Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio], but both my brothers were bused. I mean, we had busing to our home schools. I rode a bus every day to go to my (air quotes) neighborhood school. But busing to achieve racial balance didn't start in Columbus 'til '76 [1976] or '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: I remember the music, I loved the music from the '60s [1960s], you know, Gladys Knight and the Pips, Smokey Robinson [Smokey Robinson and The Miracles]; that was always playing in our house. I remember Malcom X you know. It, it's funny because I often, as a, as a adult, I would always have, felt, felt like I missed something in the '60s [1960s], you know, I was there, but I wasn't really part of it. I wasn't present for it. It seems like the adults that lived through the '60s [1960s] had this special gift that those of us who were not adults during that time missed it. But I can remember greens cooking. My [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] always had a pot of greens on and, and fried chicken and cornbread. It was just, those special smells, like if you talk to my kids [Belinda Waters Brown, Laura Brown and David Brown], we don't fry anything (laughter), you know, it's just not healthy now. So, all the food that I grew up with, my kids don't get the benefit of that (laughter). Story_ID: 638597 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started elementary at Fairwood Elementary [Fairwood Elementary School; Fairwood Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio]. Then I went to South Mifflin [South Mifflin Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio], then Mifflin Middle [Mifflin Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], and Mifflin High School [Columbus, Ohio]. So, this is what's--we were talking about the desegregation. The, the district, the Columbus city school district [Columbus Public Schools; Columbus City Schools] was so poor that I went to middle school and high school in the same building. So I went to middle school from one to six [o'clock] in the evening, and I went to high school from 7:30 to 12:30 in the same building until my senior year of high school when I got a full day of classes because the deseg order had kicked in, and we moved into a new high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, at Fairwood Elementary School, now did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. It was the place I felt most comfortable because I was shy. I wasn't athletic. I never considered myself one of the pretty girls, so school was a place that I did well. I'm, again, I'm very task oriented, so you give me an assignment, I'm going to do it, and I'm going to get an A, so it was an environment I felt very comfortable in. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you, were you well liked by the teachers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. My former, my former elementary school principal is volunteering on my campaign right now (laughter). He's just like, he's like, "I remember when you were in fifth grade. You worked in the office. You were the most conscientious student we ever had. You would be even telling me what to do." And he, so when he found out that, you know, I was, I was running in November, he, he volunteered for my campaign, and he's relentless, too. He talks to teachers; he's calling people. Speaker 1: Did you have favorite teachers in school? Speaker 2: Yes. Ms. Henderson [ph.] and Ms. Turner [ph.]. Ms. Henderson was my biology teacher. Ms. Turner taught chemistry and physics. I never took physics. Speaker 1: This is in high school, right? Speaker 2: This was in high school, yeah. And Ms. Turner, she used to have us over to her house on Saturdays periodically for hot dog and science. Now, teachers would never do that now because of the liability, and we have so many rules. But that's what I meant about, even though our school was quote segregated, we had black teachers who cared about us, who promoted us, who pushed us to take the hard classes. And Ms. Turner, whenever we had a test coming up, she wanted us to do well, so she'd say, "Anybody that wants to come over, I'm roasting hot dogs," and we'd sit there, and we'd go over chemistry. So, they were two teachers, Ms., Ms. Henderson who was also an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], which I ended up being. They just really pushed us to pursue things, to excel. And then there was my guidance counselor--I think her name was Joan Pringle [ph.]. She's the one who told me, "You're too smart not to go to college," and-- Speaker 1: She's a high school guidance counselor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was high school guidance counselor, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what did--now, did you think that you would not go to college? I mean, did-- Speaker 2: You know, I, I honestly don't know that I thought about it one way or another. I--nobody in my family had been to college, and I think my mother's [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] biggest goal for me at that point was that I graduate from high school, and not be pregnant. (Laughter) I mean, it was, they were pretty minimally expectations. But I had this boyfriend when I was in the eleventh grade, and I remember standing with him in the hallway being inappropriate. I'm, I'm confident of that. And Ms. Pringle, walking up, sticking her arm through mine, and walking me away from him. And she said to me, "You are too smart not to go to college." And for whatever reason, made it her business to see that I got to college. She sent home financial aid information, student loan information, took me and several other students to Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] for a college visit, She just was a person who changed the trajectory of my life. And I think for the first time--now would I have gotten there on my own? I don't know. But she, for the first time, really made me believe that I could go to college and compete. Story_ID: 638598 Speaker 1: Did you take the college preparatory courses? You didn't (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so. There were no AP [advanced placement]--I mean, I took chemistry and biology and English, yeah. Speaker 1: You took chemistry and biology, yeah, those are the, yeah. Speaker 2: But there was no, like, unlike now, there was no foreign language requirement. I didn't take any AP class. I took honors classes. Speaker 1: Yeah, you were on the college track, but you just weren't sure 'cause no one else had ever been (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Nobody talked to me about it. I mean, she [Joan Pringle (ph.)] really opened the world to say, okay, this is what it's going to take for you to go college, you know. You've got to, you've got to decide where you want to go. You've got to get financial aid. You've got to get student loans. Speaker 1: Now, Mifflin [Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio] was a black high school, you said? Speaker 2: Mostly black, about 70/30. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you play an instrument in school? Speaker 2: I did, I played the clarinet. I was in the band and in the marching band. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you run for any student offices? Speaker 2: I did. I, I immediately got involved in student government when I got to high school, so I was on student council. I ran for class president my senior year and did not win, came in second, and it's funny 'cause the guy who beat me, his name is John Pace. And he since died, I, I believe I heard that. But John said to me years after I got elected, he said, "I'm the only person that ever beat you," (laughter). So, but as it turned out, I ended up giving the--I was selected by my classmates to give the student commencement address at graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that made you--would you be the salutatorian or what? It was-- Speaker 2: I, I--they just, the students-- Speaker 1: Valedictorian? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't either. The students--they just let the students vote on who they wanted to represent them at graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you graduate with honors? Speaker 2: Oh, god, I, I don't know. I may, I don't, I have no memory, I can't tell you (laughter). I mean I was a good student, but did my--I don't know if my diploma said with honors or not in all candor. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this would be, like 1978 when you graduated? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you, now were you still shy in high school or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in high school, I came out. I mean, I was, I was really shy until ninth grade. And then, I, I tell young women, I said, what happened is, you know, how they call that, call you chubby, I said, you guys call it thick, I was fat. But the fat moved into strategic places, so I had breasts and hips before my friends. So, in ninth grade, that made me hugely popular (laughter). And so, I really started to come out of my shell then. Boys started to pay attention to me. I started getting involved in student government, and I think the summer before ninth grade, I just decided that I was going to enjoy high school, so I just got involved. I, I worked on the student newspaper. In fact, when I went to college [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], I thought I was going to be a journalist because that's what I enjoyed doing. I worked on the yearbook staff, you know. It was just, it was a good experience, as, as good as high school can be. Story_ID: 638599 Speaker 1: Those are the days during your high school days, I guess, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was elected president. Speaker 2: I was in college. Jimmy Carter is the first--yeah, right? No, '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: He came in '76 [1976], yeah. Speaker 2: Right. So, the first president I voted for was Jimmy Carter and he didn't win. Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] vote- beat him. That was in '80 [1980] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) in '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And he was president when you were in high school [Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And there were--well, the country is coming out of Vietnam I guess. Speaker 2: There was a recession. Remember the fireside chats? I still remember the day, 'cause it was during the summer--I think it was in August, when Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned. I remember watching TV and they did this special interrupt, and he said (gesture), "You won't have Richard Nixon to kick around anymore [sic.]," yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638600 Speaker 1: Did you know any lawyers at that point? Did you have any role models in the community who were lawyers that you could look to? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know any lawyers growing up. An interesting story is when I was seventeen, I was a senior in high school, we had to do a gover- a senior government paper. And I chose my senior government thesis on the Columbus schools desegregation case [Penick v. Columbus Board of Education, 1977]. So, with all of the bravado of a seventeen year old, I called Judge Robert Duncan [Robert Morton Duncan], the first African American to serve on the Supreme Court of Ohio, and the first African American federal district court judge for the Southern District here in Ohio [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio]. So, I called him and, surprisingly, he took my call. And I told him, I wanted to come interview him about the Columbus desegregation case. And so, I took my tape recorder, which was about the size of a lunchbox and my legal pad, and here is a judge, who I could do nothing for, who gave a seventeen year old such patience. And I went in, and I said to him, "Why are you making us change schools?" And I had all my questions written out. He was so patient 'cause I remember saying to him, "Why can't you just make our schools better? Why do we have to change schools?" And he just explained that he went through--and that meeting with Judge Duncan, that was, that was the, the tops for me. And I, I didn't yet know then that I would be a lawyer but I--he, just his gracefulness, how, how kind he was to spend all that time talking to me. And my teacher loved it--I mean, Dwight Gross [ph.] was my government teacher, and he now works for the state department of education [Ohio Department of Education]. I run into him occasionally, but that, that experience was so life changing for me to think that somebody as important as a federal district judge would take time with this seventeen year old from Mifflin High School [Columbus, Ohio]. And it probably wasn't until years later that I really understood how significant that encounter was. As a lawyer, I would have never picked up the phone and called a federal district court judge, and say, "Hey, can I have an hour of your time just to interview you" (laughter)? But as a seventeen year old, you don't know what you don't know. And on the day that I was sworn in, in 1993, I told the audience that I wanted to be the kind of judge that Judge Duncan was: a judge who would always make time for kids and young people, and be willing to talk to people and answer their questions. And, next week, I'm actually going to get the Judge Robert M. Duncan Award from the American Constitution Society. So, from that moment in 1977 until now, we have become friends. He's been somebody I've admired, and to think that I'm sitting on the court that he was the first African American on, and then, I get to be the first African American woman. You couldn't even write a script like that. We could not have known that when I interviewed him in 1977. Story_ID: 638601 Speaker 1: When you were a senior [at Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio] then, what were you considering as a career? What were your--? Speaker 2: Journalism. When I was a senior, I decided to go to Ohio University [Athens, Ohio], and I, I often tell, tell young people this. You know, I, I didn't, I didn't pick Ohio University, and I hope they don't get mad when I say this. I didn't pick it because it was this great academic institution, or I'd done my research and decided that they were the best journalism school. I really--our, our guidance counselor [Joan Pringle (ph.)] took us down for a visit, and I got to go to an Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] party. (Laughter) And I was (laughter) like, if this is college, sign me up. I am so in. And, and that's really why I decided to go. It was far enough away that my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] wouldn't come down unannounced, but it was close enough that I could get home on the Greyhound and so, I decided to go there. I was going to be a journalist, and I wanted to go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and work on the Hill [Capitol Hill]. I wanted to be like a congressional press secretary. That was my career aspiration at that time. Story_ID: 638602 Speaker 1: Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] is a school that's known for producing journalists. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And a lot of the writers in Ohio, right now in the newspapers, went to Ohio University. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Matt Lauer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page went there. So, what was, what was it like and? Speaker 2: You know, it was great. I mean, I, I started off wanting to go into broadcast news. And then (laughter), one of my professors said, "You need to lose fifty pounds." Well, god, I was like a size twelve, and he told me I was--still had to lose fifty pounds. I was like, I'm not doing that, so (laughter). Speaker 1: To be on-- Speaker 2: To be on TV, 'cause think about back then, women--they have very stringent standards for women on, in broadcast news. So, then I decided to do print. And so, I worked for a quarter at the OU Post [The Post]. But back then, this is what they gave freshmen to do. You had to manually set headlines, so back then, we had to measure the size of the story column, and then manually set the headlines. Well, I'm kind of a girly girl, so I would leave every night with black ink on my fingers from having to measure and lay out the, the headlines--didn't want to do that. Then, I did radio, TV, finally ended up in public relations journalism sequence. But the great thing is I had my own radio show on WOUB [WOUB Radio, Athens, Ohio] for a couple of quarters. I was able to get involved in all different things at the college of communications [College of Communication; Scripps College of Communication, Athens, Ohio], whether it was, you know, working on articles or working with professors. I served on the dean of students' advisory council. I did what's called, what was called minority programming back then for the minority students on campus. It was a really rich and affirming environment for me. Speaker 1: What kind of a radio show did you have? Speaker 2: It was, it was called 'Black Talk' (laughter). And I still have the reel to reels, you know, remember those huge reel to reels? I still have them in my basement. And it was a call in show, so whatever people was on the minds of students, and it was, like a Sunday night at ten o'clock show. I don't even know how I got it, but I did it for a couple of quarters. Speaker 1: So, were your guests, students for the most part? Speaker 2: They were call-ins, yeah, they were all students, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All, all call in, talk about topics of the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, whatever was going-- Speaker 1: --news (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638603 Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, and--oh, absolutely. The woman who talked me into going to law school, her name is Sandra Haggerty. She just retired from OU a year ago to go to Arizona where she's living. Sandra had lived in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], had a syndicated column in the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times] and she got divorced and moved her three daughters to Athens, Ohio. If you can imagine that as culture shock as an African American woman, from L.A. to Athens, Ohio. But I was fortunate enough when she came to Athens, I got assigned as her advisee. And so, at the end of my sophomore year, I go in to just drop my schedule off which is what I'd done with my previous advisor. He never really asked me what my interests were; I just go drop my schedule off. She says to me, "What are we doing with this degree?" It's the first time anybody had ever asked me. And I said, "Well, I'm going to, going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I'm going to be a journalist. I'm going to be a press secretary working in [U.S.] Congress." And she said, "Oh, well, then, you should go to law school." I said, "Why?" And she said, "Because everybody in D.C. is a lawyer. It's three more years of your life. You'll be twenty-five years old. You'll have the world by a string." She was the first professor to really take an interest in me as a person, and so, she--I give her so much credit because she saw potential in me that I wasn't even sure was there. And she really pushed me and encouraged me to do that. Frank Henderson, who was my political science professor. I loved politics. I took every political science course I could get my hands on. And he was one of the few African American male teachers there, and he would really challenge us. He would challenge us to think about government and politics in, in different ways, like what is government's responsibility and, you know, what should be the role of politics in a, in a modern democracy? And then, I remember him saying to us once, he said, "You know, I'm living for the day when somebody runs for office and says what they truly think, not caring if they win or lose." And so, he was the kind of professor that just got you excited, like you couldn't wait to get to class to see, what was Professor Henderson going to talk about today? And both--I stayed in touch with both he and Sandra--well, with Frank until he died, and with Sandra, she just sent me a note last year. She was cleaning out some things because she was moving. And in 1980, I was Miss Bronze 1980 at OU, 'cause I entered the pageant [Miss Bronze Scholarship Pageant] as Miss Kappa Alpha Psi, and she found the program, (laughter) and she sent it to me. There's nothing, like looking back at when you were twenty years old. And she sent me this program with a note that said, "Oh, my god, when were you twenty, and why are we this old?" So (laughter), but San- Sandra was at my wedding. She, she's just been a jewel. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you ever run into Cosmo Pieterse, the South African writer or? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--I know he was there. And I think Dennis Bruce [ph.], I think some of the South African expatriates were at OU (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear), you know, I mean it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember any of them. Story_ID: 638604 Speaker 1: Now, did it take any, I mean Athens [Ohio] is in like the hills of Ohio (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, southeast Ohio, yeah. Speaker 1: So, is it, okay, was it, was it hard to get used to being there [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, it was when I first got there because I'd never been around that many white people in my life. I mean, there were--I came from a pretty black neighborhood, and a pretty black high school [Mifflin High School, Columbus, Ohio]. And I go to Athens and there's fourteen thousand students. Only about seven hundred of us are black, so it was a real--just even living in the dorms was a real experience. Yes, it, it was culture shock for sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. There's heavy Appalachian culture, most of the local people (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we but, you know what, the, the students come in and so for--the students are not mostly Appalachian, so the students are from all over. We had a lot of East Coast students, students from all over Ohio. And the black community was very tight, you know, it's one of the reasons I pledged a sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. But we, there were parties every weekend, and so, even though we were dispersed in terms of living throughout the campus, we always found ways to come together. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there some kind of capstone project your senior year for journalism? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't have to write an article (unclear)-- Speaker 2: See, I was in the public relations sequence so, yeah, I didn't have to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right so, 1982, this is the, I guess, the disco era, I guess (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, you're probably right, 1978 to 1982, yes, yeah, we had people, like Lakeside, Cameo, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) all right. And I guess some disco was (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Lionel Richie, right? Who was he pa- was he a part of Cameo? Speaker 1: Commodores [The Commodores]. Speaker 2: Commodores, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 638605 Speaker 1: So did you apply for law school? Speaker 2: I did. After, that was, that would have been the end of my sophomore year [at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], which would have been 1980. Sandra [Sandra Haggerty] suggested I go to law school. I come home, and I'm talking to my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] about it and, and she would sit in the chair, not unlike the one I'm sitting in. She used to crochet and, and watch game shows. And I'm saying, "You know, Granny, this professor thinks I should go to law school, but that's three more years of your life. Do you know how old I'll be at twenty-five? Who stays in college for seven years?" You know, I'm giving her all the reasons why not to. And she's just crocheting, and I bet in her mind, she's thinking, this poor, silly child. So, she doesn't even look up at me as she's crocheting. She's listening to all my reasons. And she says, "Well, if you're gonna live to be twenty-five anyway, why not be twenty-five and be a lawyer, versus twenty-five and not?" And I was like, oh, okay. So, then, she got on the phone all summer and told her friends, "My baby is going to law school." Well, it was pretty hard to back out at that point. So, yeah, I did apply, and it's funny because earlier today, I was at the, I was up at the university 'cause we had a big--I'm on the National Council, so we had a luncheon today with what we call Moritz scholars, law school scholars, and we were honoring one of the alums who's given significant scholarship. And I was saying to some of my colleagues who I saw. I haven't, I see them twice a year if I'm lucky that, you know, Ohio State's law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio] was an amazing experience. But at the time I applied to law school, I was really thinking about going to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.]. I still wanted to be in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]--that was my plan. And Ohio State was just relentless. They would call, they had a person, her name is Barbara Rich--talk about people that influence you. Barbara Rich was in charge of admissions for the law school, an African American woman. Barbara would call me every week and say, "So, when are you coming to Ohio State?" And I'd be like, "Ms. Rich, I'm going to Georgetown." And she'd go, "Okay, well, I'll talk to you later," and always very nice, no hard pressure. She'd call the next week. and she'd go, "Hi," said, "you know what, we wanted to put this package on the table, so we're going to send this to you, but here's the money we're willing to offer you to choose Ohio State." And I'd say, "That's really nice, Ms. Rich, but I'm going to Georgetown," (laughter). But the reality is Georgetown was giving me no money. So, by the time, Ohio State got up to a full scholarship, my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] sat down with me. And she said, "Okay, Ms. Genius." She took that, you know, the infamous piece of paper where you put the line down the middle. She goes, "Georgetown here, zero dollars, plus you have to live in D.C. Ohio State, full tuition scholarship, and you can live with family. Help me understand why this is a hard choice for you." "Because I want to be in D.C." And she said, "Okay, how are you going to pay for D.C.?" So, I went to Ohio State. Best decision I ever made. I, I, I have been involved and engaged with that university from the very first day. And once you got into Ohio State, they embraced you like a family. Story_ID: 638606 Speaker 1: Tell us, tell me about the family at Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio]. And I don't know it's just the law school that you dealt with or did you deal with the broader Ohio State, 'cause we, I mentioned Dr. Kelsey [ph.] had mentored-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, is it, who were the people who provided the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was at, when I was at the law school, it was just the law school. But then, after I graduated, I got involved in the greater university which is one of the things about becoming part of the Ohio State family. At the law school, it was Dean Meeks [James Meeks] and Associate Dean Jack Henderson [John P. Henderson] and Barbara Rich. They were the three pivotal people because even though I was on full academic scholarship, I can remember at one point going to Jack Henderson, the associate dean. I was in tears and I was like, I have no money. I--'cause they wouldn't let us work our first year. And I said, "I don't know if I can continue. I just have no money. I have nothing to live on. And I, I can't, I can't do this," and I was so stressed. Dean Henderson wrote a note on a piece of paper, put it in a sealed envelope, said, "Take this over to Lincoln Tower." And I went over there, and they gave me a check, something that probably wouldn't even happen now. I don't know how he did that, but that's what I mean. The hard part was getting into Ohio State, but once you were there, they were committed to you succeeding. So, if you had stressful days, or you felt like I just can't do it, there were just so many people there to keep you encouraged, or to help you get whatever it was you needed. That's what I mean about family. I, I have always been glad that I chose Ohio State. It was tough. It, it was rigorous getting through law school, but I never felt that I was in it by myself. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the toughest part of law school? Speaker 2: The reading and, and being prepared for four classes a day. I mean, every professor was giving you fifty, 100 pages of reading. You had to brief cases. You had to understand concepts. And as a first year student, this is all new to you, and you've got to be prepared in case that professor calls on you. You--they're using seating charts. And, for me, I always felt tremendous pressure because out of 225 students, there were only eleven of us who were African American. And we were divided into three sections, and in my section, there were only three of us that were African American out of about eighty-five, ninety students. And so, I always felt this pressure, like I had to be prepared because if I wasn't good, if I didn't know the answer, people would think I was an affirmative action choice. People would think I didn't belong there. And so, I had this self imposed pressure to make sure that I always knew what I was talking about and I was always prepared. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you do grade wise? Speaker 2: I did well, I did well. I was, you know, I was in the top half of the class, not the top 10 percent, but, you know, I was in the top 25 percent, and I did well. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Did you have a favorite aspect of law that you studied? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved litigation. In fact, at graduation, I got an award, a cash award actually, for having the highest grade in trial litigation of anybody in the, in the class. And so, it was something I excelled at. After my first year, I worked in the prosecutor's office. I loved being in a courtroom. I loved being able to argue my case. And so, I took to every class that had to do with litigation, whether it was evidence or criminal procedure or civil procedure. I just loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a favorite case that you studied that you--seemed to--okay. Speaker 2: Not that I can remember, yeah. I'm sure there was probably something going on at the time that interested me but-- Speaker 1: Okay. I'm thinking, now, '82 [1982], can't think of what was, who was in. There was-- Speaker 2: Wow, if you can recall that, that's impressive (laughter). Speaker 1: You know, it's just nothing real big that I can think of right now related to, or national like Watergate was. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, no. It was, I don't remember anything that was as, like of that level, when I was in law school. Story_ID: 638607 Speaker 1: When you graduate from law school, this is 1985? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1985. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five [1985]. What did you--did you be- did you clerk for someone right away? Speaker 2: No, I actually went to the attorney general's office. I was a litigator. I, I tried doing--you know, at the time, Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio] really encouraged people to go into the big firms or do clerkships. And it's funny that Chief Justice Moyer [Thomas J. Moyer], who was the former chief justice of this court [Supreme Court of Ohio], when he was an appellate judge, I actually interviewed for, at his court for a clerkship. And it was so funny because as he walked me out after the clerkship, he looked at me and said, "Why do you want this job" (laughter)? And I said, "Oh, it would be great. It would enhance my research and writing skills," you know, the things you say. And he looked at me, and he said, "Do you know in this job, you would never see a person?" He said, "You would spend your entire day in a library." He said, "You would hate this job. You need to go where there are people." And it's, it was one of those, again, those pivotal points where I was like, he's absolutely right. So, I immediately went to the attorney general's office. And I was a litigator there for two years. I was in court. I started work the Monday after the bar exam, so the first Monday in August. And immediately, in October, I was trying cases against lawyers in law firms and partners in law firms. It was a great--it's like throwing you into the deep end of the pool, making sure you can swim fast. Speaker 1: Okay. I neglected to ask you about Janet Jackson [Janet E. Jackson]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, tell us about her. Speaker 2: Janet was, she was the person that interviewed me, so the, I got my job through the law school placement office. And I interviewed on campus with someone from the attorney general's office, and then the second interviews were done in the actual office. And Janet was one of three people that I interviewed with. And she and I hit it off immediately. She was just so impressive, so poised, beautiful, smart, and I ended up, we ended up liking each other so much, she made me fifteen minutes late to meet with the actual attorney general for the State of Ohio [Anthony J. Celebrezze, Jr.]. But from that moment in 1985 until now, she's been one of my closest friends. The reason I got involved in the community was Janet Jackson. When I went to work at the AG's office, she looked at me and she said, "It is not okay for you to go to work and go home. You need to get involved in the community. You've been given great blessings. You need to go out and volunteer, get involved with United Way [United Way of Central Ohio, Columbus, Ohio], get involved with a non-profit." So, she's the one that kind of pushed me to do it and then, she was the first African American woman elected as a judge in Franklin County [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 638608 Speaker 1: Did you know about--at the time you went to law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio], did, did you know about [HistoryMaker] Lillian Burke? Speaker 2: I did not know about Lillian Burke. I only met her within the last year. I actually met her last year when I was in Cleveland [Ohio] at the Cleveland Metropolitan Bar [Cleveland Metropolitan Bar Association], but, no, and it, I've since learned about her story and, and I was at her funeral on Monday, but what a fascinating woman, yeah. Speaker 1: She just passed away? Speaker 2: She just passed away, ninety-four years old, and it was on Monday. Speaker 1: Tell people who she is. Speaker 2: Lillian Burke, she was the first African American woman judge in the entire State of Ohio. She was appointed in 1969 by then Governor Jim Rhodes [James A. Rhodes], and just a woman, she's so beautiful. I mean, the photographs of her, she was amazingly graceful, smart, beautiful, and what I didn't know until I attended her funeral, she was a champion bridge player. (Laughter) So, she, she, like competed across the country in these bridge tournaments, very smart. But to think about--I actually spoke about her this past weekend. I gave a speech at the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association] banquet, and I spoke about her. And I said, you know, you complain about things now that really are so insignificant. Think about Lillian Burke. Imagine being a judge in 1969, you're African American, and you're female, I'm sure people walked in being disrespectful to her. I'm sure she had to prove over and over again that she understood the law, and that she deserved to be in that place. I, I think more people need to know about her. And so, I'm going to give the commencement speech for Cleveland Marshall Law School [Cleveland Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] in May. I'm going to talk about Lillian Burke because I think a lot of people need to understand. As I said to the students on Saturday, they're living on, on cash--on, on checks they didn't cash. Other people paid the way for them, and for them to complain about little things. It, it--I have no patience for that, none. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you did get the chance to know Judge Burke before she-- Speaker 2: I got a chance to meet her. Yes, yeah. Story_ID: 638609 Speaker 1: Okay so you're working for the attorney general's office? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who's the attorney general? Speaker 2: It was Tony Celebrezze [Anthony J. Celebrezze, Jr.]. Speaker 1: That's right. I remember his name, but I didn't realize (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: Tony Celebrezze, okay, Anthony Celebrezze. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what were the significant events of, you know, serving for the attorney general? Speaker 2: Well, back then, my client was the state medical board [State Medical Board of Ohio]. And I met--they assigned me to represent the state medical board shortly after the Cleveland Plain Dealer had done this multiday series on how the medical board was not adequately disciplining doctors, and holding them accountable. So, here I am at twenty-five, going up against partners in law firms because who do la- doctors hire to represent them, but very expensive law firms. And so, I learned very quickly how to try a case. We worked very, very hard, but it was a great experience. And then, I was, I stayed at the AG's office for two years. And then, I went to the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction. At twenty-seven years old, I was their chief legal counsel. I had four lawyers working for me. And part of my responsibility was overseeing four federal consent decrees, and helping to direct or plan for the first death, death penalty execution in Ohio. We had not had an execution in Ohio since 1973 when the death penalty had been declared unconstitutional. And so, there was huge angst about how we were going to carry out the, the death penalty when it was finally reached the point, which we thought back then would be in '85 [1985] or '86 [1986]. I think it happened in about '89 [1989] or '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638610 Speaker 1: What did the court order the-- Speaker 2: The department [Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction] to do? Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the department at that time was deemed to be discriminatory from race and sex. And the court, the federal court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio] had ordered the Ohio Penitentiary closed. The Ohio Penitentiary used to sit in what is now called the Arena District in Columbus [Ohio]. It was this huge prison that had been built in the 1800s. And the federal district--the federal courts had declared that it was cruel and unusual to have inmates inhabit that facility. So, it had to be closed and, ultimately, it was torn down. At the time, I came to the department we had been accused of race discrimination for not promoting African Americans, and not just in employment, but in how we dealt with inmates. We had a caste system inside the prison department where white inmates got cells, and black inmates got dormitories. And so, part of my responsibility was to help develop and write policies, and then train the wardens and the staff on how this was going to happen. It was very interesting to me because I would meet with the wardens, and they were very opposed to housing black and white inmates together. They were like, "You don't understand, they will not live together." And I looked at them and I said, "Oh, we don't let inmates choose any part of their existence. We don't let them choose what they're going to wear, what they're going to eat, when they go to the bathroom, what time they get up, and suddenly, we're going to let them choose who they live with? This is prison. These are your issues. We're going to assign cells based on security levels, and not based on race." But, oh, my gosh, it was so hard. And then, the other case we had was a serious case of sex discrimination. They would not allow women to work as correctional officers in maximum security prisons because, apparently, women are so weak, they would have sex with the inmates. And a woman couldn't get promoted to be a warden if she didn't have maximum security experience. So, the, the duplicity of their argument, though, is that, at the same time, they were prosecuting and--or, excuse me, defending a case as to why women couldn't work in maximum security prisons, we had men working in the female prison. And we had female inmates actually getting pregnant. And nobody was saying that men couldn't work in Marysville [Ohio Reformatory for Women, Marysville, Ohio] so, of course, we lost that case. And I can remember sitting with this old warden. His name is Arnold Jago [ph.]. And Arnold Jago, he used to call me Gal, 'cause Arnold was sixty-five years old. And he looks like what you would think a warden would look like, and he would say to me, "Gal, we are not letting women into this prison." And I said, "Warden, yes, you are. Women are going to work in this prison. That is what the federal court has ordered." And I had his supervisor with me who said to him, "Arnold, either women start working in this prison, or you're not going to be the warden anymore." So, it was a fascinating practice for somebody who was only twenty-seven years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, it does. It sounds like a fascinating--Ohio State Pen, as you described it, was used as a model for a draconian prison in 'The Shawshank Redemption' (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, that was Mansfield. Speaker 1: Oh, Mansfield? Speaker 2: The Mansfield Correctional [Ohio State Reformatory, Mansfield, Ohio], yeah, 'cause that one is Mansfield, and I've been there several times. It, it was the only prison in the country that was built six tiers high, solid concrete. It was so noisy, like you could hear yourself as you would walk through. You hear every step you take, and the noise was deafening. Oh, my god, if they even started talking, they, and because they were stacked straight on top of each other, you have somebody on tier six yelling down to somebody on tier four, you would lose your mind. I don't know how people didn't go crazy in there. It was the loudest, most difficult prison to operate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was where 'Shawshank' was filmed. Speaker 1: Okay. And I always thought it was Ohio Pen-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Ohio Pen was, I think, gone or, or pretty decrepit by that time. Speaker 1: I think they shot something before they knocked it down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they probably--oh, 'Cool Hand Luke' maybe? Yeah, they did do, they did several movies at the Ohio Pen because to see it, you're right. It was pretty draconian looking, yeah. And then, there was that infamous fire there where several inmates died and, yeah, it was a bad place. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, you were trying to implement the federal consent, consent decree, and-- Speaker 2: We had several, yeah. We were being sued all the time (laughter). Story_ID: 638611 Speaker 1: Now, at the time that you were with the state's attorney office, Celebrezze [Anthony J. Celebrezze, Jr.] was a, was a Democrat? Speaker 2: Yes, he was a Democrat, um-hm. Speaker 1: And did--and you were there for how (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was at the attorney general's for two years. Then, I went to the department of corrections [Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction]. Speaker 1: (Unclear) with the department of corrections. Speaker 2: And that was part of the executive branch under Governor Celeste [Richard F. Celeste], who was also a Democrat. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then, I was there for two years, and then went to the juvenile part of the state system, the department of youth services [Ohio Department of Youth Services], still under--and that was when Governor Voinovich [George Voinovich] came in, so I was there for two years. And that's where I decided I needed to run for judge, 'cause I really didn't like representing the state against kids, kids that didn't need to be there, kids who, if they'd had different parents or a different break in life, would not have ended up incarcerated. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this takes us to the--to where you first ran for-- Speaker 2: For judge. Speaker 1: --for judge. Speaker 2: In 1992. Speaker 1: So, how did the idea, you know, come to run for judge? I mean, I guess you could have chosen, you could have made a choice to do other things-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --but to be a judge? Speaker 2: It, it's interesting. I was actually approached by the Franklin County Democratic Party, a man named John Greene [ph.], who was vice chair of the party. John was a bigger than life man, former steel worker. He called one day and asked to take me out to lunch, and he wanted to talk to me about running for judge. And I said, "John, I'm not running for judge." He said, "You need to think about it." I said, "I appreciate it very much, but I'm not running for judge." Then, he called a few weeks later and said, "I want to talk to you again about running for judge. You need to do this. You have juvenile experience. You'd be a great judge. You know what these kids need, and this is a winnable race." Well, in 1992, Franklin County [Ohio] was a decidedly Republican county. We had no countywide Democratic office holders. I was going to be running against somebody who had been appointed to the court by Governor Voinovich, and had been Governor Voinovich's college roommate at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. (Laughter) It just did not look like--and I would have had to have quit my job. And so, I told John no. So then, John came back a third time, and he said, "You really need to think about it." And I, I think this is, this is one of those, you know, roads less taken. I often think about what if I had said no to John, if I'd given into my own fears, my life would be dramatically different now. But what happened was when he came back the third time, I said, okay, you know, that old parable in the Bible about I sent you a boat, a helicopter, you know (laughter), and you didn't take any of them? So, I went home that night, and I called one of my close friends, who was a criminal defense lawyer. And I was telling her about how John kept insisting that I should run for judge, but I'd have to quit my job, and I wasn't married then, and how would I support myself, blah blah. And she said to me, she said, "Well, okay," she said, "how much money do you need to pay your bills every month?" And I told her, and she said, "Okay, look, I've got more business than I can take. Why don't you come in with me? I'll give you, I'll cover your--I'll give you that as a draw every month. I'll cover your bills, and you can have 50 percent of what you bring in the door." I said, "What?" She said, "That's right. So, that, that barrier is gone." She said, "Now, what's your excuse?" And I said, "Well, well, if I don't win?" And she said, "If the only reason you're not going to do this is fear--that is unacceptable." And I just, I prayed about it that night, and I asked God to, you know, give me clarity and give me peace--that this is what I was supposed to do. And the next morning, I woke up, and I said okay. And so, I quit my job. I joined my friend's firm. It was called Turner, Wright and McGee [Columbus, Ohio], and I give Carol a lot of cre- Carol Wright, a lot of credit for getting me elected because, not only did she give me the means to support myself while I ran for election, she also, she would come home from court, put her blue jeans on, and go walk the neighborhood, handing out lit [literature], talking to anybody, phone banking. She was just an amazing friend. Story_ID: 638612 Speaker 1: So, this is 1992? Speaker 2: Um-hm. It was the year of Bill Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Ross Perot, and George H.W. Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, so, was it time for change in Ohio, you think, at that time? Speaker 2: I think, no, it wasn't that. We did well that year countywide [in Franklin County, Ohio] for the first time, but I think it had a lot to do with President Clinton. If President Clinton, remem- if you remember that year, there were lines out the door at every polling location 'cause you had Ross Perot, which was the first time you'd had a third party candidate or an Independent candidate stay in through the race. And so, I think I benefitted significantly from just the voter turnout, from Bill Clinton coattails, but also something very unusual happened. The Columbus Dispatch, which was known as being a Republican paper, endorsed me over a sitting judge [Clifford Cloud]. That never happens. And so, the day that the endorsements came out, and I saw that they had endorsed me over my opponent, I mean, that was one of those like, okay, we're going to win this race now because it was so unexpected, and I think caught the entire community by surprise. In fact, that, that endorsement came out, let's say, three weeks before the election, and I was out going door to door. I was up in Upper Arlington [Ohio], going door to door. And I remember this man saying to me, I, I told him who I was. And he said, "Listen, I've already voted for you, absentee. I figured if The Columbus Dispatch endorsed a black woman, you must have your shit together." (Laughter) So and we won by four points. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eleven thousand votes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638613 Speaker 1: So, you're, you're a common pleas court judge domestic relations and juvenile division [Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the cases that came before you that you can talk about? Can you talk about some of them? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. I mean, I, I dealt with any number of cases. We dealt with, not only divorces and dissolutions because we were a combined family court, but my toughest cases were dealing with bind over cases, you know, decisions where you had to, you had to make a decision about whether you help a juvenile in juvenile court or transfer them to adult court. Dealing with children who were raped by their parent's boyfriends or live-ins, some of the horrific abuse that I saw happened to kids. It, it was, it was a challenging court to be on. You can't even begin to imagine what people do, or will allow to be done to their children. It, it was shocking for me. And so, one of the things that I did, as I said to my staff, I said, "You know, look, we know we have six years. I don't know if they're going to give me more than that, but we know we have six." And the one thing I know about black robes is when you put them on, suddenly, the media cares what you have to say. And so, I made it very intentional to talk about abused children and how the system was treating them and pushing for improvement in how we dealt with these cases. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we live in a time of increasing public scrutiny of certain kinds of crimes of that nature. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People abused, 'Oprah Winfrey Show' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], or these talk shows-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --talk about these, but you're seeing things at another level. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: You're seeing people actually walk in-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --on a level of intensity and we, we can't imagine. Speaker 2: I had, I will never forget this. I had a twelve year old who was pregnant by her mother's boyfriend. And the mother kept trying to convince me that he didn't do it. And I said, I finally looked at her, and I said, "Ma'am, we have the DNA. You can try to get your daughter to recant all you want to. That is his baby." And she looked at me, and she said, "Why do you keep babying her about this? She can get over it. I got over it, she can get over it." This is this child's mother, and she forced this twelve year old--and I'm not saying it was the wrong decision, but she did it out of her own motives. She never asked the child if she wanted to keep her baby. She told her she was giving it up for adoption. She said, "Because I have a baby by this guy, and it's going to be too weird. What, I'm raising my grandbaby who's a sibling to my son? That's not going to happen." So, this twelve year old, tears streaming down her face, not even understanding what's happening to her. She had depression, she was raped by her mother's boyfriend. And her mother, instead of trying to help her own daughter get through it, was there trying to get her daughter to say something that would allow the boyfriend not to go to prison. It, it and then, there were so many examples of that. I can't even begin to tell you. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's unfathomable, you know. You'd think she--what would he have to do for her if they want to get rid of him? I mean, I don't know, I think, you would think that'd be enough, right? Speaker 2: What, for the girl--oh, yeah, for the boyfriend (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. I think, you know-- Speaker 1: What could he do? Speaker 2: There are so many women who are so insecure that they would have rather settled for any piece of man than to be by themselves. You know, the one thing I learned growing up with my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] is she said, "There's a difference between being alone and being lonely." She said, "Now, if I'm going to struggle, I'd rather struggle by myself," you know. And so many women would just rather say they have a man, even if it's somebody that abuses their kids or mistreats them. It's a phenomenon I still can't ever get used to. Story_ID: 638614 Speaker 1: Does the court hear--I mean, did the Franklin County court [Franklin County Court of Commons Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch] when you were on the bench work with domestic violence programs and that sort of thing for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did, we did. But the court, the court can refer women to programs, but unless the woman really sees it as something she needs to go through, it just doesn't sustain. And that was part of our frustration is really--sometimes we'd have court orders over them, like if we had their children in custody, we could order mom into counseling, or into domestic violence treatment. And then, as a consequence of her not going, we could refuse to give her children back. But I had so many moms who didn't want their kids back. If they had to choose, they would choose the guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there--I know in Illinois, when I was in Chicago [Illinois] during those days, there was increased pressure put on the deadbeat fathers-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to--did that happen here in Ohio? Speaker 2: Yes. I, I was one, you know, because of my life experience, I was one that was pretty stringent on people paying child support. You know, if you had a child, I expected you to take care of them. There's two people that made a baby, two people need to take care of a baby. So, but some of the cases--I mean, part of our challenge with some, some of the moms, we didn't know who the dad was. I literally had a case, I will kid you not, where I had six children--no, wait a minute--nine children, six fathers. You should have seen, we had to bring in extra tables for the hearing. The mom and dad were married so, and I actually had to graph it out because I couldn't understand it. So, the mom and dad were married, but mom's oldest child was not the husband's, even though the child was named after the husband. And during the course of the proceedings, the custody proceedings, the husband got mom's sister pregnant (laughter). It was--those were the things I dealt with every single day (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. That's, yeah, these are the challenging-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --cases that had a--I was just thinking, if they knew your background, they, you know, they'd be (unclear) and say, uh-oh. Speaker 2: Right. That message quickly got out (laughter). Story_ID: 638615 Speaker 1: Let's talk about juvenile court. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what is your philosophy about juvenile court? There, there are those who would you know sentence all juveniles to adult sentences. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what do you think? Speaker 2: I, I really think that people have lost sight of why the juvenile court was created. Before we had juvenile courts, children were treated as mini adults and sent to adult prison. My philosophy of juvenile court is what the juvenile court was designed for is that kids should not be forever tainted with a criminality of their conduct because they've made decisions as children. Now, if they're bound over to adult court, that's a different matter. But kids, if they're in the juvenile system, you're in the juvenile system, one, you're not convicted of a felony; you're a adjudicated delinquent because the belief is that children can still be rehabilitated. And as a society, we have moved so far away from that because we have had kids commit some horrific crimes. I will grant you that. There's ways to deal with children who are violent predators. Those children should be bound over to the adult system. But for kids who remain in the juvenile system, and that should be only a small number of kids that you absolutely have to transfer to adult--the kids that remain in the juvenile system should be treated like the children they are. I can remember as a juvenile court judge [on the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch], I would send a kid to an institution. And they'd get written up for doing something that was very much a kid activity. So, let's say, like the boy--they were in a, they were at a treatment facility that housed boys and girls. I once got a report that this child should not be released 'cause he got caught kissing a girl outside the bathroom. Well, he's a sixteen year old boy. It didn't have anything to do with his criminality. It was a normal kid act. And so, I think sometimes the system and the people in the system are so hung up on (air quotes) enforcing rules, and not remembering these are children. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And did you have a sort of a philosophy of--that you-- Speaker 2: When I was a judge, I had--my philosophy, and I would say this to kids all the time. You make the choice, you choose the consequence. I was not a soft on crime judge. I would say to kids all the time, "If you come in here and you have hurt somebody, you're going to go to the department of youth services [Ohio Department of Youth Services]. I am not going to have my community unsafe because you can't control your impulses. But if you're willing to make changes, you're going to find no better advocate for you than me, but don't come into my courtroom--." When I first got on the bench, there would be these lawyers who would come in and say, "Well, you know, my client grew up without a father. He was poor." And I would just lose it. I'd say, "You know what? Being poor, growing up without a father is no excuse for shooting somebody. I was poor. I didn't have a dad. I never once hurt anybody or stole from them." So, my philosophy is what my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] taught me. You have to be accountable for your choices. You make a bad choice, you got to deal with the consequence of it. That doesn't mean that you can't move forward from that, but there's not going to be any of this patting on your back, saying, oh, sorry, you know, you get another chance. You have to acknowledge what you did was wrong, be willing to address your own conduct, and then move past it. That was my philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638616 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] was also the Clarence Thomas hearings for the Supreme Court of the United States of America [U.S. Supreme Court]. Anita Hill, Clarence Thomas. Were you paying attention to that? Speaker 2: Oh, of course, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But you're not going to say something about it (laughter). Speaker 2: What would you like me to say (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Unclear) I just wanted to-- Speaker 2: I was paying attention. That's-- Speaker 1: --chronology, that's something that, that, you know, we have to (unclear) go past. Speaker 2: There was also the O.J. Simpson case going on in '93 [sic. People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]-- Speaker 1: Yeah that's ninety-- Speaker 2: --or '94 [1994]? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--the case came to public light in ninety--was it '93 [1993] or '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I remember the reporters, when the jury came back so fast, reporters were calling all of us. This judge is saying, "What do you think? Is he guilty, not guilty?" And, you know, our philosophy was that no jury is going to send somebody to prison that quickly, so we were afraid it was not guilty, but. Speaker 1: Did you have an opinion about that case or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I mean, I would say to you that there are people sitting in prison today on far less evidence than was in the O.J. Simpson case. That, in my opinion, was, it was--there, there was a judge [Lance Ito] who let the trial get away from him, too much media attention. And I'm not sure the jury was totally sequestered; that they didn't understand some of the social issues that were going on. It was amazing to me how this case got all tied up in black and white when the real issue was did he kill two people [Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman]? And there are people doing life today on far less evidence. Speaker 1: Okay. Some say it was some sort of a payback to the justice system of the State of California who had, who have so often run over the rights of the people of-- Speaker 2: There, there was clearly, this jury was sending a message. But I think there were, there were, you know, look, you've got the, the twenty-four hour news cycle. You've got the pressure on two prosecutors [Marcia Clark and Christopher Darden], and a very experienced, very well paid defense team. And so, they were able to create reasonable doubt. I mean, they're, it--when you look who populates prisons, it's poor people. Most people who go to prison don't get the kind of defense that O.J. Simpson had. You had two prosecutors trying to, to respond to everything that was thrown at them by four lawyers. It was an unusual circumstance. Story_ID: 638617 Speaker 1: Tell us about, now, now you got married in '93 [1993]-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --to a man named Tony Brown [Anthony Brown]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And his name is the same as the-- Speaker 2: The commentator, yes. Speaker 1: --as the commentator Tony Brown, but so did people get it confused? Speaker 2: Oh, all the time. He loves it, too. He's like, "I'm not that Tony Brown, but I am the Tony Brown," (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, well, tell us how you met Tony Brown. Speaker 2: I met Tony during the campaign. I'm--well, Tony and I went to church together, but we go to a large church, so I didn't really know him. I knew who he and his family was. His first wife died of breast cancer, so she died on September 15th of '92 [1992]. And our pastor had called me to--he wanted me to come to church, like the third Sunday of September, but I couldn't because I was at, at another church. So, I said, I'll come the fourth Sunday, and it just so happened that was the same Sunday Tony had come back to church after burying his wife. And he was sitting next to my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick], so I asked him to scoot over and he refused. So, I was like--so he said, "You can sit by me," so I was like, okay. So, I, I sat with him, and he kept talking to me all during church. And when I had to leave, he asked me for my number, so I gave him my business card. I assumed he had some legal work, and he said, "No, I'd like your personal number. I need to call you about something." And I was like, "Okay, but I got to go," so I wrote it down. And that's how we met. And he actually called me that same day, and told me that he just felt something in his spirit when I sat down. His wife had been ill for three years. They had two young daughters who were then five [Laura Brown] and thirteen [Belinda Waters Brown]. And he just came at me hard, as the kids would say, you know, he just kept sending flowers. And he started working on the campaign, and just got very involved. I actually suggested to my mother, she might suggest he see a therapist (laughter). I thought there was something wrong (laughter). But, yeah, we got married. We met in September. We got married in June because he had two daughters and he said, you know, "I'm not going to date. I'm not going to bring somebody in over my daughters," and that's the story. And it's been twenty years. Speaker 1: Yeah, sounds like he knew what he wanted. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that's right (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 638618 Speaker 1: So did you serve, serve as a judge for, up through (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand--January 2002. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And are there any--what are the, some of the, I guess, the high points of that time period? I know that in 2000 you won the, you were the recipient of the Champion of Children award. That's one we have down here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know what some of the others might be. Speaker 2: And in 1995, I was recognized as a woman of achievement for being the first African American woman elected to the common pleas court [Franklin County Court of Common Pleas] and for my community service. I, I received many awards for, for, which I'm, I'm very grateful for. People in this community have been very kind. I think what I remember is that I think of my, the things I'm most proud of. I started the SMART program, a truancy intervention program, because I saw too many children ending up committing felonies, or getting into trouble because the system just hadn't paid attention. And I'll very briefly tell you about a case that really caused me to implement the SMART program, and SMART stands for Student Mediation Reduction of Truancy [sic. Student Mediation and Assistance to Reduce Truancy]. Speaker 1: Now when was that started? Speaker 2: In 1997. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1996, I presided over a case of a young man named Lamar Coleman [ph.]. Lamar Coleman and two of his gang members kidnapped Anthony Keseer [ph.], who was a Capital University [Columbus, Ohio] student, as Anthony was coming home from his evening job at eleven o'clock. They kidnapped him, put him in his own car, drove him around to various ATM machines until they got a grand total of two hundred dollars. Then, they kneeled Anthony beside his car and shot him in the back of the head. Anthony was just a college student. And on the day Lamar sat in my courtroom at fifteen years old, I had to decide whether to keep Lamar's case in juvenile court or to transfer it to adult court. And when you're making that decision, you order a psychological evaluation, you get educational records. You get a psychosocial on the family. I got three hundred pages of records from Columbus City Schools about Lamar Coleman. And what they said was this: when Lamar Coleman was five years old, he missed fifty-two days of kindergarten. When he was six years old, he missed seventy days of first grade. When he was seven years old, he missed eighty some days of second grade. So, by the time Lamar was in fourth grade, he wasn't coming to school hardly at all. But what else was in those records were little notations and disciplines: Lamar cussed out a teacher when he's eight years old. Lamar spit at the teacher. Lamar shoved the desk into the principal. Lamar beat up another kid. So, all of these discipline things are in the record, along with Lamar not coming to school, but the one thing that wasn't in that record is why. Nobody ever asked why. Nobody ever said, why is little six year old Lamar Coleman so angry? Why is little six year old Lamar Coleman not coming to school at a time when kids love school? And had anybody asked the question, they would have found out that Lamar Coleman's mother was a severe alcoholic. She was when he was six, and she was on the day she sat in my courtroom. And so, when I had reviewed all of that, I get on the bench, and I was furious. And I kind of railed, kind of like I'm starting to do now. It made the front page of the paper (laughter), above the fold that: "Judge Blasts School System." But, but I blasted them for this reason: when a child in elementary school is not coming to school, that's a parent decision. That's not a child decision. And for a school to ignore that when we have compulsory education in this state, that is a crime. And so, I determined on that day that we were going to have to do something about it. And so, Lamar Coleman is doing thirty years to life in prison, and Anthony Keseer is dead because nobody dared to ask why. And so, we started with one elementary school. We got the principal to agree, the prosecutor, and we did something very simple. Any kid that had five unexcused absences got a letter on court stationery signed by a court social worker, telling them they needed to come to the school at four o'clock to meet with the child's teacher, the child's principal, and the court social worker. And at that meeting, the court social worker would say to them, compulsory education is required in the state. If you don't send your child to school, that is a first degree misdemeanor, and the judge is going to send you to jail. For 85 percent of the cases, that resolved the problem, 'cause soon as they were facing jail for 85 percent, that was it. But for the 15 percent that it didn't resolve, it's because the parents had severe drug and alcohol issues. We had one case where a mother and father were living on methadone treatments in a Motel 6 motel room with their three school age daughters. So, for those 15 percent, what were able to do is go in there and get those children into save environments before they spent ten years raising themselves, and then became the felony with a gun in your head. Very simple, didn't cost extra money. It was just asking why. So, that's one of the proudest things I did as a juvenile court judge. When I left the court in 2002, we had gone from one elementary school to forty elementary schools in the Columbus city district because why have compulsory education if you're not going to enforce it? So, that's one of the things I will always remember. And then, I also started the Family Drug Court [at the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas]. Story_ID: 638619 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Family Drug Court. Speaker 2: Well, the Family Drug Court came about because the number one reason that we put children into foster care is their mothers are drug addicted. And so, I, I spent some time with one of the drug and alcohol treatment programs, Dr. Grant Schroeder. And I talked to him about if I'm a mom--I'm a mom, if somebody takes my kids, I'm going to move heaven and earth to get them back. And I don't understand why a woman who is choosing to smoke crack [crack cocaine] over having custody of her kids. So Dr. Schroeder set me up with three recovering addicts, and they changed my perspective because what he said to me, he said, "Look, before an addict is going to get cleaned, they got to hit rock bottom." And for most of them, rock bottom is jail. And so, sometimes you got them there quick. If you let them do it, it's going to go over a series of years. And so, when I met with these three women, one had been incarcerated for twelve years, one had been clean for fifteen years, one had been clean for seven years, one had been clean for five years. So, this is what they told me. The one woman said when she was incarcerated, she decided to get clean because she said, "I clearly heard God's voice that said to me, 'You can have your kids, or you can have drugs, but you can't have both,'" and she said, "and I can tell you that I heard God speak to me. That's what made me change." I had another woman say to me, the one who'd been clean for seven years, she said, you know, "Look, you're judging us from your perspective." She said, "I would be pregnant with my kids, and I'd be sitting on the stoop, and I'd been getting high, and I'd be saying, 'God, please protect my baby,' but still getting high." And she said, "And when the baby was born, I couldn't wait for them to get the afterbirth out of me, so that I could go get high." She said, "You're judging us because you had a bond to your baby. All I had a bond to was drugs." She said, "And I can even see a lady like you walking down the street and think, I'd like to be just like that lady, but I would have no idea how to get from where I am to where you are. So, I would just sit back and get high." So, what I did, and there was another drug court that was in Lucas County [at the Lucas County Court of Common Pleas]. I asked that judge to come here. And what we did was design a program that if we put your kids into care, into foster care, with your lawyer's consent, you could opt into the Family Drug Court, but you have your lawyer's consent, 'cause I was going to see you every week. And if you tested dirty, you were going to jail. I was going to get you to rock bottom a lot quicker than waiting on you to do it over a ten year horizon while your children grew up in foster care. And so, you know, there would--had to be a lot of meetings. Defense lawyers were initially untrustful of the program, think we, we were just going to incarcerate their clients. But with a lot of help from our case management staff at the court, the defense bar agreeing, we were able to get it off the ground. And that Family Drug Court still exists at the court today. They just had a graduation with forty moms, so it's really about trying to use the power of the court to solve problems. If you keep doing what you've always done, you're going to always end up with what you already got. So, that was one of the things we wanted to do. I wanted to be a change agent. I didn't know how long I would stay there, but I wanted to make a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now when was the, when was the Family Drug Court established? Speaker 2: We started planning for the Family Drug Court in 2000, and it was just getting underway when I left the court [Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch] in 2002. Story_ID: 638620 Speaker 1: What happened when you left the court [Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch]? (Unclear). Speaker 2: Well, I left the court to go over to Nationwide Children's Hospital [Columbus Children's Hospital; Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio] because I was in the middle of my second term. The second time I ran, they did not run anybody against me, so people were shocked that I was stepping down. But I'd al- I've always been one of those people guided by, where can I make the biggest difference? And, quite honestly, I was just getting burned out on the court. It was, it, the depravity that I was seeing every day, it just, I wasn't able to leave it at the office. And I'd always promised myself that when I reached the point where I couldn't see the humanity in the person across the bench from me, it was time for me to go. My youngest [David Brown] was four, my middle daughter [Laura Brown] was fourteen. It was time for me to go. And I started having quiet conversations with people, imagining I would just transition to a law firm. And Nationwide Children's, one of my friends was on the board and Nationwide Children's asked me to come and talk to them. And they wanted to create a one stop child abuse center because they had children who were sexually abused, spending hours in the emergency room, sometimes eight, ten, twelve hours waiting on detectives to get there, waiting on children's services to get there. So, they basically said, "This is kind of what we're thinking, but we'd like you with your experience to come in and design it." And so, I literally got the opportunity to plan, program, and build a center from the ground up. They had originally told me I had $3 million. I, I ultimately got $10 million, and we built a forty-two thousand square foot facility that, now in Franklin County [Ohio], we've been open now for, since 2005 for seven years. So, we have literally changed the paradigm on how you treat abused children. What we did is we moved all of the systems that deal with seriously abused children into one location. This beautiful building looks like you're walking into somebody's living room. It doesn't look like a hospital. It doesn't look institutional. We moved our five child abuse physicians, nurse practitioners, eight trauma treatment therapists, seventeen detectives from our special victims bureau at the Columbus police department [Columbus Division of Police], ten children services investigators, two Franklin County prosecutors, a domestic violence therapist, a child psychiatrist, and the Columbus Coalition Against Family Violence [The Center for Family Safety and Healing, Columbus, Ohio] all in one location, all working together. It took us two years just to get the memorandums of understanding completed. But what--it's amazing what happens when you take six organizations that are used to pointing the finger at each other, which is what they used to do when I was on the bench; the police would blame children's services. Children's services would blame the prosecutor as to why nothing happened. But now, instead of being this anonymous name on a phone message, it's the person you see in the parking lot. It's the person you get coffee with in the morning. So, the beauty of this is that when a child is raped, they come to the center, and everybody they need to see is at the center: the detective's there, the children's services worker is here, the physician is there. We immediately get them into trauma treatment with a therapist. And so, oftentimes, the police detective is able to go and interview the alleged perpetrator before the mom can get home and say, oh, my god, this is what they found. So, it's a wonderful system. It was the work of my life. It's what I thought I was going to end my career doing. And then, Governor Strickland [Ted Strickland] called in 2010 (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. For the record, the name of the place is the Center for Child and Family Advocacy [The Center for Family Safety and Healing, Columbus, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: At Nationwide Children's-- Speaker 1: --at Nationwide Children's Hospital. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this makes so much sense. Is this still going on? Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: And has it been replicated in others? Speaker 2: Yeah, we, and we actually weren't the first people to come up with this concept. I mean, there are centers like this that exist. Chicago [Illinois] has one. I went to visit the Chicago one. It's twenty-seven thousand square feet. That's when I knew I had to make it bigger. And Chicago's is a house, it's really kind of whimsical. They have windows that are on the floor, and they have windows that go up outside down, so it's really entertaining for a child to look at. But one of the things I--when I met with the director there, and I asked her, I said, "What would you do if you were doing different--doing it today differently?" She said, "I'd build it bigger." Because what we, what we everybody underestimated, which we got the benefit of their experience, is that when you create a safe place for people to come, where they don't have to go down to the police station, where they don't have to into a hospital emergency room, it makes it easier for people to come forward. So, I went to San Diego [California], I went to Chicago, I sent a consultant to Denver [Colorado], I went to Cincinnati [Ohio]. I went to Houston [Texas]. Houston has a fifty-six thousand square foot facility, and they were adding on to it at the time I visited them in 2002. So, we didn't create the model. I'd like to say that ours is the most comprehensive model because we included domestic violence because what we found in interviewing our families is that 60 percent of our parents gave a current or prior history of domestic violence, so we believed in terms of healing the child, we had to heal the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638621 Speaker 1: You were there [Center for Child and Family Advocacy; The Center for Family Safety and Healing, Columbus, Ohio] until two thousand and-- Speaker 2: Ten [2010]. Speaker 1: --ten [2010], okay. And in the interim, you're, while you're there, you were inducted into the Ohio Women's Hall of Fame. Speaker 2: Yes, in 2008, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, that, you, it would seem to me you'd be too young for that. I don't-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I started young. I started at thirty-two, so when I was elected [to the Franklin County Court of Common Pleas, Division of Domestic Relations and Juvenile Branch], I was the youngest elected judge in Ohio at that time and, yeah, that was a tremendous honor. I, I never imagined, as a kid growing up in my neighborhood, that I would become part of Ohio's history. I mean, that's a pretty heady thing to think about, but it was just doing work that I love. And I can honestly say, I was telling a law student this earlier today, I have loved every job I've done. At the time I was doing it, it is what I loved. And when it no longer made me get excited to get out of bed in the morning, I looked to do something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638622 Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008] also, you served on the Ohio election commission [Ohio Elections Commission]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's a--okay. Speaker 2: That was an appointed position, yes. Speaker 1: Appointed position. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so, what did you do as part of the Ohio (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We dealt with election law complaints, so whenever somebody was an opponent, your opponent alleged you were being unethical, or you had violated something about the elections laws in terms of how you did your signs, or what you put on your literature, we held those hearings. Speaker 1: Well, I made a note here. In 2004, that's when John Kerry ran for president. And Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] made his speech at the Democratic National Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts]. There were those who, there have been books written about this, how the election was stolen in Ohio. And one of our Ohioans, Ken Blackwell, was often cited as part of the process of minimizing, especially the black vote in Cuyahoga County [Ohio] and other places. Speaker 2: All, all I can tell you is that I can remember that year. It was raining and in my, in my community, there were no lines. In the inner city, there were lines around the block. I don't know, I don't know what to say about that. That's, that was just my experience, 'cause I remember thinking I went to vote early 'cause I thought, oh, my gosh, there's going to be just lines everywhere and I walked right in and voted and walked right out. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what I'm, what I'm saying is that when you look at the 2004 election, and then look back at 2000 election, an election that was allegedly stolen in Florida, what was on your mind when you served on the Ohio election commission? Speaker 2: We, we didn't deal with that. Those things went directly to federal court, so that didn't impact our work at all. We were dealing primarily with disputes between candidates or between people who were promoting issues on ballots, or whether a ballot issue was properly on the ballot. Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so we didn't deal with that kind of voter, no. Speaker 1: --(unclear) voter or counting and that sort of thing, okay. Speaker 2: No. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Story_ID: 638623 Speaker 1: So, in 2010, you were selected as a running mate for Ted Strickland. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, he, he was already governor-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and elected in 2006, I believe, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And he selected you to run as lieutenant governor on his ticket? Speaker 2: Yeah, what was interesting is he had asked me to run in 2006, and I'd met with him. He was a congressman then. And he had asked to meet with me and we talked about it. And I gave it some thought, but at the time, the center [Center for Child and Family Advocacy; The Center for Family Safety and Healing, Columbus, Ohio] had only been open for a year 'cause we'd opened in--March 3, 2005. And I just didn't think it had the legs to stand on its own yet. So, in 2006, I told him no. Then he came back in 2010, and my first answer was no again, but he asked to talk to me. And he made a pretty compelling case about what he wanted to do on his second term, and what he thought I would be good at. And, you know, the center now had been open for five years. I was turning fifty, thought I needed a new challenge. And I also thought what an amazing experience it would be to run statewide. You know, I knew that the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] would be here a lot and I'd get to meet him and spend time with him. I knew that I could help Ted, and what better honor is there than to, if I want to go back into public service to do it in this way? And I, I said to my husband [Anthony Brown] who really--he's the hero of the story because I was making really good money. I was serving on two public company boards and as--well, one public company board, and one regional board. And, you know, I went to him and I said, "You know, this Ted Strickland called, this is what he's offering." He goes, "You should do it." And I said, "Do you understand what a pay cut this is going to be" (laughter)? And he goes, "I do," and he said, "but you know what, we're still going to do better than most of the people in this state," he said, "and public service is your sweet spot." He said, "We'll be fine. We'll pull back, we'll recalibrate. Our kids [Belinda Waters Brown, Laura Brown and David Brown] aren't going to go hungry. It's okay, you, you do this. This is what you need to do." So, with that, I, I decide to do it and, you know, it was a calculated risk, but I will never regret that experience. I mean, I've flown on Air Force One. I've been on Air Force Two three times with the vice president [Joe Biden]. I, I've spent a whole day with Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and got to fly on his plane two weeks after Chelsea [Chelsea Clinton] got married [to Marc Mezvinsky], so we got to talk about that and the, about his humanitarian work. And so, the people that we met--I flew with Magic Johnson on his plane. His, his plane has number thirty-two emboldened in every seat, you know. So, I mean, the people I got to meet, and not just the famous people, but I went around this state. And, and people, they're so hopeful and they're so proud, and they want you to do things for them and, and to have people kind of invest in you their, their hopes, it, it was an amazing experience. And it's one I don't take for granted. Story_ID: 638624 Speaker 1: Okay, well, the campaign. And I, and I--we had been saying off camera, talking about that there was a super PAC [political action committee] formed, I think, through the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, you got a, that ran a commercial, anti-Strickland commercial, with a white couple drinking coffee and talking about how Ted Strickland himself was personally killing the jobs in Ohio, over and over and over again. And so, what's your assessment of how that election was actually lost? Speaker 2: The, the election was, was lost by this. We had not only that commercial, but you had Ted running for reelection. You had Lee Fisher who is lieutenant governor running for the [U.S.] Senate. So, you had two campaigns. You had the Portman campaign [Rob Portman] and the Kasich campaign, and the U.S. chamber all running the anti-job--four hundred thousand jobs became the theme of the campaign. And I think that the Strickland campaign never responded suff- there was, there was a story to tell. I don't think it ever got out. I think once they started playing defense, instead of directing what the message is--the economy was down because of decisions that had been made at a national level with, with the banking, and the war [Iraq War] and all of that, and those messages never got out. And so, people want jobs. The end of the day, they want jobs, they want to work. It's about the economy. And we didn't control the message. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what role did the campaign assign to you? And-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I, I (laughter), my role was to go--I gave lots of speeches. I spent a lot of time in Cleveland [Ohio], Cincinnati [Ohio], Dayton [Ohio], Toledo [Ohio], Youngstown [Ohio] and Columbus [Ohio]. So, I was in the urban core of the state and, and part of that was by design. I wanted to really focus on revitalizing our cities, and that was really my message. And that's how I planned to spend my time as lieutenant governor, really focusing on making sure that our cities were places where there were good jobs, where the schools were strong, where kids were safe. And so, that's how I, I spent my time on the campaign. Speaker 1: Well, living in Dayton, I don't remember you appearing in any of the ads on television. (Unclear) you were saying you're-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wasn't in any of the paid media, and that was a strategic choice by the campaign. I can't tell you why they decided not to have me in the paid media. But, you know what, I think it all worked out because as I've taken my position on the supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio], I am able to transition to a new role. And part of it is I'm never going to be an attack dog. So, if you saw me on the campaign, you never heard me say anything negative about Governor Kasich [John Kasich]. I was always talking about what our record is. I wanted people to not vote against somebody; I wanted them to vote for us. And I had made it very clear to the campaign, I was not about to go out and be an attack dog. I'm happy to go out and talk about accomplishments and plans for the future. And I don't think near the end of the campaign that was the message they wanted to put out, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think that people around the state, especially the African American population, knew that you were running for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. I don't, I don't think that most people were aware that Ted had an African American woman as his running mate. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638625 Speaker 1: When the election is over-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and one of the last acts of Governor Strickland [Ted Strickland] is to appoint you to the Ohio state supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Then tell us about that. Were you surprised? Speaker 2: No, actually. We had talked about it, and it was actually something that I was given time to think about because it was not something I planned on. And so, what happened after the election, the, the Wednesday after the election, the first email I had was from a lawyer named Alex Shumate [Alex Shumate], who's the managing partner of Squires Sanders Dempsey here [Squire Sanders and Dempsey; Squire Patton Boggs]. He sent an email at two [o'clock] in the morning, and it said, "Think about the supreme court. Call me." I didn't call him for four days. I wasn't thinking about the supreme court. And then, the head of the legis- Ohio Legislative Black Caucus called me, Sandra Williams. She says, "My members want to see you go to the supreme court." And I said, "Sandra, I've not--I don't know what I'm doing next. I haven't thought about the supreme court." "Well, they want me to call the governor, but I don't want to call him if you're not interested." And I said, "Well, don't call him yet 'cause I'm not sure." Then, I got another call from another legislative leader asking me to consider the supreme court because it would be historic. But at the same time, within a few days of the election, I had a call from a headhunter asking me if I would consider a college presidency, and would I be willing to just sit down and have coffee with a board, the board chair. I had somebody calling me, asked me if I would consider a CEO's position for a large nonprofit. Had another phone call, whether I would be interested in doing anything with regard to the Ohio chamber here in Columbus [Ohio] so--not the Ohio, the Columbus chamber [Columbus Chamber of Commerce]. And so, I had all of these things going in a very short window within which to make a decision. So, I did meet with the board chair of the college and, and talked to him, and that sounded like a very interesting opportunity, but it would require me to leave Columbus. And my son [David Brown], you know, was going into ninth grade. That wasn't something I was interested in doing at this point. And then, you know, my husband [Anthony Brown] said to me, he said, "You would be forever part of Ohio's history: the first African American woman to serve on the Ohio supreme court in 208 years." He said, "Honey, I don't, I don't think you can pass that up." And then, the clarion moment that every woman needs a good girlfriend, I, I met one of my friends, who is a trusted advisor, and I said to her, I said, "Okay, I don't know what I'm going to do. The supreme court sounds very interesting, but, you know, I've got to campaign, and what if I lose, and I got to give up my corporate boards," and, you know, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And she looks at me, and she says, "So, tell me what is that you can do now that you won't be able to do as a former supreme court justice? " And I was like, "Oh." She said, "'Cause it seems to me, if you can serve on a public company board now, you can pick that up after you're done being a supreme court justice. The money you've got now, it will be there when you're no longer a supreme court justice." And I was like, okay, okay. And then, when I said yes, I have to say to you, I was not prepared for the outpouring of love and pride from, not only this community, but from the state. And when I was at, at Judge Burke's [HistoryMaker Lillian Burke] funeral on Monday, one of the ushers, this African American woman, came up to me, and she put her hand on my arm, and she said, "I'm so proud of you," she said, "you don't know me, but, like your mother, I am proud of you." And I got that reaction from people in the grocery store, from people when I picked up my dry cleaning, people that didn't even know me that came up to me. And, you know, it is, it's an, it's amazing to feel that. I, I can't even describe it, so, yes, I'm glad I said, yes. Ted really wanted to do it, and it's a legacy that we both share now, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Your friend's advice now sounded a lot like your grandmother's advice. Speaker 2: Absolutely, ready, absolutely. I, I wish my [maternal] grandmother [Eunice Bailey Banks] were here to see that--you know, she lived long enough to see me sworn me into the bar. I got sworn in November 4th of '85 [1985], and she died Christmas day of '85 [1985], but I, I can't help but believe that, that she's guiding me through all this 'cause there's no--I mean, when you, you look at my career, and where I started from, all of this, it's, it's not, it's not, you couldn't even plan it, you know what I mean? I tell law students that. There's no way when I was sitting at Ohio State's law school [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio] that I could have planned this career. Story_ID: 638626 Speaker 1: As supreme court justice, was--how did you fit into the, the-- Speaker 2: The court [Supreme Court of Ohio]? Speaker 1: --court? Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: It's been be- they've been beyond welcoming to me, in all candor. I get that question a lot when I travel around the state because I'm the only Democrat. A lot of people think that they sit me in the little people's chair, and that somehow I don't have influence, but it's not like that at all. When we're here at the court, we're not talking about political parties. We're not wearing our political R and D [research and development] on our sleeves. They've been very welcoming. Justice Stratton [Evelyn Lundberg Stratton] was the first person from the court to call me when word started to leak out that I was considering this. She said, she used to say to me--I knew her when she was a trial judge here in Franklin County [Ohio]. And so, she would always say to me after she came to the supreme court, "You're the only Democrat I would ever want to serve with." And I'd always laugh and say, "That's never going to happen." So, she called me and said, "Remember what I used to say to you? Now's the time." And then, the next call I got was from the chief justice [Maureen O'Connor], and I had said to her, I said, "You know, I was, I'm a little concerned about, you know, whether I can still be out and involved in the community as a supreme court justice." She said, "Absolutely, I want my justices out in the community," and she has been so supportive. The whole court has, not only in my role here on the court, but in giving me the opportunities to be involved in things representing the court that I wouldn't get if there were any animosity. They've been very gracious and, and very supportive. Story_ID: 638627 Speaker 1: Now, as one of your constituents in the state, I, when I was--I think I contacted your office about Back to School With The HistoryMakers back in August. But some, I don't know how it was done, or how I cho- I guess I chose to do it, become a part of--I receive notices about where you speak-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in the state? I get something--there are three, four things every week. Speaker 2: I know (laughter). Speaker 1: You speak a lot. Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: You appear to make a lot of public appearances. Speaker 2: I do. Well, part of it is because I'm up for election. You know, we are public servants, and in Ohio, justices are elected. And so, as the newest member of the court [Supreme Court of Ohio], one, I realize I have to be elected in November. But, two, I like to say I'm the new shiny penny, so everybody wants me to come and speak. I'm doing six commencements in May, which is just like (laughter)--it's, it's unbelievable. And I was teasing my staff because I said, if we can just get through April because January was Martin Luther King's birthday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], so there were a lot of speeches then. February was Black History Month. March was Women's History Month. We just kicked off prevent child abuse month [National Child Abuse Prevention Month], and I said, so I was saying, "Well, if we get through April--." They're like, "No, you got to get through June 'cause you have six commencements." So, part of it is people want to see me. I'm, I'm, I'm the new person on the block, but, second, I like, I really like speaking to just kids. I like going to schools and saying, you know what, my mom [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] was a single parent. She had three kids by three different men. None of them ever provided support for us, but look at what I've been able to do, so my circumstance is like yours. I want you to look at me and think, I can do anything I want to do. So, so part of that is self imposed, too. I just feel like that's my responsibility in this place. Story_ID: 638628 Speaker 1: Now what have been I guess some of the cases that have come up in the supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio] since you've been a justice? Speaker 2: Oh, we've had any number of cases. We've had cases involving--you, we do a lot of utility cases. We've have had eminent domain cases about, you know, whether the state can flood farmland. We've have had death penalty cases. I just wrote my first death penalty affirming a death penalty where a three year old child was brutally murdered. We've had contract cases, insurance cases. We've just declared a couple of l- Adam Walsh laws unconstitutional because they're cruel and unusual. So, we recently, this week, had a case--we issued a decision on the case where juveniles who commit sex offenses would be required to have lifetime registration. We declared that cruel and unusual and declared that law unconstitutional, so we deal with everything. And people think that they shouldn't pay attention to the supreme court, that it doesn't impact their life. We impact their life probably more directly than our governor does because the decisions we make about whether your insurance company has to pay out on your policy, whether a contract is enforceable, whether the state has the right to take your land without compensation, or like in the case with the eminent domain, they have the right to make decisions that will have an adverse impact on your property, but will help support the lake levels on the other end of the lake, and should you be compensated for that. So, we decide all of those. And I wish more people paid attention to the supreme court 'cause I think it's important who serves here. And one of the things I've been saying, as I go around the state is a state as big and diverse as Ohio should not have an all one party court. That, that's the reason you have seven people is you imagine there's seven people who bring different philosophies, gender, race, geography to their decisions. Speaker 1: Now, there are, there are seven. Of the seven, you're the only black woman (unclear). Well, you're not the only female-- Speaker 2: Right. I'm the only Democrat. I'm the only African American, only Democrat. There are four, four women. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, they're, they're Republicans? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there, does Ohio, do Ohio Republicans reflect the--I guess, the national hard line between Democrat and Republican? Speaker 2: I can't, I can only speak to the court. I think there are factions of the Ohio, of the Ohio Republican Party that do, but on the court, it is not so. On the court, when we walk in here, we walk in here as colleagues, and we treat each other with respect. And there is no--I don't see any political calls being made. I see everybody making the decision they think is best on the case that's before them. I think it's hard sometimes, particularly given that I ran statewide in the, in the gubernatorial election. It's hard for some of my constituents to see me in this role because when--I had a young woman ask me a question, she goes, "Well, some of my friends say that you vote like a Republican, like you write cases like a Republican." And I said, "Well, I think what your friend is saying is that she can't tell whether I'm a Democrat or a Republican by my votes," which is important when you're talking about a justice of the supreme court. I said, "Look, Republicans have been writing the laws in this state for two decades, so if it looks like I vote like a Republican, it's because that's what the laws are. I'm voting based on the laws. I don't make laws, I don't get to change laws. I only get to make decisions based on the laws we have," so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, would you be--you mentioned a death penalty case. Are you in favor of capital punishment? Speaker 2: We're not allowed to have an opinion. The law of Ohio is that we have capital punishment. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right. I hear you. Okay, let's see. I don't know what I can ask you about that's (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: As a supreme court justice, is there something that we need to--you want to tell me about that I can ask you about or should or could, but don't know I can and-- Speaker 2: No (laughter). I, I think it's just important for people to know that, you know, when people start talking about whether it's activist judges or, or, or courts that are making policy, court--people say that there are activist judges when the case doesn't go their way. For the most part, judges are making decisions based on the law and their interpretation of the law. Do some just- judges try to be activist? I can't answer for that, but what I can say on this court is that even when we disagree about how the law should be applied, I don't believe that, that disagreement is because they're Republicans or I'm a Democrat. For example, there's never been a 6-1 decision where I'm the only one. You know, I typically am voting--I'm always voting with other Republicans since there are six of them, but it's always based on how I believe the law applies. Would I like the law sometimes to be different? Yeah, but it's not and because my role as the third branch of government isn't to make law or make policy, it's to apply it. I accept that. That's what I signed up for when I agreed to come to the court. Speaker 1: Okay. The Ohio supreme court, unlike the U.S. Supreme Court is not forever, right? You, you have to run-- Speaker 2: Right. We have to run every six years, so I'm up this year and because I'm filling an unexpired term, I'll have to run for a full term in '14 [2014]. Speaker 1: Okay. You were appointed because of retirement of-- Speaker 2: No, I was appointed because chief, or Maureen O'Connor became chief justice, which meant her seat was open, so I got appointed to her seat. Story_ID: 638629 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and when you look back at everything you've done to this point, and you've had a remarkable, you know, run here, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I think I have several. I think the center [Center for Child and Family Advocacy; The Center for Family Safety and Healing, Columbus, Ohio], clearly, is my legacy. My, my grandchildren will be able to walk by and see that center up and operating. I'm, I'm really proud of that work. Certainly, the supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio] will be my legacy. I hope to be, not only the first African American woman to serve on the court, but to be elected to the court, and the first person of color to be elected to this court since 1970. So, I, I would like to have that, and I think that would be a legacy, and to serve with distinction. I, I hope that when law students look back they will say not just that I was the first, but that I was a really good jurist, that I really was thoughtful. My opinions were legally sound and that they were things that withstood the test of time, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638630 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and redo it? Speaker 2: Not with my career. I think if, if I, if I were going to do anything differently, it might be to pause a little. You know, again, I'm very task oriented (laughter), and so, I would have taken more time to enjoy my children [Belinda Waters Brown, Laura Brown and David Brown] when they were younger. I mean, I, I think I've been a good mom, but I don't know that I was as present as I could always be. And so, you know, you always have the hindsight. And I've got a really good husband [Anthony Brown] who takes the kids to soccer practice and to dance lessons. But if I were starting again knowing what I know now, I would probably have more balance in my early judicial career. You know, one of the things about having success really early is you always feel like you have to prove yourself. You always got to be the best at, you got to be better than. And so, I was always working longer hours than anybody else, and doing more than anybody else 'cause I had to show that I deserved to be there. And if I had it to do over again, I would, I would be more present with my kids when they were younger. Story_ID: 638631 Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family. Speaker 2: I, I, I got three kids, two the easy way: I, I married their father [Anthony Brown] (laughter). And I, I adopted the girls. They're, they're wonderful, wonderful human beings. Their mother was just a great spirit, and I imagine, dying from cancer, I think the hardest thing would be to see these two beautiful faces and know that you don't get to watch them grow up. And I feel like they've been a big gift to me because I get to, to have a part in, in shaping and molding who they are. And then, my son [David Brown] is, was an unexpected joy, and they're all doing well. My oldest daughter [Belinda Waters Brown] is married and has a fourteen month old son; I'm a grandma. And my middle daughter [Laura Brown] is twenty-five and she's in graduate school. She went to college on a volleyball scholarship. She's like her dad. He played college football. She is a natural born athlete. She, there's no sport she doesn't excel at, so she went to college on a volleyball scholarship, and spent two years working at The OSU [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] athletic department doing marketing. And now, she's getting her master's in sports administration and business administration at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]. And my youngest is fifteen, and he's in the ninth grade, and he's a little mini me. He has my face and kind of my nerdy-ism. He's, he's very much into books and reading and intellectual--not a sports kid at all, which, initially, drove his father crazy. He's come to accept that. But, they're really, they're really the, they're really the joy. And then, my husband is a high school teacher. And I can honestly say that I would not have this career had he not always been willing to do extra because I would always drop the kids off in the morning, and he would pick up because he was out of school every day at 3:05. And he worked 187 days a year, which I would always say, I'm not bitter but (laughter), you know, he had summers off, so I never worried about what my kids were doing in the summer or during Christmas break 'cause their dad was always there. And as a result, he has such a great relationship with them, you know, because he was the one taking them bowling and swimming in the summers and to the movies, and just being able to hang out with them, so I've been very blessed in that respect. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 638632 Speaker 1: Ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My biggest concern is that we are not valuing education in the way that our grandparents taught us to. I mean, for the generation that comes up next, education is the game changer for them. There aren't going to be factory jobs for this, these kids. They've got to get more invested in learning, and learning because it's important. I worry so much about the garbage they see on television, that parents aren't really instilling a love of learning for their kids because they're not doing it. And so, kids are watching reality TV thinking all they got to do to be famous is put something on YouTube and there you go. So, I really, I worry a lot because you know what made us successful was we had to struggle. Things weren't handed to us. And my husband [Anthony Brown] and I talk about this all the time with our kids [Belinda Waters Brown, Laura Brown and David Brown]. While you want to give your kids better than you had, you also have to make them fight for it, too. That's what gets you to the next place. You got to have that internal fire, so I, I worry about that. I worry about us lagging behind on the indicators of success. And what's interesting is if you look at indicators for black and white people, and you put in equivalent education, the difference in earning potential and all the other economic factors virtually disappear. The reason you have the disparity so much is because of educational level, often, growing up in poverty. I say to young women all the time, the one thing my mother [Sylvia Banks Kendrick] did, is we may not have a father, but we didn't wake up with strange men coming out of my mother's bedroom. We grew up understanding moral values, so if you have a child, you don't expose them to everybody you're dating. You set some moral boundaries for them. My hopes are that, my, my hopes are that, that, that our children and, and these aren't all, because there're African American children doing amazing things. But my hopes are that we can start to correct that poverty index. We have really--when, when you look at two thirds of black children being born to a single parent, we know that that is going to, more likely than not keep them in poverty. Looking at academic achievement, so I guess my real hope is, is the same thing my concern is that edu- unless we get a thirst for education, I don't see how we move kids out of poverty, and, to me, it's not acceptable to have children in poverty. And I think, I think we got to have a moral voice again. It's not the politically correct thing to say. People don't like to say it, but it's not okay to have all these children out of wedlock. I'm one of those children. I, I know what it feels like not to have a dad in the home. I don't think it's okay. And I think you can look at a lot of the societal issues we have and understand that it's babies raising babies. And until that changes, for our community until we get back to the community that our parents had, I, I worry a lot about it. But we got hope, got our first African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. We've got African Americans like Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons], and the woman who's heading Xerox [Xerox Corporation] and--I think it's [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns. And I mean, so we have people that are doing great things, but kids need to be able to see those people and, periodically, be to touch them and to know that those people started just like them. Story_ID: 638633 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we haven't discussed yet that we need to touch upon before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't imagine there is (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, thank you for taking the time of this. Speaker 2: It's my pleasure. Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as somebody that worked really hard to make a difference for the most vulnerable in our community, somebody that took what she was given and tried to make her patch of the garden better. That's what I hope people say..