 Story_ID: 98704 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Sterns is the videographer. Will you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: Brenda Sue Hill Cole, B-R-E-N-D-A, S-U-E, H-I-L-L-, C-O-L-E. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 25, 1943. Speaker 1: And your--the place of birth? Speaker 2: Joaquin, J-O-A-Q-U-I-N, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a Judge, State Court of Fulton County [Atlanta]. Speaker 1: All right, and the location of this interview. Speaker 2: My home in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: January 19, 2007. Story_ID: 98705 Speaker 1: Okay. We're gonna start by me asking you some me--People magazine-ish type questions. What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I think yellow. Speaker 1: All right, your favorite food? Speaker 2: Turkey (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a toss-up between chicken and turkey (laughter) Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere where the sun is shining. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like spring. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I like two. One is "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me." And the other is "to whom much is given, much is required." Speaker 1: Okay, wonderful. Story_ID: 98706 Speaker 1: So we're gonna start the interview with talking about your family--your family tree. How far back in your family tree can you go on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, my sister has traced us back to my great, great grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tell me about--well do you know their names? Speaker 1: I do not know their names. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In fact I was just thinking the other day; she needs to send me that family tree, because I don't have it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I--I did know my grandmother on my mother's side. Mama Mary [Mary Montgomery] is my grandmother, she died in 1988, and they tell me I knew her mother, Mama Minnie. But she died when I was very small, so I don't remember her. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I do know that my grandfather on my mother's side was Charles Montgomery. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I did not know his parents. Speaker 2: All right. Are there any stories about your grandmother, did you have any--have a relationship--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Oh I didn't--I didn't tell about my father's side. Speaker 2: Okay, we will get to that let's--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Let's do your mother's side first. Speaker 1: Stories about my grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Well, I knew Mama Mary. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Papa Charles because we spent summers with them when we were children, when my parents [Eulalia Hill Allen and Garfield Hill] were getting their masters degrees, we would go and spend the summers. And I--I just have plenty of stories to tell. I have memories of going out picking blackberries for pies that my grandmother would make. I have memories of sitting down and (laughing) my grandmother combing our hair. She had a rough (laughing) hand, but she would get that hair combed. And playing in the backyard and my grandfather making us pick cucumbers, not a pleasant task. I remember getting into trouble and running, playing and tearing down a line of freshly hung clothes, we almost got killed (laughter). Many memories from Timpson, Texas where we spent summers with my grandparents. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They were both educated people, both had finished Bishop College [Marshall, Texas]. My grandfather was a principal and taught school, before he became a farmer. And my grandmother also taught, and but when I knew them they were pretty much retired and sort of semi-- farming part-time. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And we had Mary and Charles, what was their last name? Speaker 1: Montgomery. Speaker 2: Montgomery, okay, I'm sorry, Make sure we have that. Story_ID: 98707 Speaker 1: Okay, so on your father's side, how far can you go back? Speaker 2: On my father's side, I think she also went back to great-grandparents, but I do not know their names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I also spent a lot of time with my--my grandmother on my father's side, her name was Frankie Hill. And his dad, who died when I was two, was named Nib, N-I-B, Eli Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they called him "Papa," I guess I may have too at two, but I didn't really know him. But Mama was a very elegant lady, she was a homemaker and Papa was a farmer. And one time he owned a hundred--he farmed a hundred acres that he owned in Garrison, Texas. And my dad [Garfield Hill] grew up farming, but he, with the help of my grandmother and her brother, who was a principal in a high school, assisted Daddy in escaping farm life and going to Texas College [Tyler, Texas] and getting his degree and going on to Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas] for a masters. So I spent a lot of time with--at my grandmother's home. Speaker 1: All right. Any stories to share, did you get in trouble there too? Excuse me. (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, not as much Mama was kind of laid back and she was--she lived with--well my aunt lived with her. And I have more stories about my aunt because Mama was kind of reserved and--and she was the person you ran to when you got in trouble (laughing). But a sister, who they called my father's aunt, ran a tight ship and she did just some gardening. And she had us participate, and I remember feeding the chickens and watching them when they killed chickens for dinner and you know ringing their neck off and the chicken flopping around. They had outhouses, so we had that unique experience (laughing). They--it was fun at--at Mama's and Sister's but it was kind of the olden days. And I remember going down to the creek and they rinsed clothes in the creek--was using creek water, they didn't really put the clothes in the creek. They dipped in--put water in a--well it wasn't--it was like a tin tub and--but they used that creek water because it was--I don't know. She would also save rain water to use for rinsing clothes, I remember bluing and she had a big iron pot that she put on you know to--it would boil and that would give the hot water for the linen so they would be nice and white. And then they put the bluing in there; that was a lot of work (laughing) it took all day to wash (laughter). Story_ID: 98708 Speaker 1: Okay. So your father, tell me about your father, tell me his name, first. Speaker 2: Garfield Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was born in Garr-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He was born in Garrison, Texas. And he--I told you he went on and got his Bachelor's Degree in Education [from Texas College in Tyler, Texas] and his Master's [from Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas] and he taught school, and he was the principal of a small school in Joaquin, Texas, where I was born. He met my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] in Timpson [Texas], but Daddy and my mother were both raised in the church. And after my parents married, Daddy got the call, as they say, and he also was an ordained minister. So he didn't--sometimes he would have a church, but most of the time he was principal of the school. And sometimes he would be assigned a church, so he was sort of part-time minister and full-time principal. But a very stern, but loving man, I mean you had to toe the mark, but he had a great sense of humor too. Daddy died in 1988, the same year my grandmother [Mary Montgomery] died. Speaker 1: And he was born in 1913 [June 1, 1913]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he share any stores about him growing up? Speaker 2: He did he was--he wasn't very open about it, but when he was about to retire, they interviewed him, and I learned more from that interview that what Daddy had told me. But he told the interviewer that as a young man he was--actually he was hitch hiking to school, going to Texas College, his freshman year. And he had done it successfully for several times going back from Garrison, Texas to Tyler, Texas, where Texas College is located. But this time, he asked the wrong man for a ride. This was a white man who did not respond to him in words, but basically just slapped him across his face and knocked him down. I know times were hard back then, because they weren't all that--it was still segregated when I was coming up. But they had a good relationship with the people in that small town, and so they didn't run into a lot of problems, but I remember an incident. When his brother got into some trouble, I don't have the whole story, but all I know is at--the clan--not the Ku Klux Klan, but the Hill clan gathered one evening with guns to protect against what they perceived to be somebody coming after this brother of my father's. And they whisked him out under the cover of night to a--a Detroit [Michigan] and he never returned, except to visit (laughing). I don't know what he had done, or what they thought he had done. But they were afraid that he was going to be lynched that night. Speaker 1: Were there any other stories that he shared about coming up? Speaker 2: No, Daddy didn't talk much about those days. Speaker 1: Most times they-they don't. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 98709 Speaker 1: My mother [Eulalia Hill Allen]] talked about her growing up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She grew up in Shreveport, Louisiana, although she was born in Timpson, Texas and my grandparents [Mary Montgomery and Charles Montgomery] later moved back to Timpson where they lived. I mean they died--when they died, they were living in Timpson. But in Shreveport, my grandfather, he was--I don't if he was the founder but it was a school, a private school there in Shreveport and he as the principal or headmaster. And then it was also, at least for two--a two year college. And during the time when he was principal, life was good, but then The Depression came and he lost--that school went under. And I know that my mother went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] for her first year of college but because the money ran out, she had to leave Tuskegee. So she ended up finishing at Texas College [Tyler Texas]. But my grandfather was a very proud and some say uppity man; I'll say Negro, that's what they called them at the time. So he had a hard time keeping jobs. But Papa was--I mean there are pictures of him where you can just see "aristocrat" written right over his face (laughing) they had five boys and one girl, my mother who was spoiled rotten. And I'm rambling, but-- Speaker 2: No, it's fine, you talking about your mother growing up. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Any other stories about would you know times with her brothers or how it was to be the only girl in the family? Speaker 1: Well, she--as I said, she was spoiled, she learned piano, and she plays now at eighty-eight, she plays for her church choir. But growing up, she--she just had a gift for the piano, she reads music, but she also plays by ear, which means you can just sort of sing or hum a tune, she can pick up that key, tell you what key and play. I started piano also, but I cannot do that. So she played at many of the churches growing up and they just spoiled her rotten. Story_ID: 98710 Speaker 1: So now you--tell me again how your mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] and father [Garfield Hill] met? Speaker 2: There was a church program and my father attended. Garrison, Texas is about 15, 20 miles from Timpson, Texas, but if you're not in the same town, you can just sort of miss each other. And Daddy's six--was six years older than my mother, so they were not you know they wouldn't have met at high school events or anything like that. So it was just a chance meeting, and my mother says when she came home after that meeting, she told my grandmother [Mary Montgomery], I met the man I'm going to marry today. And she had not said two words to him, (laughing) but that was--that turned out to be true. Speaker 1: So they married and do you have siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, I have an older brother and two younger sisters. Speaker 1: And what are their names? Speaker 2: My brother is Winston Hill and my sister, two years younger is Dr. Sharon Cranford--Hill Cranford [Dr. Sharon Hill Cranford], and my baby sister is Dr. Rhonda Hill Saldivar. Story_ID: 98711 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what was your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory. I remember learning to read, I remember getting lost I didn't know I was lost, but everybody else was looking for me. But I had stayed after school, the school was right adjacent to our home, you didn't even have to cross the street, you just walked over to the school (laughing). And I started school early because my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] taught there and my daddy [Garfield Hill] was the principal. And when school started, they couldn't find a babysitter, and my brother [Winston C. Hill] was starting early too. I was five and he was six, and so at age five, I just sort of-I loved to read--my mother taught me to read when I was three, and so whenever I saw a book, I wanted to read it. So I got lost in the li--well it wasn't a library it's just a few rooms. But I got in the corner with a book and they basically forgot about me and locked me up in there and I was just as happy until the sun went down, and then I couldn't see to read. And I started trying to get out, and by then everybody was all alarmed but that's my first memory is causing havoc by getting lost with the books. Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood that you lived in growing up. Do you remember the street name? Speaker 2: I don't think there was a street name (laughing) Speaker 1: Oh, okay, or road. Speaker 2: But I remember the neighborhood-- Speaker 1: The neighborhood, okay. Speaker 2: Very well. I--the--there were two main streets in my little town. I don't think there was a stoplight in this town, population 500, Joaquin, Texas. Story_ID: 98712 Speaker 1: We were talking about your neighborhood. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was two main streets in Joaquin [Texas], one was the main street that led--you came through town from Garrison [Texas], Timpson [Texas], Joaquin and then going on to Logansport, Louisiana, we were right near the Louisiana line, maybe two miles from the Louisiana line. That was the main street, then they had this other street, maybe that was Route One, I don't know that we were on so kind of ran through the black neighborhood. And there was a few little homes and then there was a railroad track right across the street from my home. And then you had the school, and then my house, and then there were several other homes and then there was a church at the end of the street. And that street sort of eventually dead ended, down there. But there was a right turn you could take at the church to lead you back to the main drag. So you know with 500 people in the town you know, it couldn't have been much. The school was not a one-room schoolhouse but it could be, because it had partitions. It was four rooms and you take the partitions down you had room and that was our auditorium. The gym was the dirt outside the school where they would outline the basketball court, there was no football, but they did play basketball. And they would outline it with a hoe or something like that, some instrument like that and then fill in the outline with lime. I don't know how healthy that was (laughing) but that's the way they played. And it was--as I said during segregation so we got the leftover books from the white school and that was, that was high school. Speaker 1: What was some of the community activities that went on beside--well in high school they played basketball-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What were the community activities? Speaker 2: It--it was either school related or church related. And the church interestingly enough was Methodist on two Sundays and Baptist on two Sundays (laughing) they shared in the building of the church. And they shared you know, instead coming at the same time, they would just--and some people did go every Sunday, but you knew you were getting two different services. Speaker 1: Did you father preach--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: At that church? Speaker 2: He was not the pastor all the time, but frequently he would preach there. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember. Speaker 1: You don't remember, okay. Speaker 2: Oh goodness, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the occupations of--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Now funny I know the name of my father's church in Garrison. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was--that's Mount--Mount Olive, C.M.E. Church, but I'm drawing a blank on the Joaquin Church. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What were some of the occupations of the people in the community in which you lived? Speaker 2: Well, the occupations, they had a few teachers. And then you had a minister or two, a few ministers, you had a few beauticians who worked out of their homes. And same thing with barbers, other than that, laborers, maids, cooks. They did not hire blacks at that time to even work the cash register in--well the town wasn't that big and a lot of the stores were Mom and Pop stores. But there were no jobs. If--we didn't even have a school bus, so there was not a school bus driver. But there was someone to clean up the school, but the jobs were few and far between. Lot of people still farmed a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay. I wanna just step back--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh and I remember in Logansport, Louisiana there was a sawmill, and people worked at the sawmill. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's where people who were not beauticians or--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The laborers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They went on--went there to work. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98713 Speaker 1: I wanted to step back a minute, because we were talking about your--your grandparents, and off camera you said that you had some stories that your mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] told you about the--the makeup of your ancestors. Whether there was interracial marriages or slavery, so could you speak to that? Speaker 2: Right. As to the slavery I remember my mother telling me that she knew her grandmother, and that she remembered her grandmother telling--her grandmother was a slave. And her grandmother remembered the march--marching--just walking, searching after slavery, for somewhere to sort of make a home. She also remembered relatives who were so fair that they could pass and did pass for whites. And basically were lost to them, but she talked about an uncle who--who passed. On my father's side, my grandmother knew her white relatives, and visited them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't know of any inter marriages, except once they passed for whites they probably married. Story_ID: 98714 Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember your first day of school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Okay. Speaker 2: I do not remember any particulars. I remember my brother [Winston C. Hill] and I were very close. We're just 15 months apart, and when he started school, I started with him. And I was very happy about that, I just remembered that, but I don't remember anything else (laughing). Story_ID: 98890 Speaker 1: So we're talking about elementary school. Do you have any stories to share about attending elementary school? First what was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: Well, at one time it was called Joaquin Colored School [Joaquin, Texas], but if memory serves me right, it was later named for someone of but I do not know but I believe the name was Womack, W-O-M-A-C-K. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what do you remember about elementary school? Speaker 1: Oh, I remember--it was having tough having your mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] there and your father [Garfield Hill] there (laughing). And I got along well in school, I had little boyfriend in school who I claimed but never spoke to. But I manifested my love for him by crying in class when he got a whipping (laughing), they used to spank you in school if you didn't know your lesson. And he didn't know his one day so he got it. I remember in school, they had--my mother-you know I told you played piano, so she not only taught, but she played piano during the assemblies. And there was this tune that she would always play that--when I was home recently, I told her mother would you play that tune, I know, it just rings in my head. But we would have these assemblies that is, take the partitions down and combine all of the classes and sing and really have a good time. And once a year there was what was known as Colored Folks Day at the Fair, this was a--a big time. This is our only time (laughing) to go and there was a parade and of course we had no band. But, we had sort of a little drill team and I was fortunate to be on that drill team one year. So, we would have seamstress to make our little outfits and we even made hats out of you know cardboard. And they covered it with satin, and oh, boy you could not tell us we were not looking good (laughing). We only hope to be close within earshot of a band so we could kind of keep on some type of rhythm and. But it was--it was kind of sad when I think about it now, but we had so much fun (laughter). Story_ID: 98891 Speaker 1: When you think of those days, what sights, sounds or smells do you remember that bring you to that time? Speaker 2: Well, the sounds would be the--the music. And it was just--it was a happy time despite the fact that there was brutality outside our little circle. And there was an occasion that I will never forget. We were in church and there was a very brutal sheriff [Eddie DeFriend] in that town, and this was an evening service, like a Wednesday evening prayer service. The sheriff and his men came in the church with their guns and they were seeking somebody and they found him in one of the pews and pistol whipped him in that church. I will never forget it, because shortly after that, my father said, we are leaving here, and that's when we moved from Joaquin [Texas] to Gladewater, Texas where I went to high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But back on more pleasant memories, it was--the people in the community were like surrogate parents. In fact, we had a babysitter that--Miss Verlie [ph.] that lived down the street and there were just people, Miss Minnie lived right--she was like a neighbor and they had a little store, and it was just a warm nurturing environment in the black community. And--and so that sustained us. Now there was a not so pleasant--when you said smells. In the fall of the year, they would have this community, I don't know what you'd call it, but they would kill hogs and they would bring then to the school to clean them. And it was kind of like a festival in a way, I mean the men would do the cleaning and then the women would sort of cook and people would gather. And I remember going over there and it was this horrible smell. And I said, "What in the world is that?" And they said they're cleaning chitlins (laughing) I never ate another chitlins (laughing) I mean it was horrible. Now you know that chitlins are hog intestines (laughing) but at that time I didn't know that, so. Story_ID: 98892 Speaker 1: You said that the people in the community were like surrogate parents to you. So was it to the point where if you were doing something wrong your parents would know about it before you got home? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. And although, you know I said, we--we lived in two separate communities, there was one notable exception. Okay we lived--behind our house there was a fence. And on the other side of this fence, there was a white family that lived. So we found a way to get through the fence, they had children about our age, so we would play together. And in fact, Miss Bill is what I called her, she sewed and mother would sometimes have things sewn by Miss Bill. So her kids were, what I remember, Billy and Ginger and sometimes if we wanted to go to movies on Saturday we would--they would come through the fence on our side 'cause if you walk up the street on our side, it was a little closer to the movie theatre. We would walk holding hands up this street to the movie theatre. And then we would go upstairs and they would go downstairs, we'd meet after the movies and walk back. Speaker 1: And you just thought that was the natural thing to do? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We knew to go upstairs and they knew to go downstairs. Speaker 1: Did your parents [Eulalia Hill Allen and Garfield Hill] ever talk to you about how to deal with white people, like in town when you met them in town. You know, your behavior toward them, did they--what did they say to you? Speaker 2: Actually my parents taught us to behave period (laughter) you respected grownups and it was "Yes, ma'am" and "Yes, sir" and I didn't--I don't recall any different treatment for whites and blacks. But I do know that we--well when I a little girl, we went to the--we walked downtown. You could walk downtown it wasn't even a mile, maybe it was a mile but--and I was with my mother and my brother [Winston C. Hill], and he's just 15 months older now, and I was just two or three. And I remember his pulling me down from the bar stool at the ice cream, you know it was like the soda jerk was you know. It was a little bar with--with stools there, and people--kids were sitting on the stools and asking for ice cream and--and I was trying to climb up on that stool. And I remember his pulling me down. You know I don't if I remember his pulling me down or his telling me about it, because to this day, he is heartbroken that he thought he was really hot stuff for knowing now, he was a big boy and he knew that I was not supposed to be up on that stool. So at that age, you know, he knew, I didn't know, that we were not allowed to do that. And I know there was a--I remember asking when I was a little girl, "Why can't we go there?" or "Why can't we go to the park?" or you know, and I never got an answer. Not a satisfactory answer, but they never wanted us to feel like we were inferior or that it was anyway our fault that we couldn't go and so they never answered it like in a way that they thought would stymie us. Speaker 1: Um-hum. As far as socializing, well not socializing but going into the stores, did you shop in stores to buy clothes or did somebody make clothes for you? Speaker 2: We did most of our shopping; at least my parents did in Shreveport, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother sewed and I had a cousin who sewed. So we did have some, and Miss--Miss Bill also would make things occasionally. But we--we purchased things. Story_ID: 98893 Speaker 1: Was there a teacher or someone at school--you went to this school [Joaquin Colored School in Joaquin, Texas] until what grade? Speaker 2: Until ninth grade. Speaker 1: And that's when your father [Garfield Hill] decide--decided that you would leave the town? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Between the first and the ninth grade, was there a teacher that might have encouraged you or somebody that you remember in--in your studies? Speaker 2: I remember, well my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] was my biggest teacher. She--my first teacher and she taught me through elementary school and she also taught me in high school. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So she was my first teacher and my best teacher. But I also remember another teacher, and I'm struggling with her name because she married--so I don't know her name, but I do know that she was a wonderful teacher and at one time--we didn't get to spend the night with other people unless it was our peep--our kin folk or Miss Verlie [ph.], who was our babysitter. But they let us go to Center, Texas where she lived and to spend the night with there. I thought that was such a big treat because she was--I thought she was so pretty and--and kind so she was-- Speaker 1: All right. You said that you like to read, what did you like to read? Speaker 2: Well, just anything, anything, but just any of the children's books, and then as I grew, then my appetite for reading grew from to history to just almost--at one point I had read every book in the library. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Which may not be saying much for much for Joaquin [Texas] but I also had read--had read every book in Gladewater [Texas] library. I was just a voracious reader, plus there wasn't much to do, (laughter) but read. Speaker 1: What type of student were you, were you a very good student? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This--this--you know I told you I started school at--I may have said five, but I was four when I started school. And it was--my mother told the teacher that it was just temporary until they could get someone to keep me. And so when they found someone about a month later, she said the teacher would not let them send me home. They said that I was the best student in the class (laughing) so this is what my mother tells me, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this--we're talking about elementary school, had you even thought or dreamed about what it would be-- you would become once you were grown? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98894 Speaker 1: All right. Well tell me about your move out of Joaquin [Texas]. Speaker 2: Well, after this traumatic event, where the sheriff and his name was Eddie DeFriend, but he was no friend (chuckling) there were all kinds of stories about him and how brutal he was. But daddy [Garfield Hill] got an offer to the principal at Weldon High School--well it was elementary through high school in Gladewater, Texas. Well, we were moving to the big city, population 7,000 from 500 to 7,000, and still segregated but this segregated school was--it may not had been equal but it was close to being equal. It had gym, indoor toilets (laughing) it was just--new books, they had a band and a football team, and oh, boy, it was-- band uniforms, you didn't have to make your uniforms (laughing), so we really thought we were--Gladewater is in the oil boom area. And at that time, the schools district was pretty well off. Neighboring--it's a small town but neighboring towns are Kilgore [Texas] which has oil derricks pumping in downtown Kilgore. Longview, Texas which is ten miles from Gladewater, population now is about 60,000 and it may have been 30 or 40 back then. But Marshall [Texas], just--it was--it was more cosmopolitan, we--we just thought we were really moving on up (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] also got a position there. In Joaquin, she was the home ec [home economics] teacher and the music teacher and whatever else they need her for. But in Gladewater they had a home ec teacher and a music teacher and so she taught English. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Weldon, W-E-L-D-O-N. Speaker 1: Oh it was Weldon High School. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the school that you went to. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And your father was the principal? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother was the English teacher. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So really this is the first time that you have a number of other teachers other than your mother? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember any of those teachers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about them. Speaker 2: Oh, my--my band teacher, Mr. Richard Blick, oh goodness, I think he may have been a Nazi in an earlier life (chuckling). Great band man taught me clarinet and it was just. We had a first rate, top notch award-winning band, thanks to Mr. Blick. My mother of course taught me English, and she made English--she made [William] Shakespeare fun. My math teacher, Mrs. oh, goodness, I don't know why I'm blocking her out, I'll come back to her (laughing) Mr.--oh, goodness, I'm having these mental blocks. Speaker 1: Well, that's fine. Speaker 2: Cannon, Cannon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Cannon. Mr. Cannon taught me math and he was an excellent teacher and Mrs. Cannon also taught there and she was not as nice as Mr. Cannon (laughter), but we had several great teachers. Margaret Bell-- Speaker 1: Margaret Bell? Speaker 2: --I should mention her as well. Margaret was--and still is a great-- Story_ID: 98895 Speaker 1: We were in high school [Weldon High School in Gladewater, Texas] and you were telling me about--was there one teacher that encouraged you or somebody that you looked up to or you know just that you just remember for a special reason? Speaker 2: Mrs. [Margaret] Bell was very encouraging. I think all my teachers were really very encouraging. Mrs. Wedgeworth [ph.] who was a neighbor and she was the home ec [home economics] teacher, really encouraged me and gave me a leadership role and New Homemakers of America and we travelled and--I in fact I don't recall anyone who was not encouraging to me. Story_ID: 98896 Speaker 1: In this new community [Gladewater, Texas], what was the makeup of your neighbors? Speaker 2: We were all black. Speaker 1: Um-hum, and the types of occupation? Speaker 2: Types of jobs, again in this--at this time, '56 [1956] '57 [1957] '55 [1955] the only jobs, if you were educated, you could teach--now we're running into not in my hometown but in Longview, black doctors. I don't recall any black dentists, but in my hometown, the doctors, the dentists were all white. All of the businessmen with the exception of beauty shop, barber shop and an occasional barbeque joint. Oh in Gladewater, we had a club or two (laughing). I remember not being able to go, but there was the Moulin Rouge, which was a shack (laughing) but pretty much as the same as Joaquin [Texas]. If you're educated, you taught or you were pastor, and some of the pastors were not educated let me hasten to say but. The--for the most part if you were not educated, you were domestic or you know laborer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then we had school bus drivers in Gladewater. Story_ID: 98897 Speaker 1: Was there anything--well okay, in high school [Weldon High School in Gladewater, Texas] now, I guess in your home since your mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] and father [Garfield Hill] both were educated, that it was a given that you would go to college. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When did you start to preparing to go to college? Speaker 2: Well that was the first time I decided that I sort of decided what I wanted to be when I grew up. And that was a librarian, I thought somebody whose sole job was to be there in charge of the books was--had to be the best job in the world. So I decided I wanted to be a librarian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was into a lot of activities in high school. Speaker 1: What were some of them? Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned band--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: You played an instrument or you would--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Clarinet. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I was in the choir, I was on the square dance team (laughing) and Student Government, we had what was called an Interscholastic League and once a year we would compete, state wide in various areas like debate and typing and all sorts of areas. Even band and sports, like tennis, and I didn't play tennis at that time, my brother did. But we would go to Prairie View A and M [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas] and compete against students all over, and this is strictly segregated now, but we would compete against black students all over Texas, so. But it would be in our--see we were Class A school and the bigger schools would be AA, AAA, so we were competing against other Class A schools but we would frequently bring home the bacon (laughing), so I was in debate and band. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98898 Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom [Weldon High School in Gladewater, Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories to share? Speaker 2: Well, when I went to the prom, I remember I had met my husband [HM Thomas W. Cole], I met him--I was a debutante and the debutantes were sponsored by Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority at--in Marshall, Texas which is his hometown. Actually I need to--I need to start back because I first met him when I was fourteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The--because of--I played clarinet in band and so did he. And he was attending Pemberton High School in Marshall, Texas, and he was playing band he--this was his junior year and my sophomore year. And actually that year I met him, but I--we didn't--I was just sort of not really into boys at that time, I was a little shy. But the next year I went back, I was fifteen then, and he was a senior and I was a junior at fifteen, but that's because I started school early. So anyway, the innerschola-- at--this was the Teachers Association, the East Texas Teachers Association and they would meet in the spring and they would appoint-- each school would send representatives from their band. So I was a representative from Weldon and he was a representative from Pemberton and we sat on the same row because we just happened to play first clarinet. So after that, we met, we talked and we exchanged information, and we started writing after that. So the next year, he went on to Wiley College which is in Marshall, Texas. All right, now back to the deb--to the debutante. Story_ID: 98724 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're gonna tell us the story about the debutante ball? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went over to Marshall [Texas] to meet with the other debutantes, and of course I'm thinking I want to have as my escort this young man [HM Thomas W. Cole] that I met. But by the time I thought to ask him, he had already agreed to escort another debutante, who was a classmate of his at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], and we are friends today. Her name at that time, was Ernestine Stubblefield, but she married Walter Sapp and they live in Tuskegee [Alabama]; she's an attorney, now. But at that time--so there I was, no escort so I asked my brother [Winston C. Hill] to escort me, and when we went to the meeting another debutante friend of mine was Earline Rand [ph.], her father was a teacher at Jarvis Christian College, which was about 15 miles from my hometown, in Hawkins, Texas. Earline also had her brother as her escort, so we switched brothers for that evening (laughing) but I was still able to see Tom. And in fact, that evening, he gave me his class ring, which I promptly lost (laughing) his senior class ring from Pemberton [High School in Marshall, Texas]. But do you know I, I was so traumatized by that it--I didn't lose it right away, I, I kept it for a while. And I lost it and I was so traumatized by that I ordered another ring, I got another ring (laughing). He--it was a while before I told him that I had replaced that ring that was not the ring, his original ring (laughing). Story_ID: 98725 Speaker 1: So, you're making plans now to go to college. How did you decide what school you would go to? Speaker 2: Well, having been in the loving eye--within loving eyesight of my parents [Eulalia Hill Allen and Garfield Hill] from birth to, through high school that is school, church you name it. My only criteria at that point, was I am leaving town (laughing) so that is why I did not go to Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], although Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] was there. And--but he had gone year round, so by this time he was two years ahead of me, instead of one year. So if I had gone to Wiley, I would have been there two years and he would've been gone. And I would have been right there with Garfield and Eulalia, my mother's name is Eulalia (laughing). So there was a teacher at Jarvis College [Jarvis Christian College in Hawkins, Texas] who had finished Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and she was heavily recruiting me to go to Spelman. She had her year books and she was just filled with stores about how wonderful Spelman was, and so I decided to apply. And I applied and of course it was in Atlanta, Georgia far from Gladewater, Texas (laughing). I applied and got a scholarship and--and so my dad and mom let me to go Spelman, I was sixteen. Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 98726 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Weldon High School in Gladewater, Texas] in 1959. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then came--and then journey to Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. So what was your first impression on the campus? Speaker 2: Well, although Gladewater [Texas] was a big step up from Joaquin [Texas] (laughing) Atlanta was huge. And I got on the train in Gladewater, and rode to New Orleans [Louisiana], changed trains and went to Birmingham [Alabama] and there were several stops along the way. And the stop in Birmingham was important, because a young woman got on the train going to Spelman for the first time, who turned out to be, and still is, a best friend. Her name was Mona Rae Norman [ph.] at the time and we sort of gravitated together because there were girls on that train, and this--we're still in segregation now, that were smoking, and we were just ooh, you know we don't--we don't--we don't smoke and don't wanna smoke and don't wanna be around smokers, so we sort of got together, and found we had a lot of things in common. Her dad was also a principal. But anyway, we get to Atlanta and we go to this train station, it's segregated, but they sent, I believe Spelman sent someone to pick us up from the train station. I don't recall getting a cab or anything or how we maneuvered so my recollection is that there was a bus to take us to campus. I just remember my eyes were big as a saucer is, you know at all of the people and cars. And it was not as big and bustling as it is today of course, but this was my first time out of the state of Texas. And so I-- it was a big learning experience for me; I was excited to get to the campus and meet girls from all over the country. And I felt really like a fish out of water (laughing) because they just seem so sophisticated and--and I was basically this small town girl. Speaker 1: Well, did you find that a lot of the girls that came to school that year were from small towns? Speaker 2: Yes, a lot of them were. But many of them were, were from the big cities, Atlanta sent a lot of girls to Spelman, Birmingham. The larger cities, there were some small, small town girls but not a whole lot, a lot of them were from the bigger cities, Chicago [Illinois], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], oh goodness. Story_ID: 98727 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, and I thought of this when you were talking about the train and the segregation. Do you remember up into this time ever experiencing just blatant racism or prejudice? Speaker 2: Well, the incident of the sheriff [Eddie DeFriend] coming into church. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was one. One other incident, we were driving from my father's [Garfield Hill] home in Garrison [Texas] back to Joaquin [Texas], and my father was not speeding, but he was driving a late-model Buick. And this policeman pulled him over and asked to see his license and when he got the license, he looked at it and he said he used the N-word on my father he said "N-- can't you write?" Daddy had not signed his--his driver's license at that time. It was like a credit card now you know you sign the back. "Can't you write?" And you know, I'm just a kid in the back, nobody talks to my daddy like that, but daddy didn't say anything back, which I thought was you know--I just--was horrified at the whole incident. Embarrassed and--and it was later that I came to understand that he could've gotten killed if he had you know gotten smart with the officer. So that incident, and so many incidents where you go to the back if you wanna get served you go to the back of the--some places would just put a sign up saying "we reserve the right to refuse service to anyone." You knew from that sign, those were the nicer ones; the, the other ones would say, "no colored," that--and then you knew that too. But if they say "we refuse the right" that also meant no colored served. Some though, if you're traveling--if we were at home, we ate at home, or we ate at the church or we ate with friends. But if you're traveling sometimes, we would either pack a lunch or we would stop at a little convenience store and buy crackers and you know Vienna sausage, (laughing) or whatever. But occasionally, it was rare, if you couldn't find anything, we occasionally would go to the back, where you could be served. But it was--it was--and that and the movie theaters and the drugstore, you sort of grew up to know quote, your place, and you--we avoided confrontations because we did not confront the system. Story_ID: 98728 Speaker 1: Okay. So now you're at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: And now meantime we hear of--of--for example, I remember whispers going on and you know. They used to say little pictures have big ears, I remember then talking about a girl, a black girl who was babysitting for a white family. And the father took the babysitter home and raped her and killed her. And I, I remember hearing about that, I know that growing up, my daddy [Garfield Hill] would never let us work for white people. Except one time, and that is when I integrated (laughing) I was in college then. And the man who owned the drugstore in Gladewater [Texas] called my father and said, "We want to integrate our"--this is what he mean by integrating. At the back of the drugstore was a--was soda fountain, and people could come back there and sit down and order hamburgers and hot dogs and be served. And they were people who waited on them, the wait staff, he wanted to integrate, not the clientele, but the wait staff. So he wanted to eventually go to clientele but he wanted to start with wait staff. And he asked--he said, "I understand you have a daughter who is in college and, would she be interested in a summer job?" And daddy said, "I don't know, I'll ask her." And he asked me and I said, "Sure, I'll try it." This was in 1960, the summer of 1960. So I was the first (laughing) wait staff person of color in Gladewater, Texas. I worked with Mr. Crouch's son, Bob Crouch, who also was a soda jerk and--and that was that first summer. After that, I--I think it was several years after that before they would actually serve black people, interesting story. I have another follow up, I'm jumping ahead a few years, but Bob and I were in the same class, but of course we didn't know each other, because he went to Gladewater High School and I went to Weldon High School. And so when went on to college, our paths would just never cross, except that summer in the drugstore. At least ten years later, I was, maybe longer than that because I had finished college, had worked five years, had finished law school [Emory University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia] and was working at the Attorney General's Office. And that summer went to a convention in--in Reno, Nevada, Bob Crouch was playing in a band in Reno, Nevada at the hotel where we were staying. And so it was a country style band, and so we walked past the casino and I heard the music, and Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] said, "well I'm not interested in that music" and I looked up and just as they were saying "Our band is gonna take a break, we wanna--" And the announcer said--was introducing the band members and finally he said," and I'm Bob Crouch from Houston, Texas." I said, "Tom go up there and ask him if he's really from Gladewater" (laughing), "I'm not going up there," but he did, he went up there and it was Bob Crouch. We had a grand reunion (laughing). Speaker 1: I know he was surprised to see you. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And to know who you were. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98729 Speaker 1: So back to college, tell me about what went on and what activities you were involved in at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: The first year I was mainly involved in books, just studying and, but later I got involved in Student Government. I was involved in the theatre group, I just--I did join the Glee Club, Spelman Glee Club my first year. I, I took violin, studied violin; my daddy [Garfield Hill] bought me a violin. And I studied under Willis Laurence James; he was also the director of the Glee Club. I--what other activities? I would say selected by the Morehouse Phi Beta Sigma [Fraternity] Chapter to be--that was the end of my first year to be in their court, one of their queens. And so that sort of opened up you know I got to meet guys from Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia] at that time. But it was mostly books that first year, but that first year was also a revolutionary year for me. Because that is the year--the second semester of my first year at Spelman is when the sit-ins began in North Carolina. And shortly thereafter, the students at the Atlanta University Center Schools [Atlanta University Center Consortium] began organizing. So I remember them calling these meetings and I went to the meetings, the mass meetings, and they were saying, "We need to protest." Of course I had gone all my life quietly chaffing at the restrictions of Jim Crow, so this was, this was an exciting time. And of course we knew about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and his successful Montgomery Bus Boycott [Montgomery, Alabama] and being in Atlanta, you know they were saying, oh, we have to do something. But I'm also thinking, "What are my parents [Eulalia Hill Allen and Garfield Hill] gonna say?" (laughing). I didn't have to wonder long because they soon started calling and writing and saying whatever you do, do not get involved in those protest because they were afraid of my getting hurt, my getting sent home, my getting jailed, (laughing) my dying my--if I got sent home, then they could lose their jobs. Because parents were losing jobs because of the involvement of their students, and if they lost their jobs, I would definitely--I had--my brother [Winston C. Hill] was also in college. So we would both have to come home, so they were just adamant, "please do not get involved." And I did not for the first, those first meetings, I just sort of waited, you know. I kept going to the meetings though, whenever they would call a meeting, I would go. But that first wave of students--but they published "An Appeal for Human Rights" that was published in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and several other papers throughout the country. And this was, this was such a big deal and the excitement was growing on campus and I started just sort of going to the meetings, helping to make the signs, just sort of participating on the fringes. And then they had this big march they assembled on Atlanta University's [now Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia] campus and then we had to march downtown. It was so many people, I thought, oh, they'll never catch me (laughing) so I marched downtown, we marched around Rich's [Department Store] and marched back home, I was--it so exhilarating, it was frightening the march down, was frightening, but the march back was just exhilarating because I was alive to tell the story (laughing). Story_ID: 98730 Speaker 1: And that continued until--I kept marching, kept picketing until one day we had a march at Grady [Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia]. Can you imagine Grady being segregated (laughing), but it was? And they had--the waiting room, they had separate waiting rooms and so we were marching to protest the segregation at Grady Hospital. And I'm just marching, I had been marching this time for some time, I mean not on this event, I mean on other occasions, without incident. The police were there, and in fact, one time we saw [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], he was just standing on the, you know sidewalks watching us and encouraging, us you know. But it got so that it was kind old hat in a way, I mean you just weren't expecting violence, it was tiring, and I mean to walk from Spelman's [Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia] campus to Grady was that was a nice hike. I (laughing) but anyway, we're marching going around at Grady, and we had not been at Grady very long and we heard police sirens. And I thought, "Uh oh, this is not good" (laughing) because I'm trying to--at this time I'm thinking my parents [Eulalia Hill Allen and Garfield Hill] are still saying, "Please do not participate in this protest." And Spelman, unbeknownst to me at the time, had sent them a letter saying "The students are protesting and do you want your daughter to participate," and they of course said "no." So, next thing I know police wagons are pulling up, loading up students. They packed up students, but it was a bunch of us down there, and do you know they ran out of paddy wag-paddy wagons just before they got to my group (laughing)? And I was so grateful, and so but I still, I waited there; they said "If you all are still here when we come back from processing these kids, we're coming back for you." I don't know if they ever came back but it was getting dark by then, and I was part marching with my girlfriend Mona [Rae Norman (ph.)], the one I met on the train? And she said, "I'm getting sick," I said, "Okay, she said you wanna go before it gets dark," 'cause I'm not sure I could've made it back to campus by myself. But the two of us made our way back with some other kids, we walked back. Story_ID: 98731 Speaker 1: Around this time, [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault is intergrading Georgia University [University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia], was there any talk about that at all? Speaker 2: Well, yes, there was talk about it. Because at, at the time, Hamilton Holmes was at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and in fact I remember, the rules were so strict at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia], after we got through getting freedom downtown, we had to protest at Spelman (laughter) to get some freedom. But anyway they had freshman girls in order to go to downtown; you had to go in groups of six. So we were walking downtown from Spelman, a group of my friends and Hamilton Holmes had a car. He was a city student; you know he lived in the city, so he had a car. And he was going downtown and he stopped and said, "Y'all want a ride?" And I said, "That's Hamilton Holmes," but we could not ride in cars, now freshman year, I obeyed the rules, so we told him "no," but we knew who he was, we knew that he was getting ready to integrate the University of Georgia. And I did not know Charlayne at that time, I did meet her later. But yes that was, that was--we were afraid for them, we were proud of them, we were just, it was just an amazing thing, amazing time. Story_ID: 98732 Speaker 1: So tell me, the next two or three years before graduation, what goes on at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia] that you're involved in, if there's anything special that you want to talk about. And one thing I wanted to ask you though, before you do that is, were there black cultural studies at Spelman at this time? Speaker 2: Well, in terms of cultural studies, I would say no. But there were no classes on African American History and Culture or but I just--I think we just sort of picked it up through the speakers they would bring on campus. We had mandatory, daily chapel (laughing) so we got our African American history and, and culture from the speakers and entertainers who would come to chapel. I remember our drama coach was Baldwin Burroughs, and he would have artists to come in and--so we were exposed to our culture. I remember Adam Clayton Powell came and spoke on campus and just whoever the black leaders of the day were would come by campus. So we, we were exposed to them, but there were no formal classes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And of course [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] spoke. I remember he spoke several times, it was--you know the thing I regret so much, I didn't have a camera; I didn't take a single picture. I didn't save a single poster or note, didn't write a single diary, I don't know what I was thinking about (laughing). Story_ID: 98733 Speaker 1: All right, so tell me any other stories about your undergrad at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Well, I, I was an English major and a French minor and I was on the honor roll, and got the opportunity to be an exchange student at Skidmore College [Saratoga Springs, New York]. And this was, just for a week, but it was my first integrated experience. I later spent my senior year--the first semester of my senior year on exchange at Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut]. At the time it was for women, and at that time, I was the only black student at Connecticut College. That was an interesting experience, but I did make friends there and recently have communicated with a student that I met there, who is now a physician in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Well tell us about the experience at Connecticut College. Speaker 2: Well, I--once I got over the culture shock of being the fly in the buttermilk, as they say, (laughing) I just pitched right in and got you know studied and enjoyed the New England area and. It was the freedom was something I had just never experienced, that you just go and, not have to sign in and (laughing) take trips, ride in cars (laughing). So I thoroughly enjoyed that, and I enjoyed meeting students of different backgrounds, and I just forgot the color thing, I really did. But every now and then, you would have this rude awakening. For example, they had, what do they call them? Mix, mixers, and they would invite guys from neighboring schools to come in, and they invited one mixer with the [United States] Coast Guard Academy [New London, Connecticut], which is in you now the same area as Connecticut College. And so here I am now, the previous year, oh I didn't mention this, but I was elected Miss Maroon and White, which is Miss Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. So I was sort of used to being appreciated (laughing) and well the guys just sort of passed me by. And so after about an hour of this, you know being ignored I went back to my dorm room, not one person engaged me in conversation or asked me to dance. So I thought, "Hmm, okay, I see where we're--what's happening (laughing) here." But I did meet a guy at, at the Coast Guard Academy and we became friends, I don't know what happened to him, but (laughing) but that was Connecticut College. Story_ID: 98734 Speaker 1: Okay, so after your exchange experience, anything else significant happen at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I got engaged. Speaker 1: That's significant. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, this clarinet player [HM Thomas W. Cole] I had met when I was fourteen, I still kept in touch in him through college and we would just see each other in the summers. And we would call and visit but we sort of had the understanding, "If you meet somebody else, just let me know." So, we met other people, but nobody ever let anybody know, so we just (laughter)--he says that I just sort of hung around until he gave up and proposed (laughing). But--we--he gave me a ring my senior year. Story_ID: 98735 Speaker 1: Okay. And now you graduate from Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia] in 1963. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Is that right? And a lot of things happened in '63 [1963]. You remember [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s speech--(simultaneous Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was in '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Medgar Evers was killed--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those incidents? Speaker 2: I remember them vividly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember the March on Washington, I wanted to go so badly, but I could not go. But I remember watching it on television with my father, and had just goose bumps and tears watching it. And I just knew that--well from my experience in Atlanta [Georgia], the success that the student protest had had, that things were really gonna change. And this is the summer of '63 [1963], I had just graduated, and was getting ready to go to the University of Texas [at Austin, Texas]. University of Texas was--admitted black students but you had to live in separate housing. So they had houses for the black students they all lived together and it was right across this huge dormitory where Lynda Baines Johnson [Lynda Bird Johnson Robb] was enrolled and living. So, things had changed, but there was still some more progress that needed to be made. So when we would hear about the horrors of Medger Evers and the 16th Street, and course my dear friend, was from Birmingham, Alabama, so I just, I felt it more acutely because I knew I had been to visit her, I knew, I had been in that area. And I didn't know the families of the girls who were killed, but it was just like it struck my church. When it's just, it was just horrible and you know sort of remembered that everytime before that a little progress was made; it was violence that held us back. And so I was just hoping that this wouldn't be a repeat, of, like reconstruction. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Story_ID: 98736 Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated [1963]? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember it vividly. I was in the dormitory--ironically it was called Whitis, the black dorm at the University of Texas [at Austin, Texas] (laughing) and we got the word that he had been killed in Texas. And the strange thing was all these black kids in this dormitory were just, I mean all but in hys--all but hysterical. And then when you step outside there was rejoicing in the streets. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Some of these white kids were celebrating and there we were, in fact one of my friends had to be, had to go to the infirmary. She had just made herself sick, but it was like a close family member had died. In fact I had had family members to die that had not struck me that hard. And it think it was because never before had we--now I am twenty-one years old, so when I say never before, not in my memory nor what I had read about. Had we had a sort of friend in the White House, I'll put it like that, or someone we perceived to be a friend in the White House. Who could make things happen for our people, and this was like, not just the death of one man, but the death of a dream. Story_ID: 98737 Speaker 1: Now at the University of Texas [at Austin, Texas], you went there to-- right after leaving Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went there to pursue my library science-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Degree. Speaker 1: And how long were you there? Speaker 2: I was just there a semester because, I, as I said I got engaged [to HM Thomas W. Cole] my senior year and I was getting married that June [1964] and moving to Chicago [Illinois]. So I knew I would not finish that program, and I was offered a position to substitute for a librarian at a high school in Corsicana, Texas which was near Dallas [Texas]. The principal was a friend of my father's [Garfield Hill] and he called and he said, "We're looking for someone to substitute for our librarian who is out on maternity leave." And daddy said, "Well my daughter's in Library School," he said, "That'll do" (laughing). So I spent the second semester in Corsicana. Speaker 1: Okay. And so what happens next? Speaker 2: Next, I get married in 1964 and move to Chicago and Tom is at the University of Chicago working on his Ph.D. in Chemistry. And I, you know when I think about the things we did not talk about before we got married (laughing) I went up there no job but and he really could not support me. But fortunately I was able to find a job at the Billings Hospital, at the University of Chicago, the Eye Surgery Clinic, where I was a receptionist. And it was very convenient, because it was across the street from the Chemistry Lab, so I could ride with him to work. Speaker 1: And so how long did you stay in Chicago? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, all right. Now Civil Rights is really kicking up now in '64 [1964]. Thinking about [Associate Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall, had you thought about being an attorney at that time, or you still had no clue you just wanted to do your library studies. Speaker 2: I, I was gonna finish my library degree. Speaker 1: Okay. What people were you looking at--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: See I didn't know, mean I knew of Thurgood Marshall and, but it did not come home to me that is something that I could pursue. I never knew any lawyers growing up, let alone women lawyers. So I mean I had heard about Constance Baker Motley, but this was, this had not hit home to me that this is something that I should aspire to. Story_ID: 98738 Speaker 1: So when you leave Chicago [Illinois], what's the next thing that happens? Speaker 2: The next thing when we left Chicago, well Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] had gotten his Ph.D., and he was considering what offers he wanted to consider. And he had an offer in industry, which I was really pushing for, and because this was something new and fresh, and it paid more money than the other offers (laughing). And we had been starving students for a couple of years, so, I was really pushing for that, but he wanted to teach. And so he had an offer from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and a how--and an offer from Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia]. And then he was also considering going back to Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], his alma mater, and teaching because his dad [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] was the principal--the president there, and he knew how difficult it was to get Ph.D.'s on the small black college campuses. So when I saw he was dead set on teaching, I said, well let's go back to Atlanta, I have friends in Atlanta. And so he interviewed at both and he liked the reception he got at Atlanta and Atlanta it was. And then I knew I could go to Atlanta University and get my library degree, and finish up, finish up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98739 Speaker 1: So any interesting stories about something else? Speaker 2: Let me go back a minute. Right after I finished Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia], I went to--that summer after I finished, I went to Texas Woman's University [Denton, Texas] and took some courses in library science. And that was the first time that I heard about Juneteenth (laughing) You'd ask me about Juneteenth, they actually celebrated Juneteenth. I went to the Cafeteria and it was closed and they said "we are celebrating Juneteenth," I said "what is that" (laughing)? So, I just wanted to pick that up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98740 Speaker 1: Okay back to Sp-- to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: So tell me about Atlanta now. Speaker 1: Well, I, I was excited to get back to Atlanta and get enrolled in school to finish my library degree, which I did [at Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia]. And this is our [Cole and HM Thomas W. Cole's] first home; they had faculty housing at Atlanta University, on Beckwith Street. And we had a three bedroom home and boy I tell you. I was leaving this small apartment in Chicago [Illinois] where, I mean it was so cramped; you could put one hand on the oven and touch the other side of the wall. One bedroom apartment, so I--we bought furniture for the first time. We rented a furnished apartment so we were really filled--felt like a married couple, setting up housekeeping. It was an exciting time. After a year, I finished library school [1967] and got a job as a cataloger with Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia]. It was College at the time, I believe, but we--I was happy to have that, and worked there for a year, and got pregnant with our daughter [Kelley S. Cole]. We were ready to start a family and excited to be expecting, and my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] was just thrilled. She had been sending me clippings about other friends of hers who were grandparents (laughing). Speaker 2: So you finished [Clark] Atlanta University with your M.A. in Library Science, and that was in 1967, is that right? Speaker 1: Right, that's a Master of Science in Library Science. Speaker 2: Okay, Master of Science. Speaker 1: M.S.L.S. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 98741 Speaker 1: And--so it's ten years later before you decide to go to law school, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what made you decide now that you would go to law school? Speaker 2: Well, after I had worked as a librarian for five years I--my last job was at [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] as librarian of the Social Science Reading Room. And it was a great job, I had--I was working in the Political Science Department, I had a great boss, I did my ordering of brooks through the main library. And they did the cataloging, I just had to--and I had student assistants, so it was a great job. And yet I was not fulfilled, and so I was thinking "Well, maybe I need to go back to school and get my Ph.D." And I thought, well that's gonna take too long and I had--by then I had two children, my son [Thomas Cole, III] was born fifteen months after my daughter (laughing). And let me just say that during that time when I was at home with my children, I was living on Beckwith Street and also on Beckwith Street, was the Interdenominational Theological Seminary [sic, Interdenominational Theological Center]. Which, in which the King Center [The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change] got its beginnings. Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King and the Director of the King Center at that time was Julius Scott, who was an old friend of my husband's [HM Thomas W. Cole], and who had worked at Spelman College and Julius saw me and he said "What are you doing?" And I said I'm--"I've got two babies," he said, "You need to get--come over here and help me." And so I said, "Well if you get me a babysitter I will," and he did, and I did. So for the better part of a year, I volunteered over at the King Center. Did everything from opening mail to drafting letters for Mrs. King to just helping out wherever I was needed, doing--writing responses and drafting speeches, just you name it, that was an exciting time. But when I worked at Atlanta University, and I'm working there a couple years, I met this young student who was studying for the law school admissions test. And she--every spare moment she had she was reading this book. And I start looking at this book, and I said, "How long does it take to get a law degree?" And she said three years, I said, "Hmm," I was thinking maybe law librarianship maybe that would be interesting, I still wasn't thinking about being a-- actually practicing law. But I went to my ten year reunion from Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia] and I went there and people in my class seem to be doing some more exciting things than I was doing. And I said they are no smarter than I am, and I knew that if I could stay sane through two babies in diapers, I could do anything (laughing). So I applied to li--to law school (laughing) and you know it was sort of like what ya you do, what--when the dog catches the car. When I got accepted, I said, "I can't afford to go to law school" (laughing). So about this time, Tom got an offer from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts] to be a Visiting Professor. So I said, "Tom, take it" (laughing) that gave me time to try to figure out how I'm going to pay for law school. Speaker 1: So obviously you figured it out. Speaker 2: Yeah, I figured it out. Story_ID: 98742 Speaker 1: You were entering law school and what school did you attend? Speaker 2: Emory University [School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay and this is in 1977 so Emory was a different type of school. Speaker 2: This was in 1974. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated in--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay in 1974. Well tell me about Emory College at that time. Speaker 2: Well, Emory Law School, the year that my first year at Emory, they sort of decided to take in the nontraditional students. So they had a number of women who--some had been home with their children, some had been in other careers, like I had been. And so they, they admitted, oh, what I would call "nontraditional," a larger number of nontraditional students. And a larger number of African American students, so I felt I was able to find mothers with children that, for my study groups. So we had things in common. Most of the African American students were right out of college, but there were a few who, one or two like me had, had another career and had children and who were coming back. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was the experience like? Speaker 2: It was tough, it's not something that--it's not the ideal way to go to law school. But I met people who had done it, turned out a neighbor of mine had finished Emory, she had been married at the time, with two children, a boy and a girl, just like I did. So she coached me, encouraged me and in fact, our children were you know same ages and she--so she would sometimes carpool with me. And so we just--I just made do (laughing) with the friends and with my husband [HM Thomas W. Cole] helping and it was a tough time. I remember one year it was finals and it's always a stressful time in law school. Because unlike college where you have periodic exams, you can go almost a whole semester and then they have that one final. And that, that test is the be all, or end all. So I'm getting ready for finals, and my daughter [Kelley S. Cole] who is in the first grade has as her class project to make a pinata. So we made this pinata earlier, and somehow the pinata fell and broke. Somehow she was playing with it I think, and knocked it off and broke it. So here I am--and she's hysterical, so I told her if you go to bed, I promise you I'll fix the pinata. So I'm up the night before a major final, trying to paper mache and trying to get a pinata together for my daughter. And I knew it was crazy and I mean but I, I knew that (laughing) it was gonna be even crazier if she woke up and there was no pinata (laughter), but I survived. Speaker 1: Right. So you really had to learn how to balance family and going to school. Speaker 2: We did, yes. Speaker 1: Where were you living at this time? Speaker 2: At this time, we bought our first home and we were living in southwest Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 98743 Speaker 1: And so you graduate from law school, and tell me what happens after that. Speaker 2: I graduated from law school [Emory University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia] and I was thinking at the time because I had had a part-time job in the summer at--well it was called HEW, [the United States Department of] Housing [sic, Health] and Education--Housing Education and Welfare, it's now HHS, Health and Human Services or something. But I was working for the Government, and had been assured that they would offer me a position, when I finished. And of course when I finished, they had a freeze on, so I had to get out there and interview and apply. I did not get a single offer from a firm. But I did get an offer from the Attorney General's Office, the Georgia Attorney General's Office. And I think in no small measure, because of this friend and neighbor, Jan Christian [ph.], who had finished Emory ahead of me and who had gone to the State Law Department and recommended me. I believe Jan was the first African American woman to work at the Law Department, and I believe I was the second. But that time, the Attorney General was Arthur Bolton and he was such a classy gentleman. I remember his telling me during the interview that--it was sort of you know not--I don't want to say sexist (laughing) but he said, "There's certain places in Georgia that I don't want my lady lawyers to go alone." He was protective, and I didn't mind that in 1977, I did not mind. There was some part of Georgia, I did not want to go alone (laughing). So but, I had a wonderful experience, and I served through three Attorneys General, Arthur Bolton, [Michael] Mike Bowers and [HM] Thurbert Baker. Story_ID: 98744 Speaker 1: Okay, you were saying that you served under three attorney generals. Speaker 2: Right, it's called attorneys general. Speaker 1: Attorneys, thank you for that correction (laughter). Okay. And Thurgood Baker was the last one you served under? Speaker 2: Yes, Thurbert [HM Thurbert Baker]. Speaker 1: Any stories about the--while you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. The first--actually this is another interview story. I did not want to go into tax law, I had studied tax or it was Federal Tax at Emory [University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia] and it was not one of my better subjects. So when I went to the interview I said to Mr. [Arthur] Bolton--he asked me what area would I like to work in. I said, "Anything but Tax," he said, "oh, that's too bad because that's the only opening we have." I said, "I'd love to work in Tax" (laughing). And I did, I worked in Tax for five years and enjoyed it, I had a great boss, I learned a lot. And I learned that State Tax Law is a lot different from Federal Tax Law. You have the Tax folks over the Revenue Department to do all the math (laughing), you just go out and litigate the cases, so. Story_ID: 98745 Speaker 1: In the late '70s [1970s] in Atlanta [Georgia] was the case of the "missing and murdered children," what were your thoughts about that, at that time? Speaker 2: I was frightened by it, I was frightened for my own children 'cause I had young children. And I was frightened for the other children, it was a time where fear was--you could just almost touch it, it was everywhere. And people were going out on weekends searching for either the children or bodies and, oh, it was just horrible. And it was--well in 1982; we left Atlanta and moved to West Virginia. And I really think having gone through that period of fear is what made me really want to just get some distance from the city for a while. 'Cause it was somewhat unresolved you know in terms whether all the killers were caught. It was a horrible time. Story_ID: 98746 Speaker 1: So tell me about your move to West Virginia. Speaker 2: Well, by this time, Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] had gotten into Administration. He was Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs at [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. And he was sought--he was nominated for the presidency of West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University in Institute, West Virginia]. And he went there for the interview, and I actually went for one of the interviews to see West Virginia. And I remember the day we flew in, it was a fall day and the sky was ablaze with color, the trees were just brilliant, it was a fall unlike any I had seen before. And I thought maybe this is a sign that we're; we're supposed to be here, so it was a small town, getting back to my small town roots. But I mean West Virginia State College is an Institute, West Virginia, which is a small town. But it is a suburb of Charleston, West Virginia which is the state capitol. So it was larger than Gladewater [Texas] (laughing) but certainly not as large as Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And so what position do you, did you take on there in West Virginia? Speaker 2: When I got to West Virginia, of course I had not passed the West Virginia Bar [examination]. So I started studying for the Bar again, I had taken the Bar and passed it for Georgia, but had to start all over, I sure hated that. But I got a job, in the meantime working for the West Virginia Department of Corrections [sic, Division of Corrections]. And that was an interesting experience, going out visiting the corrections facilities and working in that area. But as soon as I passed the Bar in West Virginia I was offered a position with the West Virginia Attorney General's Office. Speaker 1: And did you go into the Fiscal or Tax Division also? Speaker 2: I did initially but then I was offered a position as deputy attorney general in the Environmental Division. And I--that was a promotion and I accepted that. Speaker 1: And did you, did you like working in Environmental in, Energy? Speaker 2: I did, I did West Virginia was, at that time, Jay Rockefeller was the Governor of West Virginia. And tourism was a big push because it is a poor state and he was trying to, to get tourism built up in that state. But you have that fight between--the struggle between the environment and the coal mine and the chemical industry. They called Charleston the "Chemical Valley," because they had so many plants in the area, and that created the pollution which also created the jobs. So it was an interesting area to work. Speaker 1: So how long were you in West Virginia? Speaker 2: We were there six years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98747 Speaker 1: And what brought you back? This is when you come back to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what brings you back to Atlanta? Speaker 2: Well, we were minding our own business; Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] had then left West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University in Institute, West Virginia] and then Chancellor of the West Virginia Board of Regents. He was on a number of boards there; I was on the board of corporation there. And we were--we had made friends, and our children were doing well, so we weren't looking to move back to Atlanta. But the Trustees of Clark College and Atlanta University where Tom had served for sixteen years, were talking about a merger or consolidation and we were, we were friends with these folks and they called Tom and they said "You're the man to do it. We can't promise you but we're willing and we believe under your leadership, you can make it happen." And he got calls from all over encouraging him to take that position, and although he did not want to let the people down in West Virginia that had entrusted him to lead--he was the first black to serve as Chancellor of the West Virginia higher education system, and one of the few in the nation. He just felt that Atlanta University was in jeopardy of going out of business. Because of a standalone graduate school, it was just really having difficulty, and so he took the job. Speaker 1: In West Virginia, was there some talk about him possibly running for Governor? Speaker 2: None that I heard of (laughing). No, he was, at that time the new Governor coming up was Gaston Caperton, who was a good friend of ours and just a great supporter and we were of him. No, he was not running, Gaston was a billionaire--millionaire businessman, might've been billionaire businessman, I don't know (laughing). Story_ID: 98748 Speaker 1: Okay. So the transition back to Atlanta [Georgia] takes you where? Speaker 2: Well, I was thinking at the time [1988], "Okay this is my chance to go into private practice." And I had looked in West Virginia at some of the firms, but I got that offer from the West Virginia Attorney General's Office and sure enough, before I even moved back to Atlanta, I got a call from the then attorney general who was [Michael] Mike Bowers. When Mike was the attorney general when I left, and Mike called me and said, "Your old job is waiting for you." Well, okay do I go back to my old job or do I get out hitting the interview circuit? It was a no brainer, I enjoyed working there at the AG's Office and those were my friends. And so I went right back to the AG's Office, and it was not having to do the billable hours, was important too, because I wanted to participate and help Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] at Clark Atlanta University [in Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because after once semester Clark and Atlanta University had-- the Trustees approved the consolidation. Speaker 1: So how did you help, help him at that time? Speaker 2: Well, basically the usual First Lady jobs plus a few more, interacting with students, speaking on campus, entertaining dignitaries and the campus community. I started a group called the Clark Atlanta University Guild to raise money for students in the arts and just being supportive of him and the University. Speaker 1: And in the meantime working at the attorneys general's office, when you left you were in the Tax Division. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When you came back, tell me the departments that or division that you worked in. Speaker 2: I came back, they did not have an--I went back to the Environmental Division, I mean I went--I didn't go back to Tax, I went to Environmental because I had gotten in Environmental. But in Environmental already had a deputy, so I went back to an assistant attorney general. And I worked there and they had a reorganization about a year or so later, and they offered me a Deputy position and it--well first I was made senior assistant attorney general. And I was the, I was the head of the--several sections of the State Law Department, the Consumer Section, initially. And then they reorganized again, and I became deputy attorney general and they--I had Consumer, I had Environmental and one other division that is escaping me. Speaker 1: Business and Professional. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, thank you. Speaker 1: All right. And you were there for ten years? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years. Story_ID: 98749 Speaker 1: Okay, and your next move would be? Speaker 2: To the bench. I--actually the first person that put being a Judge on my brain was [Georgia Attorney General Michael] Mike Bowers. He called me in his office; he said he was on the Judicial Nominating Commission. And he said, "I want you to think about being a Judge, I want you to go through the process, apply for it. You not gonna get it the first time, but you'll be comfortable with the process." So I did what he told me to, I went through the process and I didn't get it and I didn't think about it again (laughing). I just, I was busy with my work and I was enjoying my work and so I just didn't think about it. But I had a friend who had been my classmate at Emory Law [Emory University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia], she had been my co-worker at the attorney general's Office and she had been named to the Superior Court Bench, Judge Stephanie Manis. And Stephanie said "Well, this is the best job you'll ever have, you need to you know go ahead try this process one more time." So I said, "Well, I don't know," by then we had a new attorney general, [HM] Thurbert Baker. And Thurbert was the first black attorney general, so I wanted to help Thurbert out and I just said "Oh, I don't need this may not be a good time." So they said, well--Stephanie said well you know, Governor Zell Miller appointed her and he was appointing a lot of women (laughing). And she said, "You better at least give Zell a try, you don't know who the next Governor will be" (laughing). So, I was nominated and this time I allowed the nomination to go in, I asked Thurbert for his support, he gave to me. And he was the former floor leader for the Governor, so he appointed me. Speaker 1: And that was in 1998? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. And you've been elected two other terms, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Talk about after your appoint--appointment--after appointed as a Judge, this had to be quite different from what you were doing previously. You wanna talk about that? Speaker 2: Well I was really afraid of the Criminal Law, because I've never done any Criminal Law. All of my practice had been in Civil, and in fact, Administrative Law, which is even different from Civil. But at least I got to go to court, argue rules of evidence, I went up on appeal, had the appellate practice, so I figured I could handle the Civil. But the Criminal I thought, "Oh, I'm really gonna have to go to school with this." Well it turns out that Criminal is easier that the Civil (laughing), Civil really is very grueling. But I went to several judicial training courses and there is a Council of State Court Judges that has training every year. So I would participate in that and my fellow Judges would help out, if there were problems or if I would run into, you know tough issue. So I was able to get over the freshman jitters and (laughing) and turned out to be a good career for me. Story_ID: 98750 Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to talk about as far as that position [State Court Judge for Georgia]. Or any--anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to speak about? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think so, I never would've dreamed as a little girl on the unpaved roads of Joaquin, Texas, that I would become a Judge in Atlanta, Georgia. But I think the training that my parents gave me and the experiences that I have had along the way at Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia], at Emory [Emory University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia] prepared me for this time. I--it, it makes me humble and so you know earlier I said, "To whom much is given, much is required," it is very difficult for me to say no at this time, which gets me in trouble. But you know, if somebody ask me to speak or to talk with young people, especially, I just, I just cannot say no. Because I remember as a little girl, growing up, my father [Garfield Hill] telling me "Look up, look people in the eye." You know I was very shy and so to be talking with HistoryMakers (chuckling), this is--I am a miracle (laughter). Story_ID: 98751 Speaker 1: I realize you probably are right by saying you cannot say no because you belong to a number of organizations and have been awarded numerous times. But some of the organizations that you belong to that you feel strong about are--well let me let you tell me what they are. Speaker 2: Well, I have served on a number of charitable foundations, The Atlanta Women's Foundation, the--I served oh, so many--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Now what does the Atlanta Women's Foundation do? Speaker 2: Well, actually they receive funds and then they give them to organizations in the community who work to help women and girls. And it was--I served on their committee that visited the org--the potential donors, and it was just so heartwarming to see the work that non-profits are doing in the community. And to be able to give money to help these, these women and young-- girls, so I enjoyed that. The Atlanta Community Food Bank, I served on that board, I am still serving on the Board of the Gammon [Theological] Seminary, which is a United Methodist Seminary, that's a part of ITC [the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, Georgia]. I've been on that board twenty-six years; they won't let me resign (laughing). I--on the social front, I'm a member of the Dogwood City Chapter of Links, Incorporated, we also do civic work. In fact, we've given over a million dollars to civic--we're celebrating twenty-five years, and I was a Charter Member of that Chapter. So I'm very proud of that and the work we've done with that. I'm a member of the Kappa Omega Chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, now AKA is big in my family and my husband's [HM Thomas W. Cole] family. All the women in my family and all the women in his family (laughing) are AKA's, so we have a lot of pink and green. And it's not, it's not just social either, although we do--it's mostly civic. We work with young women and just do a lot in the community, education and, and service. So I'm proud of those two and a number of other social. The Chautauqua [Literary and Scientific] Circle is a book club that I, I am a member of and Chums, Incorporated is a civic and social group. So I stay busy. Speaker 1: Also the Council of State Judges. Speaker 2: Professionally a member of the Atlanta Bar Association, the National Bar Association, the Council of State Court Judges. Next year I'll be President of that Council, I am now President-elect, I am a member of the Lawyers Club and I stay active with Emory University. And will Spelman College the Alumni Association, the--I have been, I have been a member of the Emory Carlos--Michael C. Carlos Museum. I served on that board for a number of years, but now I'm on the Board of Visitors for Emory. And I'm also a Treasurer of the Law Alumni Association. Speaker 1: Wow, so yes, you do stay busy (laughter). Story_ID: 98752 Speaker 1: When you think back over your life, would you have done anything differently? Speaker 2: I cannot imagine--one thing I may have done differently, but it may have changed the course of history, I don't know. I might've waited for those paddy wagons (laughing). Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No regrets. Speaker 1: This material is going to be used as a learning tool and it will be seen by future generations. What message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: I want young people to understand that no matter how humble your beginnings if you are willing to work hard and just use the stumbling blocks, because there will be stumbling blocks. But use them as stepping stones. I talked about--you asked me if I had any regrets, and I mentioned jokingly I would've waited for the paddy wagon. The jail experience for a worthy cause was kind of a red badge of courage and my dear friend, [HM] Anne Ashmore-Hudson, who had that experience, I always envied that. And so when you see something that is worth fighting for, worth sacrificing, just don't hold back. If I had a regret, that would be it, then I might not be a Judge (laughing). I think there have been Judges though who have, who went to jail during the Civil Rights Movement. But I am proud of the participation that I did have. You know it's hard to think that you were the bravest of all when you were sixteen and seventeen (laughing). Story_ID: 98753 Speaker 1: You mentioned your children, do you want to talk about your children? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I'm very proud of my children, they are wonderful adults, wonderful human beings. And my daughter [Kelley S. Cole] is in advertising, she is with Grey Advertising [Grey Global Group] an Assistant--she's a Vice President and Associate Creative Director, very dynamic. She's a Link [Links, Incorporated] and she's an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], so she's giving back to the community, as well. And my son is a-- Story_ID: 98754 Speaker 1: So you were gonna tell me about your son [Thomas Cole, III]. Speaker 2: Oh, he's, as I said he's fifteen months younger than my daughter [Kelley S. Cole] and they're two different personalities. But they were not so getting along their earlier years, now they're good friends, and he is--they're both college graduates. He is now in real estate and doing well, and he's also committed to the community. He works through his Fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha and, I'm just proud of both of them. They, they boss me around now, tell me what movies I can and cannot see, so but that's good. My daughter's getting married in June, and we're just so fortunate to have wonderful, loving, smart kids. They're not kids; they're adults (laughing). Speaker 1: What are you looking forward to in the near future? Speaker 2: The wedding and then grandchildren (laughing). Story_ID: 98755 Speaker 1: Tell me how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I want to be remembered as a person who passionately cared about family, about community, about this country, and where we're headed. I just want us to do the right thing, and be it's--I shouldn't have gotten off on the country (laughing). But I just want the little people to be as important as the people with money. That the children are most important, that we have to protect these children. Give them a good education, give them a chance in life and then the future of this country will be assured. If we do not do that, then it will not be assured, we have to stop being ugly Americans and have a world view that also embraces the children and the world. And make sure as an old environmentalist, that there is a world for us to have in the future. Speaker 1: Well I want to thank you on behalf of The HistoryMakers for taking the time to share your story. We know that you're busy and it's just such an important story that we felt that had to be documented. And we just really, really appreciate the time that you have taken to share time--your story with us. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Story_ID: 98756 Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Now that's a photo of my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] kissing me at the Coronation of Miss Maroon and White, my junior year. I was elected Queen at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], which was the all-male school across the street from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. And it was definitely a highlight of my college career. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Do you remember what year it was? Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: Now that's a family photo that was taken in I'm not sure of what year. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: You can give a decade if you want, approximately. Speaker 2: Approximately 1980. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was taken--that picture was taken of Tom [HM Thomas W. Cole] and me at the same time. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, year? Speaker 2: Nineteen Eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Oh, I see you mean the same year, okay, sorry. Speaker 2: Yes. I am not sure, but I would say 1988 for that one. No, make that '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: All right. Speaker 2: Now that was in 1977, that's at my desk at the [Georgia] State Law Department, my first job after law school. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: That is in 1977, I'm celebrating with a classmate after having passed the Georgia Bar and admitted to practice in Georgia. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Very good, next. Speaker 2: Now that's a picture of me at graduation from Emory [University School of Law in Atlanta, Georgia] in 1977. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. What about this one? Speaker 2: That is a picture me with my mother [Eulalia Hill Allen] and father [Garfield Hill], approximately 1985. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Good, next. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my brother [Winston C. Hill], number 75 of the New York Jets, during the time when he was playing with the New York Jets, where he went on to win--they went on to win Super Bowl III. And he is now a businessman and restaurateur in Denver, Colorado. And still goes back for Jet Reunions, he is, was--is good friends with Joe Namath, and blocked for Joe. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-nine [1969], that's a picture of Tom and me and baby Kelley. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Go ahead. Speaker 2: That is a picture at West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University in Institute, West Virginia] it was taken at an Alumni dinner in 198- sort around '83 [1983], '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Good, next. Speaker 2: A picture of Kelley at approximately six months, so that would be 1968. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: No, 1969. Picture of Governor Jay Rockefeller, of West Virginia and Tom and me at Tom's Inauguration in 1983. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: That is Tom's mother [Eva Cole] and father [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] and his two sisters who were among our Bridesmaids and our--at our wedding in 1964. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: My mother and father at our wedding in 1964. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother and my stepfather, Donald Allen at their wedding in 1993. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, next. Speaker 2: My mother and father around 1958. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, next. Speaker 2: My father in-law taking Tom and me out to dinner in 1965, around 1965, '64 [1964] or '65 [1965] (laughing). Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Very good. Speaker 2: That is a family photo of The Coles around 1989. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: Thomas W. Cole, III. I think that's around 1972, no, it couldn't have been. Wait, let me get this straight, (laughing) oh, 1975. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay..