 Story_ID: 4948 Speaker 1: Augusta Alexander Clark, "A-U-G-U-S-T-A", Alexander, "A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R", Clark, "C-L-A-R-K", no "E." Speaker 2: I want you to state the year you were born and--usually the same all (unclear) were before it--and the date, today's date. Speaker 1: Today is July 26th is it? Speaker 2: 27th. Speaker 1: Today is Friday, July 27th, 2000. I was born March 5, 1932. Story_ID: 4949 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Maryland hard-shell crabs. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: U.S. Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: Oh, you've been there. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: It's tied between spring and fall. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: This year it's green. It has been blue. I go through color phases. I'm having a green year. Speaker 1: Okay. And then also your favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: I reduce to a mantra the expression that "the ultimate expression of freedom is the freedom of self-definition." Story_ID: 4950 Speaker 1: Now you were born in Alabama. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where in Alabama? Speaker 2: In Uniontown [Alabama] which is not far from Selma [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Is it--you know, my father's family is from Buckhorn [Alabama]. That's probably way in the country somewhere. Speaker 2: You know my problem is we only went when someone was sick, dead or dying and never spent any non-crying time there. So I don't know Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. So now tell me, now--so you were born there. You didn't, you didn't Speaker 2: I was born there. By the time I was two, my family had moved to West Virginia. So my father left his hard life as a farmer to be a coal miner in northern West Virginia. Speaker 1: Now, tell me what your father's name was. Speaker 2: Harrison. My father's Harrison Alexander, my mother is Lula Bell Warren Alexander. Speaker 1: And tell me about your father, what kind of person he was. Speaker 2: A remarkable man, a little guy, a twin. A little black man--never weighed more than 160 pounds in his life. Little feet, wore a size nine shoe. Measured himself with the best of whatever he was doing. Therefore, if sixteen tons was being loaded by the big guys, you can bet Daddy got his sixteen in. He measured his effort by the size of the task. So Daddy said "some people run as fast as they can. I run as fast as I have to depending on what's chasing me or what I'm chasing." Speaker 1: And what about his side of the family? What is known of that? Do you--your grandparents or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. His father was Uriah, a farmer, a photographer and a preacher. His mother was Rebecca. A housewife, farm housewife of a large family. He was big and red with freckles, she was tall and black with wavy hair. So they had twins in 1909, on July the 12th. A baby girl who grew to be near six foot tall, was big and robust and red and freckled. And this little black boy, (laughs) who was five [feet] nine [inches], and never weighed 170 pounds in his life. Speaker 1: So he had--it was he and his sister then? Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were large numbers--he had a big family, but his uniqueness was that he was a twin. Story_ID: 4951 Speaker 1: Did he [Harrison Alexander, Clark's father] talk any about growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He talked about growing up as a farm boy. He was born in 1909, too young for the First World War. His brother went off to the First World War. Racism was a constant companion in their family, in their section of the country. The Scottsboro Boys [nine African American teenagers falsely tried and convicted for rape in Scottsboro, Alabama] happened when my father was growing up. So it was something that was--it colored his life. They grew up trying to be safe. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about that incident with the Scottsboro Boys? Speaker 2: He talked about how dangerous it was to cross white people who might not like what you were doing. It could cost you your life. Speaker 1: And--now did he talk about farm life or growing up on a farm? Speaker 2: And what characterized his discussions of farm life, was that there was no money involved in it. They worked all year and at the end of it there was no money. Maybe you had more eggs than you could handle or maybe you didn't. You know, so it was a barter kind of existence, which my father didn't like--that he liked money. And he was willing to work for it. But at the end of some designated work period, he expected a paycheck. Story_ID: 4952 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Lula Bell Warren Alexander]. Let's talk about her and her side of the family. Speaker 2: My mother was a very strong woman, very pretty. Towards the end of her life, gray haired and grandmotherly. But not at all that sweet soft little lady that she appeared to be. Always ramrod, always the capacity to snap you, too. Please do not take her for granted. As soon as you did something bad was getting ready to happen to you. Because Mama valued herself, her opinion, and was never going to let anybody get in the habit of taking her for granted. And I think I got some of that from her, you know, "don't tread on me." Speaker 1: So what about her parents? What were they like? Did you know them? Speaker 2: I didn't know her mother, because her mother died when she was less than three years old and her father married a younger woman who they called Ms. B. My grandfather's name was Jimmy Warren and he amassed a large amount of land in Alabama, probably more than any of his children or grandchildren or great grandchildren. When he died in 1966, he had a farm in Hale County of 240 acres. Pretty land with ponds and pecan trees and--it was a wonderful piece of land. It also had Klanspeople [members of the Ku Klux Klan] around it. Speaker 1: So did they take it? Speaker 2: Oh no, no. The family jealously guarded it, paying the taxes on it. His widow had a life estate, and since she's died that remainder has not yet been allocated among the children and the heirs. But it is watched. Speaker 1: That's great. That's an uncommon story in our community. It's been much more common that people lost their property. Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. From what I can hear whispered, he didn't earn it just from sharecropping. He also did a little bootleg whiskey. That's a story for another day. Speaker 1: So, how did your parents meet? Speaker 2: They were farm kids who went to the same church. Went to the same school for as long as their school lasted. You know that in the agrarian south, children went to school when crops were in and didn't go to school when it was time to pick crops. So of course, they were known to and by each other. And started to spark each other during teenage years and paired off and married each other. Story_ID: 4953 Speaker 1: Now you said you moved to West Virginia when you were about two with your family. Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: I'd like you to just tell first where you fit in the hierarchy, and who your brothers and sisters are. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In order. Speaker 2: I am the middle of three girls. The oldest being my sister Mary Dean Alexander Kyle, "K-Y-L-E" who was born in 1930. I'm Augusta Alexander Clark, I was born in March of '32 [1932]. And my baby sister, Velma Alexander Buckner, was born in January of '34 [1934]. And then sixteen years later my parents were surprised by the birth of their only son, Harrison Ronald [Alexander], who was born August 6, 1950. My mother [Lula Bell Warren Alexander] thought she was having a tumor. And we teased her about that nine pound tumor for a very long time. But our family got out of Alabama the way the black family left the South. My father's brother had come back from the First World War unwilling to scratch in that hard red clay in Alabama. So he went to West Virginia following rumors that there were jobs to be had. And after he got a job and settled his family, then my father [Harrison Alexander] joined him until he got a job. Then he sent for Mama and the three children. I'm in the process of writing Mama's story. Because she was a farm girl who'd never been more than twenty miles from that farm where she was born and married. When she got on the train to go to a state that most people had not heard of, West Virginia. From where nobody had ever returned, with less than five dollars over her ticket. With three babies, 'cause a four year old is a baby, on a segregated train for a three day ride. She didn't have any refrigeration for the milk. She was breast-feeding one baby. She had two of us who weren't house broken yet, including me. Imagine what that must have been like to put everything you own in a trunk, pack a suitcase and a shoebox lunch, and get on a segregated train for a three day trip to parts unknown. And she did that successfully. And I think therein lies the grit of the black mother that hasn't been told adequately. How much--who, who, who understood? To whom did she tell her story about "I'm afraid to do this?" How long could she indulge her own fear? She still had to do it. Failure to do it would be to abandon her husband and her children. Speaker 1: Was she joining your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was joining him where we lived in a room in my uncle's house with his wife and three girls 'til we could get a room, and then a house of our own. Speaker 1: Where, where in West Virginia? Speaker 2: Fairmont [West Virginia]. Speaker 1: Fairmont. Speaker 2: Fairmont. Speaker 1: The only place I know is Wheeling [West Virginia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Fairmont is seventy-seven miles south of Wheeling. If you can see Morgantown [West Virginia] where the University is--West Virginia U[niversity, Morgantown, West Virginia]. is--Fairmont is eleven miles from WVU, home of the Mountaineers. Story_ID: 4954 Speaker 1: Because if you're a black child, you get so many negative influences, that if you don't start with a lot you'll be on "E" [empty] before you get back home. So we started with a full tank and a little measure on our back. And I raised my children the way my mother [Lula Bell Warren Alexander] raised me. You're pretty and you're smart. You're pretty and you're smart. Speaker 2: And where do you think she got--I mean she obviously believed that. But where do you think because you know, a lot of--a lot in the black community wasn't positive. You know--. Speaker 1: Of course! My mother didn't know psychology started with a "P," but she knew how to motivate girls. I told you I was the middle size of three daughters. What do you think she told her other two daughters? Whatever it was, we all bounced off her lap feeling ready for whatever our world had for us that day. We were very successful in school. Always, because our parents never expected or accepted any less. My sister, Velma [Alexander Buckner], graduated valedictorian of her high school class, as did I. I graduated cum laude. Velma graduated summa cum laude from college. That's what our parents expected of us. Story_ID: 4955 Speaker 1: So share some other memories of growing up. You know little girl-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was always a glib little girl. I always had an explanation for the world around me. And if I was setting out the scenario, I always won. I can't imagine a person setting up a scenario where they lose. What is wrong with you? You're the author of this tale. So of course you're the hero of it. And I always had the lead in plays. One 'cause I could learn the part. We were not ever permitted to fail. Failing was never an option. I could remember practicing my valedictory address while washing dishes in the fourth grade. I expected to be valedictorian--of course, I was. I had this speech that was eight years old. What was I gonna do with it? It is the best example that expectations are always met, whether they're high or low. Story_ID: 4956 Speaker 1: And any other memories about the family? You know, times spent, or you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: With friends or-- Speaker 2: My mother [Lula Bell Warren Alexander] was a great person for games and puzzles and poems. When it would be cold in West Virginia--and you can have very long cold winters--she would make popcorn and we would sit around telling stories or reading stories or making up poems. Things which we all participated in and which Mama enjoyed as much as we did. We learned the map of the United States by putting it together and learning the capitals and the principal products in which things go--I still know even those states that are in the four corners, that are all squares. Because we got a certain amount of enjoyment and praise for knowing things like that. My father [Harrison Alexander] didn't have a son until he was old. And so I was the son he never had. And he could brag to his boys "that girl knows all the batting averages of all the guys [baseball players], and which farm teams they came from." Of course his friends never believed him. So I always made him look good 'cause I did know stuff like that. Speaker 1: So now, how--how were you your father's favorite? Speaker 2: One because I looked like him. And in West Virginia they used to say that "if a girl looks like her daddy she's born for good luck." And he kind of liked the notion that I looked like him too. And I was glad. Speaker 1: Now who do you think--I know you said that, you know, you were definitely like your mother. Who are you more like? You know, what like or, you know, we have parts of each parent. But who are you? Speaker 2: I think I'm probably a combination of the best and the worst of both of them. But I am my own kind of separate person. Argumentative. That got me in so much trouble as a child growing up, at a time when children were expected to find out what you wanted them to do, and go do it. And all that discussion which I insisted on having was out of character, and sometimes past my parents tolerance. So I liked to argue my point. And if I hadn't been beat down, my last word was, "it's not fair." And "fair" is still my favorite four letter word. Story_ID: 4957 Speaker 1: What was the young Augusta Clark like? Speaker 2: I was very popular in school. School work came easily to me. Teachers liked me. Fellow students liked me. I did not go through a period of self-doubt. In fact, I didn't know teens had self-doubt (chuckle) until I was in my thirties. It wasn't--it didn't characterize my group. We didn't go through periods of self-doubt. If I had come home one day and told my father "I was trying to find myself." I would have found myself getting up from under something. "What are you talking about? How did you get lost?" I mean he just didn't--that concept would not compute with him. So I was a confident teenager, responsible, respectful. A little bit brinksmanship oriented. I'd always push it as far as I could, but--I liked praise. So I did those things calculated to get me praise. I mean it's why I'm an elected official. I like praise. Story_ID: 4958 Speaker 1: I grew up, I'm the oldest of four girls, and I often sometimes felt sorry for my father, who--you know, he's a quiet man. But he's a man in his own right. But I want to ask about what that whole--you know, because your father had all girls. Speaker 2: Daddy [Harrison Alexander] said, "the hardest thing about being the only man in our family was trying to get some quiet bathroom time." He said--we'd all be outside playing and he'd go into the bathroom with the newspaper and light up a cigarette. And a parade would line up outside the door. He said "I can't believe that you came in for the express purpose of disturbing me." We had one bathroom. So he would have to vacate it. And we were always dancing and it was the greatest urgency. He would come out cursing and spitting "can't believe it!" But he was always proud of us. He was always very protective of us. Guys that we would have loved to have some kind of a relationship with was scared of my daddy. "Don't even speak to my girls!" Story_ID: 4959 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Ms. Doherty was my fourth grade teacher. We didn't have--we didn't grow up with nicknames. My parents called me Augusta. But Ms. Doherty called me "Gusty." And she always said, "you could do anything you want to do--you talk too much, if you didn't talk so much, you could do anything you wanted to do." And as I went through high school and college, and graduate school and law school, Ms. Doherty sent me my first briefcase when I graduated law school with a note. "We're not at all surprised." So that kind of community support that comes in a small town. That, that I've always been the beneficiary of. Speaker 1: Now that's what I wondered. How small the town [Fairmont, West Virginia] was? And what was--. Speaker 2: 23,105 in the 1950 census. Speaker 1: So what was--what was the community like? Can you just describe that? Speaker 2: Totally black and totally white. We went to segregated schools, we lived in segregated communities where there might be one or two black families on your block. There might be one or two white families on your block, but it might be one or two black families over on theirs. But by and large, there were black communities and white communities, black churches and white churches, black schools and white schools. But there was not conflict. We didn't have racial fights and things. We didn't interact with each other at all. We were two parallel lines. We could have gone on forever maybe. Speaker 1: So you had no interaction with white society? Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no). I had never sat in a classroom with white students until I went to graduate school at Drexel [University] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: So your--but your father [Harrison Alexander] in the mills though, he's interacting right? Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the thing about the coal mines, fifteen minutes in the coal mine and everybody is black. Okay? (Laughs) Speaker 1: See I'm from--my--actually part of my family settled in (unclear) and I grew up. Speaker 2: Excuse me for that coughing. Speaker 1: My father's from a small coal mining town in Pennsylvania, he worked in a steel mill. Speaker 2: Okay. And coal mines feeds steel mills. And in West Virginia the same owner might own both the mill and the coal mines like Consolidated Steel [Corporation]. Okay, Bethlehem Steel [Corporation]. My father worked for both of them. Story_ID: 4960 Speaker 1: You were always a good student. Did--now were you was there elementary school and then junior high or high school? Speaker 2: One school. We went to the Dunbar School [Fairmont, West Virginia] in the first grade. We didn't have kindergarten. And you stayed in that school until the twelfth grade. It was a brick school with marble hallways and gymnasiums and bands. But it was one school for the entire county. And black students from outlying communities were bussed in, past white schools, to this one black school. Now, in the counties they had elementary schools through eighth grade. But from ninth grade on, there were no senior high schools in the counties for black children. So senior high school kids were bused in, into Fairmont [West Virginia] to Dunbar. Story_ID: 4961 Speaker 1: Our schools did not have the best and the--and sometimes they didn't even have adequate equipment. When we did the biology lab, we didn't each have a frog. Five or seven or eight kids would cluster around. One person who had one specimen of a frog. We didn't each have an earthworm looking for those ten hearts. One person had one earthworm, one scalpel. And when we were in physics, where the most exotic piece of equipment was a slide rheostat, which is a dimmer, a light switch dimmer. We were told that when these--let's say it was a chemistry lab and we had some cracked beakers and one Bunsen burner that worked. We were told "if you mixed these chemicals it would give you this reaction and this smell and this sound." We actually saw, heard and smelled the exhibits. Because our teachers told it to us in such detail knowing that we had to experience it as though we had, had the example. And don't tell me you can't, you can't smell sulfuric acid without smelling sulfuric acid. First of all he got to tell you what it smells like. "Have you ever smelled a rotten egg? Well that's--can you smell it here? When we put this and this." They, as I said, failure was not an option. We were always being prepared to compete with the student who was not in our classroom. All my life I heard this sound--(makes slapping sounds with her hands). And that was the white student who was gaining on me. I was not running behind the white student. I was out in front and they were gaining on me. That's how my teachers psyched me out. But isn't that a nice little twist? It takes all that inferiority bit out of it doesn't it? Speaker 2: Now do you think--I have a--I usually ask my philosophical questions later. But you know, historically, you know, you say okay, "separate but equal." And there's been always that perception that black education was inferior. But yet when I talk to people and I hear their stories. You know, and you think, you know, Black English always existed. When you hear these stories you see that, you know, people were doing okay. Speaker 1: Black education was inferior as to materials, buildings, supplies. Not in children's ability to receive, and not in teachers' ability, ability and willingness to teach. I mean, have you heard teachers talk about teaching eight classes in one classroom? And you had three over here and two over here? The story of the black teacher hasn't been told yet. And unfortunately it's getting corrupted. Because it now looks like black teachers do not now, nor have they ever cared. That is clearly not the truth. Most of us would have nothing to brag about if we hadn't had teachers who looked in us and saw successful adults, out of those little snotty nose, nappy head, ashy-legged children. Story_ID: 4962 Speaker 1: In high school, were you involved in any activities? Or were things centered around the church? Or was it? Speaker 2: Well, things were centered around the school. So we were in 4-H Club [youth organization], Girl Scouts [of the United States of America] and those things were generally headed by teachers who volunteered these extracurricular activities. We were involved in the church. But the school was the major institution in our community. Speaker 1: Where you--yhen you graduated was it assumed you were going to go on to school? Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By the time I graduated, not only was it assumed that I was going, it was assumed that I was going to West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia, now West Virginia State University]. That I would live in Dawson Hall. Because I was the fifth of the Alexander girls to graduate high school. By then they had set a standard. I was going to West Virginia State, I was going to live in Dawson Hall, I was going to be an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha, black sorority]. Speaker 1: Now was that your determination? Or was it--did you ever rebel against it? Or was it something you wanted? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. I mean--I think they also assumed I was going to be a teacher. The one thing I didn't do was train to be a teacher. But yeah, I went to West Virginia State, I lived in Dawson Hall, I'm an AKA. But instead of being an education major, I was a business administration major. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about what you--what were your thoughts about what you wanted to do were gonna do? Speaker 2: From about the ninth grade, I wanted to be a lawyer. But I'd never seen a lawyer; I'd never spoken to one. I wanted to be a lawyer because during Negro history week I had read about a woman from Pennsylvania, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] whose name was Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. Who was the first black woman admitted to practice in the State of Pennsylvania. Her appeal to me was that her last name was Alexander. So across the mountains and across the years, her life motivated me. Through high school and through college I played with this pretty notion, but didn't know how to do it. When I went to graduate school and went to library school. I would have gone to library school--I mean to law school--if I'd known how to do it. Still didn't know any. But I couldn't get the picture out of my head. Story_ID: 4963 Speaker 1: What year is it when you graduate from West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia, now West Virginia State University]? Speaker 2: January of 1954. Speaker 1: That's the year of 'Brown v. Board [of Education of Topeka, Kansas,' 1954]? Speaker 2: I come out in January, 'Brown v. Board' gets settled May 17th. Speaker 1: And what--what were your thoughts then? You know, because you, you--it says you worked as a girl Friday for 'Color' magazine. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes I did. Speaker 1: And what, what was that all--? Speaker 2: 'Color' magazine was a pictorial magazine that predated 'Ebony' [magazine]. It was the big size of old 'Life' magazine. If you can remember what the original 'Life' magazine looked like. Maybe what's that? 14 by 16 or 18 [inches]. Big color pictures. Well, when I came out of college that's the job I accepted. Mr. Wells, who was the publisher, was moving the headquarters from Charleston, West Virginia to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And that was an excitement and inducement for me to come. He offered me--but never fully paid--the grand total of $2,400 a year. And so I came. Speaker 1: And now how did you find out about him? You said--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, he was at West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he recruited me. I had graduated with honors in business administration. And he recruited me. Speaker 1: And this is pretty inventive back then when you think about it. What he was doing. And where had he gotten the sort of brainstorm or--. Speaker 2: Mr. Wells was perhaps--he really should have been on Madison Avenue [New York, New York]. He was an idea man. He didn't have much patience for the detail of getting it done and he didn't have the money to get it done. But the man was brilliant in ideas. So he had this idea that there was a place for a black pictorial magazine. But he couldn't get bring it out every month on time. Because he couldn't get advertising. And then he couldn't cover his publishing costs. When he moved to Philadelphia, they ran him out of business because the distributors of magazines, who were union, wouldn't carry him and wouldn't let him use scabs to distribute it. So they purposely ran him out of business. Speaker 1: So who was he selling advertising to at that time? Speaker 2: Hairdressers and High John the Conqueror Root Man [rejuvenation product] and Dixie Peach hair products, choir robe manufacturers. I mean people who worked in and on the black community. But they needed a national market in order for him to be most successful. And most of these people served a local market. But he would--persuaded them that people would come from far and near to buy their product if they bought an ad in his magazine. And I don't think he was a charlatan. He was a dreamer. Speaker 1: So what things did--how long did you work for him? Speaker 2: About sixteen to seventeen months before the magazine just went belly up. Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned from that? Speaker 2: Follow your dreams 'cause it doesn't make any difference how long they last. If you ever send your balloon up, that's what flying is. And Mr. Wells believed in every one of his schemes. And none of them were harebrained in of and by themselves. What made them not work and made them laughable 'cause he couldn't fund them. That was a function of racism. If he'd had access to the market, given the quality of his ideas, he would have been as wealthy as [John H.] Johnson [publisher]. And he predated Johnson. Story_ID: 4964 Speaker 1: Coming to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--first you know, country people are afraid of the city. Oh, we didn't know what to expect. In small towns everybody speaks to everybody. "Hello, how are you? Hello, nice day isn't it?" I mean you--just a little chatter off. And if you passed a puppy, you say, "hello little puppy." I mean you dignify life and you recognize life. In the city, people pride themselves on not speaking to each other. So they'll sit opposite each other like you and I sitting opposite each other right now on a trolley. And the trolley's rocking us like this. And we're purposely looking at a point beyond your ear or above your head so as not to get eye contact. Well, poor dumb me I was "hello, hello." And I still speak to people. Been here forty years and I haven't learn I'm not to speak to people. It's a foolish thing not to speak to people. So here I was in this town having my old habits of speaking to people, and still being afraid of them from all the stories I had heard. But I knew that I had to succeed. And when that $100 got slim, I walked around trying to get a job. And people said, "but deary can you type?" And I said, "yes, but I have a business degree. And I've had accounting through cost. And I've had tested measurements in advertising and statistics. I'm ready to be a management trainee. " And they said, "and how good is your shorthand?" And when that $100 was getting perilously low, my choices were take a clerical job or take a Greyhound bus back to Fairmont [West Virginia]. I took a clerical job working for the City of Philadelphia. I passed an exam and I was on two registers. One was the water department and the other was the library. I wasn't interested in either one. But as between water and libraries, I was more interested in books. So I went to work for the Free Library [of Philadelphia] and ended up as the secretary to the deputy director. I often wondered though if I'd gone to water if I'd been a meter reader. I just don't know. My boss was a very sincere woman from Iowa, Helen Hutchinson, who talked me into going to library school. She said, "you don't want to be a secretary." I said, "naw I don't want to be a secretary. I want to be--." She said, "what--the only way you can go up in this structure is to train yourself in library science." And so I went to Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and took a Master's [degree] in Library Science. Story_ID: 4965 Speaker 1: So what did you find appealing about library science? Was it--it's not an area--you had dreamed of really being a lawyer. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) a lawyer. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I still had law in the back of my head. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But library science is orderly, okay. The whole Dewey [Decimal System, library classification system] classification thing. It's orderly. And the ability to organize, store and retrieve information is still a valuable skill. We do it in computers now, but that's what Dewey was trying to do with that decimal system. And I was a reference librarian. So, bringing high school students and books together, answering reference questions. Very satisfying. Very, very satisfying profession. Didn't pay any money, but it was a satisfying profession. Speaker 1: And you worked in that, in that--as a librarian how long? Speaker 2: A dozen years. I worked in the public library [Free Library of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for five or six years. Then when my second child [Adrienne Clark-Mitchell] was born I was working for the federal government as an engineering librarian, later as a medical librarian. And then there came an opportunity to go to work for General Electric [Company, GE], where I was part of a three person team that designed an online management information system. We profiled the outstanding professionals and searched the literature in advance of their knowing that it existed, to keep them always abreast in their subject matter. It was a wonderful application of library and information systems. But then when times got hard and contracts got canceled, GE disbanded the unit and we got laid off. But it was fun. Speaker 1: What do you think that whole experience--I mean you know, you said you liked it because it was orderly, but I'm wondering what those twelve year--as you know--what did you learn? What, you know, what do you think you gained out of that whole work experience? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I learned was to value myself and my contribution in any job. And that if you don't value yourself, your bosses will move you around like a chess pawn, and never tell you of the high quality work you're doing. For instance, my job was to set up young adult collections in branches. I thought I was setting it up for myself. As soon as I got one, all the chaos out and set up the contacts with the communities and the schools and bought the books and that. And it was running almost like an automatic, then somebody would be assigned to that job. And I would be sent somewhere else to set up another one. I thought "what's wrong with this picture?" About the fourth time I realized that I was doing the grunt work and somebody else was enjoying an organized system that I had put together. I was very offended by it and that caused me to leave the [Free] Library [of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I didn't think I could ever stay long enough to have my work respected. And I would not have my work disrespected. As soon as I figured it out--I'm slow--but as soon as I got it figured out, I was out of there. Speaker 1: And do you--you know, earlier I was telling you that I'd talked to Robert Wentworth [librarian] and then you mentioned another guy who'd been-- Speaker 2: E.J. Josie [librarian]. Speaker 1: But what--are there a lot of African Americans in the field of library science? Speaker 2: No there are not, there are not. Since the--since the '50s [1950s] it has required a Master's degree in Library Science. And in the '50s [1950s] there were only thirteen schools in the country. Now there are many more now, and particularly as information science has been expanded to mean computers and advanced technological innovations, that library science--a degree has been much more respected. But no, there are not a lot of minorities in it. Speaker 1: And what do you think of it as a career check? I know it's something you opted out. But do you think I mean--. Speaker 2: It's satisfying. The liberal arts part of you will always love it. The bringing materials and the inquiring mind together. You know how satisfying that has to be. If I had not had law pacing me, I might have been satisfied with it forever. Because I can tell you stories of interesting encounters that have lasted me forty years. Story_ID: 4966 Speaker 1: At one time I was a librarian in an inner city, run down community, where people weren't expecting very much from the kids who attended the local high school. And as senior English teachers are want to do, they had an assignment that required them to do a term paper. They needed X number of magazine references and X number of books, and X number of newspapers and, you know, whatever that little formula is. A kid came in one day and said, "Miss, do you got any books on trees?" And I said, "yes. What trees?" He said, "I don't care which trees." "Well, why do you want books on trees?" "Gotta do the senior paper." "Well, if you don't know or care about trees, why are you writing about trees?" "'Cause if you got a lot of books, I won't have a hard time." So I said "well, let me answer--yes I do have books about trees. And if you insist, I'm gonna give them to you--but let's--let me walk you through something. What do you really silly dilly like?" He said "cars." In those days kids and their put together cars were called hot rods. And he said, "I really like hot rods." I said "you know we got books about hot rods?" He said "you right? Do you have books about--?" And I showed him. And I took him to the 621s [section of library under Dewey Decimal System] and let him see all the books about all the cars that he cared about. Those that were so high priced that he could never afford, and those that you could put together from a junk yard. He got all into it. We helped write the working bibliography. And to make a long story short, he wrote the best paper he ever wrote in his life. And he got an A. He came bounding up the steps--the library had cathedral steps--came bounding up the steps. "Ms. Alexander! Ms. Alexander! I made an A," he said. I said, "in what?" He said "on that term paper." I said, "who made an A?" He said (puts hand to forehead) "we made an A." But, you know, I think I changed his life. But he could have written about trees. Now how can you change a person's life who doesn't care about trees by telling them how many different varieties of evergreens there are in the Pennsylvania forest? Goodness gracious! That's as bad as watching your refrigerator defrost. Just boring. (Laughs). Story_ID: 4967 Speaker 1: So you decide, you decide after you said, how many years? Twelve you said. So after that, you decide that this is, you know, you're seeking--you want to get out of it [field of library science]. What's, what's the motivation? Speaker 2: Well, I think I got laid off probably from GE [General Electric Company, energy corporation]. Yeah--got laid off from GE. I'm working for Auerbach [Corporation, consulting corporation] as a consultant and we're evaluating community legal services around the country. And it's my job to take a team into the field. Administer a pattern interview, draw some conclusions, write the report. I had done that. I had just come from West Virginia, as a matter of fact. I'm sitting with my feet on my desk snatching innocence from the gallows with the sheer virtuosity of my legal reasoning, when I hear a voice as clearly as I hear myself talking. Say, "Clark you know you really ought to do something about that or stop telling those pretty stories. You're never gonna be a lawyer. You're never gonna do anything unless you do something different than talk." I swung my feet down off my desk and called Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. It was the Monday after Mother's Day. And announced to them that I was interested in attending their law school. He said, "this year!" I said, "yes." He said, "Miss, the people who are going to attend this law school have been notified that they're accepted." He asked about LSATs [Law School Admissions Test]. "No LSATs. This is my first move." He let me come in and talk. I told him my story. And this was in the days of special admissions programs for minorities and women. Long story short, I got admitted to Temple Law School not because I had low LSATs, but because I had no LSATs. Speaker 1: (Laughs). Okay, okay. Okay. But you did it on the basis of an interview? Speaker 2: And life's experiences. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did take the LSAT and I did--I do standardized test well--I did test well. Story_ID: 4968 Speaker 1: So now I'm in law school [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I want to know how that experience is. Because here you dreamed--. Speaker 1: I'm working forty hours a week. I've got two small children, the youngest of which is in the first grade, the oldest was in the fourth grade, okay. I'm going to law school twenty hours a week and I'm busy as a one armed paper hanger with fleas. But I brought this on myself. All those thirteen years of procrastination. I'm thirteen years out of graduate school. So here I am doing property [law] and contract [law] and ad pro [administrative procedure] and civ pro [civil procedure]. And I got a crazy job that is kicking my back out. I can't turn either one of them loose. At one point my grades got so low that I got bounced out. My mother-in-law alternated diabetic coma and heart and my housekeeper got sick and ultimately died. All in that first year of law school. I was devastated. Speaker 2: How old were your kids then? Speaker 1: Mark [Clark, Clark's son] was in the fourth grade and Adrienne [Clark-Mitchell, Clark's daughter] was in the first grade. And I have no relatives in this town [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: And you were--were you a single parent at this time? Speaker 1: No. No, no. I couldn't have, I couldn't have graduated law school, if it hadn't been for Leroy [Clark, Clark's husband]. Because he took on so many of the duties that were typically mine. Homework and meals and shopping and all of that. And let me go to school and work. And I couldn't take my salary out of my family's lifestyle. So I had to work. And it wasn't easy. Speaker 2: And so he--was he--was there any resistance like "why are you doing this, Augusta?" Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Go ahead, one more question. Speaker 1: Any of this like "Why are you doing this?" Speaker 2: No. When I was so devastated over the poor grades and actually being bounced out of law school because of poor grades he said to me "you don't have to be a lawyer for us to love you." And it was the most enabling and comforting thing. I sat in the classrooms. But clearly Leroy Clark helped earn the law degree. And, you know, I am not ashamed to say that. I could not have done it without him. Story_ID: 4969 Speaker 1: Well people said things like--did I tell you the story about--I was thirty-nine when I went to law school [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I went in the evening, it was a four year program. They said "you're gonna to be forty-three years old when you get out of law school." I said "hell, I'm gonna be forty-three years old in four years no matter what I do. It's not like if I don't go I'll be twenty-three. I'm going to be forty-three years in four years." And I could never figure what they were trying to do when they told me that. Did you want me to hurry up? What can I do with that piece of information, that doggerel, that little piece of arithmetic? What can I do with that? I used it again to define who and what Augusta Clark is. "I'm gonna be a forty-three-year-old lawyer. That's what I'm gonna be. "I'm gonna be a forty-three-year-old day one lawyer. That's what I'm trying to be." Speaker 2: So because it was a challenging, you know, experience, and it's your first time really, you've excelled. What do you think that taught you? What did it--did it cause you to question--. Speaker 1: It did. It did. For the very first time, I wondered if I was a fraud all those years, that I'd never really been tested with anything hard. It really shook my confidence for a while, for the very first time in my life, not doing well first year of law school, almost rocked my world. And my husband [Leroy Clark] was really, very, very good for me. Because sometimes I'd be in tears, and he'd say--he always calls me Boobie--"but Boobie, you don't have to be a lawyer for us to love you. If you're a lawyer we'd love you but, you don't have to be one." And so that was the part that I most appreciated about him. I take a lot of crap off him now for how good he was then, when my world was so fragile, and he was so supportive. Speaker 2: That's beautiful. That's a wonderful story. So I would keep him. Speaker 1: Oh I plan to. We just did forty years, just finished forty years. Speaker 2: So, okay. So you finished, and you were--where did you say you were working? I know you said you were working and going to school. But where were you working? Speaker 1: At this time I'm working for [Philadelphia] Model Cities [Program, community improvement program]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, and the neighborhood involvement piece of it. Tacky, you know how neighborhood programs can be. They're funded, but the boss of them can be dictatorial. She made me run neighborhood elections at the time of my finals [exams]. That's how I got in trouble. I almost busted out of law school over a federally funded program. And then I got crazy. "I'm not gonna let her tell me what to do," you know, instead of giving it up (laughs), I'm holding on to it like a dog with a sock. And got myself into such trouble that I actually got bounced out of law school and had to petition for readmit. And it was very, very ego bruising. But, I learned that there's life on the other side of a giant ego bruise and that where you heal, you're stronger than before. I didn't know that, but where you heal, you're stronger than before. Story_ID: 4970 Speaker 1: So, what are you wanting to do at this time? You're working, and you know, community--had you gotten--you hadn't gotten politically active. Speaker 2: No I hadn't. As a matter of fact, I didn't get involved in politics until I was waiting for bar [exam] results and my pastor and buddy [U.S. Representative] Bill [William H.] Gray [III] ran for [U.S.] Congress the first time. There's a period in your life of a would-be lawyer when you can't go back and do what you used to do and you can't go forward and practice law. So you're stuck waiting on bar results, and that's where I was. And he asked if I would come and help with this campaign, and I did. And it was my job to schedule him. And I had accepted an invitation for him to go to group A. And after that was all tacked down, there came an invitation from group B which was imminently more important to him than A. So I then used to send him to B and I covered A for him. And I answered questions on my candidate's behalf and advanced his positions and answered questions. And some lady way in the back said "why have you not run for office in your own name?" I don't know who she was and it was the first time anybody ever said it and I certainly never thought of myself in elective office. But it put a little germ back there. And I thought, "hmm, that's not a bad idea, maybe--." And Bill Gray lost that election by 339 votes, we were furious. So in 1978 when he ran again we were loaded for bear. He won with the largest plurality of anybody in his class, in his congressional class. That was the same year that [Mayor] Frank Rizzo had attempted to succeed himself by changing the charter. And there had grown throughout the city a loosely held coalition of anti-charter change people and these people who won were beginning to feel that they could make a difference--they could snatch Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] kicking and screaming into the Twentieth Century. And so, after that election in 1979, which is the City Council and the mayor's race, large numbers of us nominated ourselves as instruments of social change or we ran for office. 101 of us ran for the five at large seats including the five incumbents. And I was in that group. I stood myself in front of a mirror and described what I saw. What I saw was a person who was black and female. What I knew about her was that she was a lawyer, a librarian. She went to a large Baptist church, she lived in north Philadelphia. And every--she was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha, black sorority]. Every time I named a group, I asked myself if half plus one of those people would vote for me if they knew I was running. And I set out to answer the question "who and what is Augusta Clark? And what would the electorate get if Gussy were elected?" Speaker 1: And so when you asked yourself that question, what did--what did you hear or what came out of that? Speaker 2: A resounding "yes, run, run for us. We need a person who has integrity, a person who will work hard, who can follow issues and who will not sell out." Story_ID: 4971 Speaker 1: I have a question for you though. You sort of glossed over this but how did you even know [U.S. Representative] Bill [William H.] Gray [III]? I mean, you-- Speaker 2: I've always known him. When I came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] back in 1954, my boss [at 'Color' magazine] Mr. Wells introduced me to Bill Gray's daddy who was the pastor of Bright Hope [Baptist] Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he said--Rev. Gray said to me--we called him Doctor Gray--Dr. Gray said "well gal, have you got so much education that you forgot the Lord?" I said, "no, Sir." "Well do you go to church?" "Yes, Sir." "What church do you attend?" "First Africa." "Oh, come up to Bright Hope, I got a whole church full of Africa." Well, he was the first person I met in Philadelphia who had anything like a sense of humor. That made me go to Bright Hope. And it he's always been good for me. Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned out of that campaigning? And you went through two campaigns with him. What lessons? Because politics is it's own sort of animal. Speaker 2: Well first of all we learned that there's a lot of difference between being a good candidate and knowing the rules of campaigning. We were so green and so trusting. So willing to believe that all we had to do was turn out enough votes and we could win. We didn't know the election could be stolen, that we could lose, that we could win the campaign and lose the count, we didn't know that. We knew it the next time around. We also learned something about ourselves. That--don't send just enough, overwhelm it. So the next election instead of having two people on a polling place, we had seventeen people on some polling places. Because the first time if we were inside they were stealing outside. If we were outside, they were stealing inside, 'cause we didn't have the people. We had so many people the second time around, chicanery wasn't even possible. And just because you didn't win didn't mean that you weren't right. We were right in 1976. Speaker 1: Describe the Philadelphia--I mean I--he was running for federal offices? Speaker 2: For Congress, United States Congressman. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 2: Second congressional district. Speaker 1: Right. So--now when he won did you take a position in--you said--I know you said you looked in the mirror. But did you-- Speaker 2: No, no I didn't take a position in his campaign. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right his--. Speaker 2: I ran the next year myself. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He won in '78 [1978]. I ran in 1979 and won. He was inaugurated in '79 [1979]. I was inaugurated in 1980. Speaker 1: Now that doesn't happen very often. Speaker 2: He had, he had put together the dynamite team. And he had debriefed it once by winning--once by losing and then by winning on his own. So when he put that team on the floor for me, I mean they--there was no way you could take anything from 'em. They were revved up, you know, energized, and looking for the next victory. I was a good candidate. You know, I would go everywhere. Early in the morning, my fingers freezing, standing on subway platforms giving out literature. Standing at train stations. I would go to bars, I would go to churches, union halls. Wherever two or three people gathered, I went and I told my story. I told my story. Story_ID: 4972 Speaker 1: Describe the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] of that time period. What was it--. Speaker 2: Government had a serious disconnect from the people. Eight out of ten Philadelphians could not name two of the seventeen members of City Council. 'Cause it was a system that didn't mean anything to them. I ran on the theory on the slogan "Augusta--breath of fresh air." What I said was "I won't have all the answers, but I will raise the right questions. And I will open the windows and doors of this old stuffy all-boys club and let you see who represents you. Then you tell--then you can know whether you got what you deserve." And I chaired the education committee. A very, very disrespected function in Philadelphia. No week passed that there wasn't some scandalous story. Warehouses full of rotting fruit, warehouses full of books that were never distributed. The superintendent uses employees to fix his sunporch on his summer home down at the seashore. I mean just on and on and on. And I said that "a community that permits its young people to die on the vie can never be a world class city." Okay. So don't talk to me about technology, don't talk to me about hospitality, don't talk to me about any of that. If you don't care about your children, why should I believe anything else you say? And I don't care what color these children are. They are your children. Speaker 1: So now--. Speaker 2: It was a story that resonated. Story_ID: 4973 Speaker 1: When you were campaigning, who was campaigning against you? And how--what's your structure there? You have how many seats in the--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We have seventeen members of [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] City Council, ten are a district. So the city is divided into roughly ten equal districts. Then there are seven at large seats of which two by charter must be held by the minority party, which in Philadelphia means Republicans. Or put another way, the Republicans have two affirmative action set-aside seats on the Philadelphia City Council. Because if one Republican gets two votes and the other one gets three, they win. The sixth and seventh Democrat might have a million and a million and one votes apiece. They could not beat the two and three votes of the Republicans, because those seats are not in contention. So I was one of the five at-large Democrats added to the two Republicans plus the ten district seats. And that makes up our seventeen member council, and the members of council then, among themselves, vote for the officers. And the officers of council are the president, the majority leader, the majority whip and the minority whip. Those are the officers. Only Democrats vote for majority leader and majority whip. And only Republicans vote for minority whip. Story_ID: 4974 Speaker 1: My house burned January of 1978, okay. I didn't have two consecutive inches of wiring left. So, the accumulations of a twenty year marriage are a two-story pile of rubble in the front and back of my house, okay. I am devastated. Speaker 2: How did that fire happen? Speaker 1: The fire marshal theorizes that an instant on color television set activated a faulty wire in the wall. And we were out of town and it smoldered all day until it broke through the roof. So the flames were through the roof. By that time the house was fully engaged. So, you know, I didn't have time to be running no political campaign. I don't have any furniture, I had no clothes. I got no carpet, no windows, no doors, no roof. I got much stuff to do and I'm grossly under-insured. Speaker 2: Now I don't want you to lean over too much--. Speaker 1: But my friends said to me that "this is the opportunity." Okay. "Now is the time to run." Speaker 2: And they figured "now was the time to run" because what? Speaker 1: Because we had just beat [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Mayor] Frank Rizzo in the charter change issue. And [U.S. Representative] Bill [William H.] Gray's [III] group is revved up and ready to go, nobody can beat them, okay. What they need is a fresh face of a serious candidate. And they--this they see as me. Speaker 2: And so did--it didn't take much to talk you into it then? Speaker 1: No. I was interested in the challenge. But having your house in the mess that mine was in--I was out of that house for seven months. So I was in a I mean, I just really--it was a gross inconvenience for me. Speaker 2: What was your, what was your husband [Leroy Clark] and your family saying at this time? Speaker 1: "I wish we could put it off. But if we can't put it off I guess we gotta go with this." Story_ID: 4975 Speaker 1: How did you feel the night you were elected? Speaker 2: Oh my Lord. I had so many emotions. First of all you gotta--if you're running for at-large [seat on the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania City Council], not running against a person, you're running to be in the top five, okay. Now there are five incumbents, okay. But all the seats are vacant. So, at midnight I was firmly in sixth place. Nice but no cigar. Then we started to turn on each other, "told you all those nights when you should have been out there. How about those days when you slept in and you were supposed to go out and shake hands and--." You know how everybody is looking for some scapegoat for the loss. And the staff was having this quivering lip. Everybody wanting to cry. 'Cause we--if what we had done didn't win, we don't know how to win. And that's what I'm saying to the guys. "Let's don't turn each other on each other and shred each other. You know I went as many places as I could consistent with having some health left to serve. So why would you turn on me and say, 'if I had.' Do you think I sabotaged it? Of course I did all I could to win. None of you held back. You did all you could to make me win. If this doesn't win, we don't know how to win. But don't--let's don't do this to each other." There was still that little undercurrent. And my brother came bounding out of the house making a happy but unintelligible sound. Something like "gollump, gollop." "What?" "Gollump, gollop!" "What Ronnie, what are you saying?" We never did figure out what he was saying. The man from across the street said, "Gussy is in fifth place." Well, people who were so tired, they couldn't put left foot in front of right foot were seen clicking their heels and hugging and swinging people around. 'Cause that means we've won. Gotta be in the top five. By 4:00 [AM] we're in fourth place. Hot dog! It's coming our way now. 'Cause if you're in fourth place, no matter what happens, the change is going to be at the fifth spot. It's not gonna be at the fourth spot, okay. I'm in. We went to bed about 4:30 [AM]. We were worn out but happy campers. In the general election I came in number one. Endorsed by every newspaper, every radio and every TV station that did endorsements. Story_ID: 4976 Speaker 1: I don't think anybody, including me, had any realistic view of what it would be like to serve [on the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania City Council]. Certainly, the old council members had no clue of what it was like. We had a very dictatorial President of City Council [George X. Schwartz] who later got caught up in Abscam [1980 political scandal in which federal and local politicians were convicted of accepting bribes] and went to prison. But in preparation for inauguration, we were in the caucus room revising the rules of council. Now like every lawyer in the world, I was making marginal notes on a document. The president looked up and said, "oh and Gussy you take the minutes." "Oh now hold up Holmes. Who me? Oh, no, no. I didn't come down here to take minutes. I came down here to make minutes. And while we're at it, let me give you some other assignments you must not give me. I don't take minutes. I don't make Xerox [copy machine] copies. I don't make coffee, and I don't do windows." Well, was he about sick of me. I haven't even gotten inaugurated and the president hates me. But he didn't understand what a serious faux pas it was to ask the only black woman in the room to do a ministerial act. There's five other lawyers in the room, why you he pick me to do the hard work? Now I'm brand new, I'm trying to learn how the game is played, you know you can't be in the game and taking the minutes too. And he never thought I'd say "no." See, now he--I had made the president hate me. Now it's on. Then Abscam broke. See. You know that story where-- Speaker 2: Was that, was that on--was it--no. What was Abscam? Speaker 1: Abscam had some [U.S.] Congresspeople and some City Council members at the--in Pennsylvania and in other states [New Jersey]--who got duped by a [FBI agent posing as a] phony sheik. And then the sheik taped them taking money. Okay, in a hotel room in Rittenhouse Square in Philadelphia. And at one point the president is heard to say, in response to "what about the new members of council." "Oh you don't have to worry about them," he says. "Tell me when your birthday is, I'll give them to you for a birthday present." I said, "damn my people were slaves. But they weren't given away. They were at least sold. You know, how you just gonna diss me like that Mr. Pres? That's two." So when he gets accused in Abscam I can go any way with it. I can say, "well, he certainly has the right to the presumption of innocence. This is America. This is nothing more than an accusation." Now I would have been safe there, unless, and until he was convicted of something, wouldn't I? I was still stinging. I said, "I believe that the president has Caesar's wife's responsibility to be above even the suspicion of wrong doing. And he has harmed us by causing us to wrinkle our brow and wonder what he does when we're not watching him." Oh, did he hate me (laughs). The same thing that makes you laugh will make you cry. He did me, I did him back. And that's when he found out something about me--I can't be threatened and I can't be bribed. Story_ID: 4977 Speaker 1: This was a whole new breed of politics. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were a new breed of politician. We had selected ourselves. We had not been picked by the [Democratic] party. As a matter of fact, we had beaten the party, showing independent strength. So we beat the party in the primary and then they adopted us in the general. But in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the election is the primary. Speaker 1: Now you were--I was asking how many blacks and, you know, were, you know, in the [Philadelphia City] Council and you said there were three. Speaker 2: In 1980 in my class there were three new black members, myself, [Mayor] John Street, John Anderson [councilman] who later died. We joined Joe Coleman [councilman] and Lu Blackwell [councilman] who were already on the council. So that's what, that's what five? Four men and one woman, me. Speaker 1: And were any of them other of them, were they independents as well? Speaker 2: All. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All. All of us three. Blackwell was independent, having beat the party before. And Joe Coleman--quasi. Speaker 1: But I guess what I'm trying to understand is the history of blacks in politics in Philadelphia. You know, what was the history? I mean here in Chicago [Illinois], you know, we have a very large machine. Most people had to be, you know, the--even like Mayor [Harold] Washington was really, you know, cut his teeth on machine politics. since that was the only way of getting in. And independent things have come out more, you know, around the time more recently. So--. Speaker 2: Well, prior to nineteen--the election of 1979, single individual and independent politicians had been able to get through, but you could really be certain that they couldn't be effective. You can't get anybody to second your motion, you see. You could make a speech, but call the question and ready to vote you getting ready to lose now. And it wasn't until the middle '90s [1990s] that we had the seniority and the numbers to chair the important committees and City Council and to elect President of City Council and the officers. Story_ID: 4978 Speaker 1: You served on the [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania City] Council twenty--was it twenty years? Speaker 2: Twenty years. Speaker 1: Twenty years. And what things stand out during that period? Speaker 2: Really, the growth of City Council as a legislative body in the mind and expectation of the electorate. Prior to that--there had always been city council, Philadelphia is 300 years old. Of course we've always had city council and a mayor. But it wasn't until our generation came that we held ourselves accountable to the people who elected us. We were known to them, praised by them, and punished by them and that's fair to me. Speaker 1: And you don't think that they--do you--there's another way of saying it is that they were growing service of course and held the politicians accountable? Speaker 2: Yes, but it went tandem and parallel 'til politicians let the public in on the game. The public doesn't know what to watch for. Well, sure they know how to catch you if you're stealing, but what about mis- mal- and nonfeasance, which is hard to say and certainly even harder to catch somebody at. What about the non-representation? And we taught people what to expect from government and I think that's our most lasting contribution. Speaker 1: Now you--were there any time periods, you know, during your twenty year career that were like down points or, you know. And then in the inverse I'd like to know what were your high points? Speaker 2: The longest dry period for me in government was [Mayor W.] Wilson Goode's term. And that was because we never forged a good working relationship between the mayor and city council. What should have been a good working relationship never happened. There were times when there was no shooting war but that's not the same as peace. We never had peace and prosperity. One of the things that [Mayor] John Street did when [Mayor] Ed Rendell [now Governor of Pennsylvania] won was to accept that olive branch that Ed Rendell offered him and they sat down and affirmatively promised to let nothing prevent them from representing the best interest of the city. Not personal likes or dislikes, ambition or anything else. And there was a real good chance for that to happen because Ed Rendell had financed and supported Julie Walker [politician] who was John Street's opponent and John had beat her. But he had every reason to be angry with Ed Rendell who had supported her. But what they both realized was that Philadelphians were sick to death of that squabbling between the mayor and city council. That nobody could win that and that it was in their own best interest to find a way to get along at least enough to do the public's business. And they did it magnificently which resulted in Ed Rendell being known as "America's Mayor" and his being able to support John Street to be his successor. And neither of those would have happened if they hadn't found a way to smoke that peace pipe eight years earlier. Story_ID: 4979 Speaker 1: I had asked what were the things that, were you know, were you--did you feel your greatest accomplishments [as a member of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania's City Council]? I mean, while I was reading the material it said that you were very supportive, that you were pro-choice, you had a reputation for that. I mean but I'm just wondering what things are you most proud of? Speaker 2: I'm most proud of an earned reputation for vigorous advocacy for public education at a time when people were finding--were desperately trying to find substitutes for public education. And while we have not solved all of the problems around public education, I think we've got Philadelphians focused on "it's here to stay." It is a system that has served this country well. Possibly public education and labor unions are directly responsible for making the middle class. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Yeah--. Speaker 2: Before it you were what your daddy was. If your daddy was poor, ignorant, unskilled, you will likely poor, ignorant and unskilled--at least one more generation of your family was going to be poor. But labor unions made it possible for workers to do an arm's-length deal with the boss. And education gave youngsters an opportunity to know more and do more than their daddies. Yes, bring me your tired, your poor. Speaker 1: That's an interesting characterization. I know that the labor movement was very--you know, has been very important in the black community. Though I have always, you know, since I've seen unions here in Chicago [Illinois], I've always thought of unions as, you know, negative and keeping minorities out. But still--. Speaker 2: But, like all things that have the capacity for good, if not controlled, that same good has the capacity for evil. Okay? Water's good but it'll drown you, fire is good but it'll burn you up--it must be controlled. And what has happened with respect to some labor unions is that they have not been controlled. And power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. And that's what has happened too often. Speaker 1: So, what was--well let me--what was your decision? I mean, was your decision after twenty years "it's time, I'm tired?" Speaker 2: Yeah. I looked at a body of work that satisfied me and I thought, "yep this is a good place to stop." I also came in on my own steam and was very insistent on going out on my own steam. I wanted to go out under my own conditions when I got ready. Story_ID: 4980 Speaker 1: People say I have a great reputation? For what? Speaker 2: Well, just that, you know, that you were, you were viewed as a doer. And, you know, someone who was sort of true to themselves, very outspoken but, you know, admired by a lot of people. And so my question is why do you think that was? Was it because you had this independent streak? Was it because, you know Speaker 1: I have a great respect for people. (Pause). I have no desire to be molded by anybody. You know, now you're a ball and when you get used to being a ball they flatten you out, (patting sound with hands), now you're a pancake. As soon as you get used to being a pancake they make you a--that's not me. I am what I am all day every day, so you can spend your time getting used to that fact, okay. I'm not a piece of clay for you or anybody else to mold. By the same token I take you as I find you. Looking always for the best in you. I would tell you the truth. Sometimes the truth ain't pretty, I don't have anything to do with that. I will tell you the truth. I wish to be held to whatever words I say to you. I will hang with or hang for anything that I say. Story_ID: 4981 Speaker 1: What were your views about Rizzo, Mayor [Frank] Rizzo? Speaker 2: I didn't ever work with him. He finished his term before I started mine. My view of him came from television and newspapers and I thought of him as a brutish police officer who wasn't very bright. People who knew him better than I said that he was a very loyal friend and that he got stuck in that big bad boy role and couldn't find a way out of it. I don't know which is the real Frank Rizzo, but I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when he stripped those young men naked on the street, and I saw him brutalize students at the school district. And I know he went to a meeting with the Queen of England with a nightstick stuck in his cummerbund. I mean, there are plenty of Frank Rizzo stories to tell. But he made people think of Philadelphia as a joke. And for that I am offended. Speaker 1: And [Mayor W.] Wilson Goode, you were saying that that was--you had mentioned that as a down point. So, why? Tell me that. Speaker 2: Wilson is a very bright man, Wharton [Business School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-trained, management by objective, a bean counter. Doesn't' know how to slap on the back and can't do small talk. And he doesn't have real good people skills. He never figured out a way to get along with the members of [the Philadelphia] City Council and forge a good working team. So we were always lined up on opposite sides of some imaginal line shooting at somebody, either shooting at or being shot at, which is foolish. Speaker 1: So, the whole thing that happened--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The MOVE [Philadelphia-based socio-political organization whose headquarters was bombed by Philadelphia police in 1985]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The MOVE [incident] was not intended by anybody. That's just one set of bad acts being followed by another and--you know, when the dominos started to tumble everything tumbled. But, Wilson never planned nor did Leo Brooks the [Philadelphia] Managing Director nor, I believe, did the police commissioner plan the bombing of MOVE. I think it was just a tragic set of bad coincidences. Now somebody planned the dropping of the incendiary device. But was none of the people in the highest levels of government who did. Nobody's been brought to justice for it, it is an absolute nightmare that refuses to go away. Speaker 1: Well, you know a lot of them--the thing that was, I guess--you know, people saw a black person doing this to other black people. But at the same time some people said "well the MOVE people were sort of out of their mind." Speaker 2: Well, the MOVE people were the least lovely people in the world, okay [MOVE members eschewed Western standards of living and grooming]. But having bad manners should not result in babies being dead. So one thing doesn't lead up to the other, and I won't be in the situation of justifying one with the other. But I will not impute to any of their motives which I never saw. And I was in government. I never saw any intent to have this happen. Story_ID: 4982 Speaker 1: What do you think makes a good politician? Speaker 2: I think politicians are first and foremost good communicators, people who will inform themselves on the issues, who will work hard, who are scrupulously honest, and who don't want to be rich. Who have found some way to be comfortable at a just above marginal, lifestyle. Story_ID: 4983 Speaker 1: So what is life now for Augusta Clark? I mean, you--you know, you got your dream of going to law school. The whole campaign thing was really very reflective of the early part of your life. How things can vary easily. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Probably it helped that you had that law school experience even dealing in a political environment. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You might have felt very attacked. So I ask--so where are you at this point in your life? Speaker 2: Well, I find myself at sixty-eight years of age [in 2000], dragging oxygen so that I can walk and talk. Working in my friend's cabinet and the mayor's [Mayor John Street] cabinet [as Secretary of Agencies, Boards and Commissions] trying to bring some order out of that, both quasi-governmental agencies that function in every city. Mine happened to run from A to Z from the art museum to the zoo. What they have in common is some public dollars but they are also very unique. They have never had any oversight. They come to government and ask for dollars, they go to city council and defend their budget request. Nobody ever asks them what they do with their dollars, they never have to account for them. And we work on the assumption that they must be doing something good because it's good to be in favor of them. I'm not going to say that they're not doing something good, but I couldn't prove it. At the end of my term I'm going to be able to prove that they've done something good. What I've asked them to do--and I called the CEO [Chief Executive Officer]s and the chairmen of the boards to the first meeting and I said "you're all so disparate. I don't know how to describe you and I guess you don't either. Let me describe me. Maybe I can do this fast by telling you what I'm not. I'm not John Street's hatchet boy, it's not going to be my job to close you down. But I'm also not Santa Claus so I do not have a bag of goodies which if you give me a sad story I'm gonna give you a pack of money. I'm not going to do that. Where your mission statement and view of what you do converges with what the mayor thinks you do, you don't have a problem. Where those two diverge you do have a problem, and my job is either to bring you in line with the mayor's view of what you ought to be or help you with your explanation so that the mayor changes his expectation of you. If you assume that all he knows he learns from me, then it would be wise for you to tell me all that you need me to know." And we just had a fabulous first meeting. We went around the table and I said "if you had fifteen minutes of the mayor's time, and resources were no object, what would you do? Tell me what you'd tell the mayor in fifteen minutes. But I want you to tell me in one, 'cause I haven't got fifteen minutes for each of you in this room." It was just fabulous. It went like electricity around the room as people got excited on how they were alike, and how they are "divinely unique" to use Susan Taylor's [magazine editor] expression. It was a wonderful meeting, and they had never thought of themselves as having anything in common with anybody else. And they certainly had never described themselves this way. And I'm looking forward to the mayor having a better hold on agencies, authorities, boards and commissions than any mayor has ever had. Story_ID: 4984 Speaker 1: What do you still want to accomplish? Speaker 2: Well I want to bring this rowdy robust group into some kind of conforming report group. I'm gonna write a book about what it's been like to be a black woman in elective office in a rust belt city at the end of the twentieth century. The joys and the tribulations because there's been some of both. And I guess that's it. I love to travel. I hope that my health continues to permit me to travel. I've not been to South Africa, I want to do that, I want to go do some more in South America, go back to Europe, go back to Asia. There's so much I want to do. Story_ID: 4985 Speaker 1: Your oxygen it's because--now how do you feel about that. Speaker 2: Well, I was very upset about it when I was first required to carry oxygen. I'm not a person who whines very much. But one day I was in a particularly whiny mood and I called up my pulmonologist and said to him "I hate this old machine. It makes me look and feel like a cripple. I hate it! I hate it!" He said "now Councilwoman, you know I love you and I know you want me to tell you that you're gonna grow out of it. Well, you're not. So here's the deal, you can carry your oxygen and live your life, or you can take your biggest chair up to your biggest window and watch other people live theirs." Pretty clear but I'd thought I'd take one more shot at him. I said "well, am I a candidate for a lung transplant?" He gave me a measured look and he said "Councilwoman, do you know anybody with a lung transplant?" I thought a while and at that time Governor [Robert Patrick] Casey was still living. He had had several organs transplanted and he read my mind. And he said, "Casey didn't have lung. He had kidney and heart." I admitted that I didn't know anybody. He said "I'm the expert. When they need it done on the East Coast, they call me." He said "you complain about carrying oxygen. What do you think the medicine load is to avoid rejecting a lung?" He said "the lung is the least effective of all of the implant programs. And the most successful patient is dead in five years." He said "but assuming we could solve all of that, and we might, we don't like to do it after sixty. Sixty-five is our absolute max and you're how old?" So I went home and gave my machine a name that's Suzybelle. So Suzybelle and I go merrily through airports and wherever we have to go. I give her a free ride and she gives me more air. Story_ID: 4986 Speaker 1: I want to know what you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want to be seen as a person who took her work but not herself seriously. I want to be seen as a professional who contributed to making Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] a good place to live and work and raise a family and visit. I want to be seen as the person who gave black elected officials a good name, as one who was effective and hard working, particularly women. I want to be seen as one who would not ever be seen as a mascot, a cheery cute little mascot, not me, not me. I want to be seen as a person who uses language well, who thinks through a situation, who never prattles. I can't stand blather. So I try very hard to have thought out what I'm going to say and then to stop talking after I stop communicating. Don't just keep [makes a noise like a typewriter]. I want to be known as a good mother, a good wife, a good daughter, a good sister, a good neighbor and especially a good grandmother. Story_ID: 4987 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for--hopes and fears or fears and hopes for the black community? Speaker 2: For the black community? My fear is that the black community will either consider that all of the problems have been solved and there's nothing left to be done, or that the problems are so magnanimous so magnificent, so large that there's nothing that any individual can do and so then they just opt out. I think--I think that's very bad for us. I'd like us to measure where we are, from where we used to be when you want to feel good about it. But I want you to measure where you are, from where you ought to be when you decide what work is left to do. You know, Alexander the Great sat down and cried that there were no more worlds to be conquered, and the new world hadn't been found. So, I'm hoping we can avoid the Alexander complex and get on with the real work. And work on the problems the same way the U.S. Government worked on space problems. The way we're gonna work on the Concorde [supersonic jet airplane]. Now you want to talk about fixing the system, we're getting ready to fix the Concorde aren't we? One plane crashed and we're gonna fix the Concorde. I only wish we could get one thing that could focus us enough to put the resources together and stay long enough to fix it, put it behind us. When that happens, we're gonna be freed up of all this garbage that ties us down. We're gonna be free to soar. Story_ID: 4988 Speaker 1: These are two friends of mine. The woman in the long braids is Carol Smith. And she's in information systems. The woman in the center is Tracy Sneed, a young lawyer in the [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] City Solicitor's Office assigned to the chief of staff of the mayor. And me. Speaker 2: Do you happen to know what year this was taken? Speaker 1: 2001. 2001. One of the thousands of social events that we attend. I have no clue what was going on. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark (right) with her friends Carol Smith (left) and Tracy Sneed (center), at a social event, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4989 Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You were just making a report about the mayor's technology commission. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's all right. Speaker 1: Right, and that's what that was. Speaker 2: And what year was this approximately? Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark giving a report about Philadelphia Mayor John F. Street's technology commission, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4990 Speaker 1: To the left of me is Trudy Haynes, a local television personality and we were at a women's meeting in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: You know how Trudy spells her last name? Speaker 1: Yes, H-A-Y-N-E-S. Speaker 2: And how long ago was this? Speaker 1: 2000. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark (right) with Philadelphia television personality Trudy Haynes at a women's meeting, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4991 Speaker 1: Me at a fundraiser with [U.S.] Vice President Al Gore. Speaker 2: You happen to know what year? Speaker 1: Well, it was the last primary? That would have been 2000, yeah, 2000, and [U.S. President George W.] Bush assumed in January 2001. Yeah, 2000. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark with Vice President Al Gore at a fundraiser for his presidential campaign, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4992 Speaker 1: Me and sorors at the Alpha Kappa Alpha [sorority] Boule in 2000, in 2000. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) In November 2000. Speaker 1: I'm sorry did you say her name, or no? Speaker 2: No, I don't know her name. Speaker 1: Sorority sister. Speaker 2: A soror, soror means sister of the fraternity--of the sorority. We were at Dallas, Texas at the Boule, which is our biennial convention. Speaker 1: [Augusta Clark (left) at the Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority Boule with unidentified sorority sister, Dallas, Texas, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4993 Speaker 1: This--the mayor me at a gathering in the mayor's conference room of students who have done well in school and understand the significance of applying themselves. The mayor was congratulating them. Speaker 2: And that's Mayor John Street? Speaker 1: John F. Street. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: And these are kids from various, different schools? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: In the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. That young woman is holding a citation such as each of them received. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark (center in pantsuit) with Philadelphia Mayor John F. Street (center right) in his conference room honoring local students and their achievements, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4994 Speaker 1: Yes, this is a picture of me and Reverend James Allen, a prominent minister who happens also to be the Chairman of the Board of the Philadelphia Commission on Human Relations. And the picture was taken at a human relations banquet in 19--no, in the year 2000. Speaker 2: And are you receiving the citation or is he receiving the citation? Speaker 1: I am presenting him with the citation from the mayor's office. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark presents a citation from the Mayor of Philadelphia to Rev. James Allen, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2000. The citation commends Rev. Allen for his work on the Philadelphia Commission on Human Relations. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4995 Speaker 1: Carol Smith. Speaker 2: Unidentified visitor (laughs)? Speaker 1: Yeah, she is likely a, a telecommunications specialist. I just don't know what her name is, a visiting telecommunications specialist. In the white suit is me, and to my right is Councilwoman Donna Miller, who chairs the committee at [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] City Council to whom telecommunications is assigned [TEPAC, Telecommunications Policy Advisory Committee]. Speaker 2: And approximately what year? Speaker 1: 2001 probably. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark with members of the Philadelphia City Council Telecommunications Policy Advisory Committee (TEPAC), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001; (L. to R.): Carol Smith, unidentified woman, Augusta Clark and Councilwoman Donna Miller. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4996 Speaker 1: Here, I'm representing the Mayor [of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, John F. Street] at the Philadelphia Convention Center at an awards banquet for the Commission on Human Relations. And it was nine--it was in the year 2000, November, 2000, I believe. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark at an awards banquet for the Philadelphia City Council Commission on Human Relations, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4997 Speaker 1: Okay, here I'm pictured with [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] Councilwoman Donna Miller, City Council Chair of the, of the Committee on Technology and Carol I. Smith who was the Chairman of TEPAC, Telecommunications Policy Advisory Committee. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark (left) with members of the Philadelphia Telecommunications Policy Advisor Committee (TEPAC), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001; (L. to R.): Augusta Clark, Philadelphia Councilwoman Donna Miller, and Carol I. Smith. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4998 Speaker 1: Diana Neff, head of the [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] Mayor's [John F. Street] Office of Information System. Beside her is Carol Smith, Chair of TEPAC [Telecommunications Policy Advisory Committee], Donna Miller, Chair of the City Council Committee on Technology, in the white suit is me, and the other members are representatives of local cable TV companies and interests. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark (center) with civic leaders and members of Philadelphia's telecommunications industry, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001; Also pictured to the right of Augusta Clark are: Philadelphia Councilwoman Donna Miller, Carol I. Smith of TEPAC, and Diana Neff, from the Mayor's Office of Information System. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 4999 Speaker 1: The woman in the dark glasses is [Pennsylvania] State Representative Louise Williams Bishop. The woman to her right is the president--judge of Common Pleas Court, Fredericka Massiah-Jackson. Speaker 2: And what was this occasion? Speaker 1: This was occasion where I was honored as a woman who makes a difference. And it was a very large, well attended program with enthusiastic, gutsy supporters. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark speaks at a ceremony honoring her work as a woman who makes a difference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2000. Also featured is Pennsylvania State Representative Louise Williams Bishop (dark glasses) and Fredericka Massiah-Jackson (to the right of Williams). From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5000 Speaker 1: Counter clockwise, there's a picture of me in a whitish outfit, my husband of forty-two years, Leroy Clark, my only daughter, Adrienne Clark-Mitchell, my only son, Mark Leroy Clark. The little girl in the red dress Ayanna Bell Mitchell, my oldest granddaughter. Speaker 2: How do you spell her first name? Speaker 1: A-Y-A-N-N-A. And the little girl in the yellow dress who is three weeks younger than Ayanna, is my granddaughter, Chloe, C-H-L-O-E Richardson Clark. I have two other grandchildren who are not pictured here. They are Ahmad Scott Mitchell and Michael Clark. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark with her family, ca. 2000; (counter clockwise from right): Augusta Clark, husband Leroy Clark, daughter Adrienne Clark-Mitchell, granddaughter Chloe Richardson Clark, son Mark Leroy Clark, granddaughter Ayanna Bell Mitchell. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5001 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me on the extreme right and some locally prominent women. ON the extreme left is Councilwoman Janie Blackwell, who is the Majority Leader of [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] City Council. Next to her is Councilwoman Marion Tasco, who is the Majority Whip of City Council. In the center, Janet Ryder, Vice President of the Philadelphia Federation of Teachers, and in the hat is Lorina Marshall-Blake, Vice President at Independence Blue Cross. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark with other prominent women in the Philadelphia area, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ca. 2000; (L. to R.): Councilwoman Janie Blackwell, Councilwoman Marion Tasco, Janet Ryder, Lorina Marshall-Blake, Augusta Clark. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5002 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Alma R. Douglas, who is a coordinator of the Smithsonian Institute Affiliation Program [sic, Smithsonian Institution Affiliations]. And she was here [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to consider the prospects of adding the African American Law Enforcement Museum to the Smithsonian network. Speaker 2: Do you all have an African American Law Enforcement Museum here? Speaker 1: Well, it was a concept that didn't go very far, but at that point we were feeling pretty good about it. And it self destructed on male ego, but that's the subject of another discussion. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: [Augusta Clark (right) with Alma R. Douglas of the Smithsonian Institution, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, ca. 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5003 Speaker 1: This is a portrait of me taken for my 40th wedding anniversary, June 25th, 2000. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark at her 40th wedding anniversary, June 25, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5004 Speaker 1: This was a photograph taken in my office about 2001, and this appeared as the cover story on a local newspaper [the 'Philadelphia Daily Observer']. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark in a photo used for a cover story in the 'Philadelphia New Observer' newspaper, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 2001. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5005 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, my Leroy [Clark], my husband-- Speaker 2: [inaudible] Speaker 1: His-- Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: --he's a very confident, loquacious kind of fellow. Speaker 2: What year was this taken? Speaker 1: [June 25,] 2000. Speaker 2: [Leroy Clark, Augusta Clark's husband, at their 40th wedding anniversary, June 25, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.] Story_ID: 5006 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my beloved Leroy on the same day as all the rest were taken. It's an anniversary portrait. Speaker 2: [Augusta Clark and her husband Leroy Clark on their 40th wedding anniversary, June 25, 2000. From the collection of Augusta Clark.].