 Story_ID: 38920 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Maam, can you please state your full name and state it for us please? Speaker 2: Barbara Ann Ciara. And that's Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Ann, A-N-N, Ciara, C-I-A-R-A. Speaker 1: Was there a story behind Ciara? What kind of name is that? Speaker 2: Well, basically the story goes that I was in the southwest in Arizona in the '70s [1970s]. And I was born Barbara Ann Jones. And I was told at the time in getting into the media, that your name is so very ordinary and so if you're so very ordinary, when people look for folks to hire, then they may think you're just too ordinary to hire (laughter). So, you know, at the time it was pretty, it was pretty common for people, broadcasters, to change their names back in that day. So I chose that because it was a time when there was a flurry of activity in hiring minorities, and very often a name on a piece of paper might be the difference between them hiring you, thinking that you are an African American or Hispanic. And so I chose that because it was mysterious enough where it could be either one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And appeal to people who were on the other end who were trying to hire. Speaker 1: Now who did you consult with about this? I mean- Speaker 2: I consulted with my very good friend who works in Arizona still, Lupita Madreo. And she works at KDOA in Tucson, Arizona and she's been there more than thirty years. And as a matter of fact, she was an individual who saved me from my last semester of Spanish. She greets and speaks to me only in Spanish for six months while I tried to get through that last Spanish class (laughter). And so she's the one I consulted with on it. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Now, Maam, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My place of birth is Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. I'm a die-hard Steeler [National Footbal Team] fan. And my date of birth is July 27, 1956. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Broadcast journalist. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date--oh, now you've--oh, gosh. It's a Tuesday (laughter). I think it is February 7, 2012. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Norfolk, Virginia. Story_ID: 38921 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food. A better question would be what don't I like. But, but, but if I had to choose a favorite food I'd probably saw strawberries. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, pink. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Outer Banks of North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. My favorite phrase and saying that people know me by here for the last thirty years, is signing off by saying "Thanks for the company." Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38922 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately. But we'll start with your mother. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Georgia Ann Jones. Georgia is spelled like the state, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Ann, A-N-N, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Her date of birth is November 25, 1930. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and were they always in Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: Well, not always, but at least the past two generations. She was born in Pittsburgh. Um, my mother's mother, Roberta [Smith Cunningham]--I talked to my mother about this when you guys sent the questionnaire, and I had it written down. I didn't commit it to memory. But I do know that when she re-married, she was Roberta Cunningham, and she was, she had another last name prior to that, but I can't recall at the time, at this time. Speaker 1: What was your mother's maiden name? Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was McAlpine. Speaker 1: Mc-- Speaker 2: Capital A, L-P-I-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, they have a root someplace else in the country? Speaker 2: Yes, in Georgia. And I believe somewhere around the city of Macon. Um, that's where I think my grandmother married before she left Georgia and eventually ended up in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how that migration took place? Speaker 2: Only that I think that they were seeking, you know, something else other than the rural life. They were, you know, wanting a better job opportunity, and came north. At least that's what I was told growing up, because they did come from a rural area in Georgia and they were farmers. Speaker 1: Okay. Did the railroad have anything to do with it, their coming? Speaker 2: Not that I recall. Um, on my father's [Robert Jones] side it's a little bit more murky because my [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Blaine] died when I was relatively young, so I didn't have a chance to pepper her with questions the way I did with my mother's mother, who died in 1967. But I can tell you that on my father's side, my father was born in Pittsburgh, as were his three siblings. And I believe that my grandmother Sarah was also born in Pittsburgh. Story_ID: 38923 Speaker 1: Okay. We're going to get to his [Ciara's father, Robert Jones] side in a second. But I just want to ask you about your mother's [Georgia Ann Jones] growing up [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Did she have any stories to share about growing up or, what's her story? Speaker 2: My mother wasn't born in the hospital. She liked to tell me she had the exact address of where she was born on Soho Street in Pittsburgh. And she talked about how she was born, she was the oldest of about twelve children that Roberta [Smith Cunningham; Ciara's maternal grandmother] had. Roberta's first husband was a preacher and he was much older than she, according to my mom. And he died when he was fifty-four years old. And she re-married to another man of the faith. And his name was Cunningham, and she had eleven more children. So, my mother is an only child from her first, from my grandmother's first marriage, and the rest of her siblings are half brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she, it sounds like she might have had a lot of responsibility, being the eldest of twelve. Speaker 2: Yes, she did. As a matter of fact, when she was a young woman, she dropped out of school so she could help my grandmother with the rest of the family. And you know, she got a job and you know, contributed to the family's household. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did your mother get a chance to finish high school or go to college? Speaker 2: Later she finished high school, and then she went to some trade school so that she could eventually learn to repair boilers and stuff like that, because she was a custodian with the school system for over thirty years in Pittsburgh. And it was unique for a woman to do that kind of thing in those days, because most of the custodians were men. So she learned how to deal with all the heavy equipment and became very active in the labor movement. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now did she live in the Hill District? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. It was, oh gosh, I wish I could recall the street. But my grandmother lived on the Hill. When my parents [Georgia Ann Jones and Robert Jones] divorced, she took me for about a year so that my mother could get herself together financially. So, we lived there for a time. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38924 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Jerry, J-E-R-R-Y, Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 8/4/'34 [August 4, 1934]. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he born in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Um, that's a little bit more cloudy, because I never knew my grandfather on my dad's side. He had passed away I think a year or two after I was born. My grandmother on my father's side, Sarah Blaine, had re-married, so I'm not, I never knew him and I never knew my original grandfather. So there's not much I know about that side of the family. They were a little more secretive. I do know that there was someone on that side of the family who married someone of the Jewish faith and there was a lot of whispering about that situation on his side of the family. Speaker 1: So this is a black person that marries a white Jew, not a black Jew, or-- Okay. Speaker 2: A white Jewish person. And so that's the reason I think it became such a big deal and lots of secrets on that side. Speaker 1: Okay. Ah, well, um, did they have a tradition of coming from someplace else? Speaker 2: Ah, you know, it's very, very hard to say. I can tell you that my father told me prior to his passing that his people came from Virginia. And I was happy to know that, since I made Virginia my home. But how long they had been in Pittsburgh, that remains a mystery to me. And because his last name is Jones, I felt like I would probably--I have (laughter) have no prayer of finding out exactly who I was actually related to, given the common last name of Jones. And then what makes it crazier is that on my [maternal] grandmother's side, they are Smiths (laughter). So I just feel like when it comes to trying to trace my lineage I think that I'll be batting zero with Smith and Jones on either side of the family (laughter). Speaker 1: So you say, you have a lot of relatives (laughter). Speaker 2: I have a lot of relatives (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38925 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Robert Jones] get a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: He did. And he was a factory worker for most of his life. When he retired, he became a part-time security guard and in 2009, he passed away. Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Georgia Ann Jones and Robert Jones] talk about the high school they attended? Did they name it? Do you know what schools they were? Speaker 2: I do not recall, unfortunately. That's a question I can put to my mother. Speaker 1: I was just wondering if there was a particular high school, you know, on the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh] who everybody knew, or two or three that--. Speaker 2: There are some that are closed now that I think that they spoke of, but I can't say. I don't have any instant recall of it. It's interesting you're familiar with Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Somewhat. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he worked as a security guard most of his life? Speaker 2: No, he was a factory worker most of his life. He was a foreman at a factory that since closed in Pittsburgh, and then after he retired he became a part-time security guard. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, what factory was it? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. I do have relatives who do know. I could probably get that information for you, but I just don't have the instant recall of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38926 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Georgia Ann Jones and Robert Jones] met? Speaker 2: Yes. They used to talk about that a lot. Ah, my mother is older than my dad and they kind of spotted each other one day, and each thought the other was cute. And so a flirtation started. In those days, you had to court, as they say. And so my dad had to go to my [maternal] grandmother's [Roberta Smith Cunningham] house and basically ask if, you know, he could take my mother out to the movies. And so they started going out and the romance blossomed and they got married. And they had a little difficulty, you know, getting pregnant. So my mother went through a series of medical tests and that kind of thing and it took a while until finally they had me. And I'm the only child between their union. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38927 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Georgia Ann Jones and Robert Jones] personalities and their talents and their dispositions and looks, who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: It's interesting. At different parts of my life, I've looked like each of them (laughter). So, you know, if I'm sitting next to a photograph of my father, you'll say, "Oh yes, you're your father's child." And then in some of my manners and disposition, you would say, "Oh, you are your mother's child." So I think a lot of my personality is definitely my mother, because I'm fastidious and I want things done right away. I don't have patience with inactivity, because my father is probably a little more laid back, and, you know, but I think I look a little bit more like him, but I definitely have personality traits that are so much like my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38928 Speaker 1: So when you grew up--now did you grow up on the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] as well? Speaker 2: Just for a short period of time, because my [maternal] grandmother [Roberta Smith Cunningham] lived there. My grandmother was trying to help out my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] when my parents [Georgia Ann Jones and Robert Jones] divorced, so I stayed with her for about a year. I stayed with my grandmother, Roberta for about a year until my mother could get herself financially on her feet. And then we together moved into St. Clair Village. That's a public housing project on the south side of Pittsburgh. And there we lived through--. Uh, my mother moved in in 1958 I think and then she lived there until the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: So, your parents weren't together very long at all before they--I mean-- Speaker 2: I was three years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you remember, I mean, did you have like frequent visits by your father? Speaker 2: Oh, like clockwork my dad would pick me up on weekends. And so he re-married, and so I would spend weekends with my stepmother Shirley [Jones], and eventually my half-sister Valerie [Layne] and my step-sister Celeste. And so it was like we had, I had my family with my mom and my family with my dad and my stepmom. And so he had custody of me weekends, some holidays, and summers. So, I would just go between the two households. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38929 Speaker 1: Now, when you think back on growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] wanted to train me to be very independent. And so when I was nine [years old], she asked me to take the bus downtown, walk around, and then take the bus back. And so one of the smells, sights and sounds was the clock that used to be either on the Kaufmann Building--or was it Gimble's, on the corner of Wood Street and Fifth Avenue? And so that was a sight that I just remember. And, of course, the picture windows where they would change the mannequins all the time. That was one of the best things about coming downtown, the window shopping aspect. And if you're from Pittsburgh, you know that you're going to smell kielbasa grilling somewhere downtown and the grilling of onions and green peppers, and you know that somewhere close by, you're going to get that big kielbasa sandwich. So, that's one of the things--and pierogies and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Alright. So, you were between two neighborhoods, I guess growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. My father [Robert Jones] lived on the north side, another project called North View Heights, and my stepmother [Shirley Jones] and father moved in there when it was relatively new, and at the time it just seemed like wow, we just moved up in the world. Because they had a little house on the north side that was just kind of, you know, kind of like a very inexpensive house that they were renting. I remember getting a baby chicken, watching it grow into a chicken in the front yard. So, there would be no more chicken pets when we moved to North View Heights, because it was more, at that time, kind of like an upscale housing project. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38930 Speaker 1: So, in your household growing up you had, with your mother [Georgia Ann Jones] you had--was your [maternal] grandmother [Roberta Smith Cunningham] with you all? Speaker 2: No, grandmother still lived on the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. It wasn't until she became ill that she moved in with my mom in the '60s [1960s]. But she maintained her apartment in the Hill District for most of her life. Speaker 1: Okay. Now considering the fact that your [maternal] grandfathers [biological and step-grandfather] were both ministers, was religion a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: My mother I think became a little disenchanted with faith. She had actually, despite the fact that there was a Baptist background, had gone to Catholic school she told me, and was Catholic. She would send me to church with Miss Lula May Huntley, who lived next door, to a Baptist church. So, for the most part, I grew up in the church because of Miss Lula. And we would go to the Hill District and go to church. But Mom, she chose not to attend. I think she had some bad experiences in the Catholic school and just kind of shied away from it. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your father [Robert Jones] religious at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. I mean, he would pray at the table, but he felt like the temple was his house. And he felt no need to give up his Sunday sports to go to church (laughter). Story_ID: 38931 Speaker 1: So he [Ciara's father, Robert Jones] was a sports fan. I know you're a Steeler's [National Football League (NFL)] fan you say now. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My first NFL experience was at Three Rivers Stadium [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. My dad took me to go see the Pittsburgh Steelers and that was the bait, and I've been a big fan ever since. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that was, you must have been a teen then or close to it, right? Speaker 2: Uh, I think I was about eleven or twelve [years old], I think. Yeah, because we remember when it was built, because Dad took me down there when the cement was still kind of wet and I got a chance to put my handprint in something. And I can't, oh, I can't wait to go back to see if they didn't cover up my handprint once they built the stadium. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember when they built--it was Forbes Field before that. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I, we used to go to Forbes Field, too, because I think that's where I took in my first baseball game, at Forbes Field. Yeah, those were the days. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were growing up, were the black baseball teams still playing? Speaker 2: I never had the opportunity to see the all black baseball-- Speaker 1: Crawfords and the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I never had an opportunity. He took me to see the Pirates. That would have been a thrill, and if there had been an opportunity, he would have taken me, because even though he never had boys, he treated his girls just like boys. It's like you're going to love baseball, you're going to love football, you're going to love fishing (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38932 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? What was your first school? Speaker 2: That was, oh, what was the name of that elementary school in St. Clair Village? Oh, gosh darn. I remember my middle school name. It's Knoxville Junior High, and I went to Schenley and I will have to think real long and hard on the elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was the name of the project again? Speaker 2: That was called St. Clair Village. Speaker 1: St. Clair Village, okay. Speaker 2: I grew up on Bonifay Street, B-O-N-I-F-A-Y. Speaker 1: But there was a school that attended that-- Speaker 2: Right there--and I just can't think of it. I'm sure that before we end this discussion, I will probably say "Ah, that's the name." Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what are your early memories of school? Speaker 2: Ah, my early memories of school is that we were able to, I was able to walk to school and it was a big treat when I was finally able to walk without my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] coming with me. And we would walk up and down the hill and over to the elementary school. My favorite class was my music teacher, Miss Lesane. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So were you good in music? Speaker 2: I loved music, and you know, growing up I thought I was going to be the next Gladys Knight, but that never happened (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So you were primarily a singer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: During those days. Speaker 1: And I take it you idolized Gladys Knight? Speaker 2: Oh yes, among others. My mother and father [Robert Jones] were great music collectors. My mother--traditional R&B [rhythm and blues], my mother loved country, my dad loved jazz--Nancy Wilson, all the greats back then. So, both houses were filled with lots and lots of music, and my dad used to sing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had an incredible voice. Speaker 1: Other people we've interviewed who grew up in Pittsburgh talked about the prevalence of music in Pittsburgh. They even talk about George Benson. Speaker 2: Yes. George Benson used to play, you know, some of the beer gardens down there before he became famous. And when I had an opportunity to meet him at one of the Hampton Jazz Festivals that I used to MC, we traded stories about Pittsburgh growing up. And he said, "Oh, I'm glad I'm talking to you, because my Pittsburgh accent's coming back." You know, so yeah, we claim him. He's very, very good. Speaker 1: Alright. Yeah, they say he used to play on the street when he was a kid. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Now, I don't remember that, but certainly you know, I've heard many, many stories about people who--well, I couldn't go into the beer garden when I was young and so--and that's what they called it, the beer garden, and that's where he played sometimes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38933 Speaker 1: When you were little, I guess, was TV important when you were growing up [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: It was very important, because those are the first images of the Vietnam War. More importantly, those were the first images of some of the civil rights demonstrations. I remember gathering around the black and white television and seeing how black people were treated in the South. We kind of felt insulated from it because we didn't seem to have as many overt issues in Pittsburgh. But I will say that once 1968 happened, that climate changed dramatically in my mind as a young person, because there was rioting, there was civil rights protests in Pittsburgh, and there was the emergence of the Black Panther movement at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Were there Black Panthers in Pittsburgh at that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, what about the print media. Did you get the [Pittsburgh] Courier? Was that still popular? Speaker 2: Absolutely. That was a must read in both [Ciara's mother, Georgia Ann Jones' and her father, Robert Jones'] households, because it was thought at the time that the general media didn't do a very good job of covering issues in the African American community. And, you know, there was no one who looked like me on television. There was Marie Torres who was, I idolized, because she was one of few women who was on television at the time. And there was no real role model of someone who looked like any of us. So, that's why we felt like the Courier was so important, because there were black correspondents who were telling our stories on, you know, everything from the economy in the black community to, you know, where to get your hair done, how to stretch your food budget with different recipes--the kind of information that you would come to expect in any general newspaper, but it had a twist, some of the things that African Americans liked to buy and eat and wear were contained in there. And also profiles of individuals who were important in our community where you've never see that on mainstream media. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38934 Speaker 1: So, how was school? Were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Not particularly. Um, I, my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] felt like education was the way out. I rebelled quite a bit. For reasons unknown to me, you know, I would sometimes get very bored in school and was a little bit disruptive. It wasn't until about the eighth grade that, you know, I was trying to mimic some of the protests that I would see on television, and I recall at the time at Knoxville Junior High that girls were only allowed to wear slacks on snow days. And I decided to hold a protest at the cafeteria, with signs, with my girlfriends saying that we ought to be able to wear pants too. And I was so dismayed that our school newspaper didn't cover it. So I marched into the English teacher and told her, I said, "How could you not put this in the newspaper? This is the biggest thing to happen at the school since pizza in the cafeteria." So, I just displayed my outrage. And she said, "Well, if you're so smart, why don't you work on the paper?" And so I started working on the school newspaper, and I found my passion, I found my voice. I was actually able to write about things, the school, that I thought all the kids cared about. Story_ID: 38935 Speaker 1: Knoxville Junior High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Now that's, is that in the same neighborhood as your elementary school? Speaker 2: It pretty much is. It's just about, it's walking distance. It's maybe a mile or two from St. Clair Village. And so Knoxville is in--yeah, pretty much in the immediate vicinity. Speaker 1: Okay. So, junior high school, this is what, 1968? Speaker 2: It's interesting, uh let's see--'68 [1968] and-- Speaker 1: Well, '70 [1970]. I guess we're approaching 1970 for junior high school. Speaker 2: We're approaching--well, actually we're--eighth grade is where junior high ended at Knoxville. And in ninth grade I went to Schenley High School for a time. My mother [Georgia Ann Jones], who worked for the Board of Education, thought that at the time, Schenley was a much better school. And it turns out that she was right, because back in those days they had computers, huge computers, but they were computers, and there were other public schools that didn't have that. I would have gone to Perry High School, which wasn't as well-equipped. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have to pass a special test or something to get into Schenley, or what? Was there some kind of qualification? Speaker 2: The qualification was that my mother worked for the school board and so she knew people, and she was able to get me into the school. And so I didn't have to pass any special tests. But I do recall taking an IQ test, which I think, you know, gave them a good idea of my placement. Speaker 1: Okay. Was Schenley like a magnet school? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course they are tearing it down now because of the asbestos and other stuff, so Schenley is no more. Speaker 1: Yeah, is this the same Schenley family that's involved in liquor, is that the one that's in Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: I don't recall, I don't recall. But Schenley--you know where the Oakland area is in Pittsburgh near the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie [Mellon University] and all that? That's--Schenley sits not far from that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were in the center of the cultural activities? Speaker 2: Yes, the cultural Mecca of Pittsburgh (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. As you said, this is the, I guess, the time that you're in junior high school. That's the era of the Black Arts Movement and, you know, the Vietnam War protests-- Speaker 2: There were black arts festivals a couple of times a year in various parts of the city. There was a great pride movement then in terms of embracing your color or calling yourself black, which was new. Because at that time my grandmother was still calling everybody colored and we were trying to correct her (laughter). I said, "We don't call people colored anymore, Grandma." And she said, "Well, I'm not going to call you Negro either." (laughter). So we had some folks in the family who were having an adjustment, trying to figure out exactly what do we call ourselves? You might recall at the time there were various articles in black newspapers about what to call ourselves, whether we were black or Afro Americans--because Afro American seemed to be very popular then. And then there were some of the old-timers who said "You know what, I'm really tired of this, I'm just going to call everybody colored." (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38936 Speaker 1: So now, did you, were you involved in any arts activities in the community [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes, there were two other girls. It was Shelly Huntley, who lived next door, who was the daughter of Miss Lula and myself. We formed a little group, a singing group, and we would perform at the Black Arts Festival every year. Speaker 1: Okay. Now we interviewed Charisse Lillie [also a HistoryMaker] in Pittsburgh, and she was telling us about Rob Penney and August Wilson, I think who came from that same era. Did you know any of them? Speaker 2: Phyllis Hyman, she was a little older than me, but yeah, Phyllis was a great, great singer growing up, and she grew up in St. Clair Village. Her mother--gosh, her mother might still live there. Maybe not. But my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] was good friends with her, and it's interesting, because when I took my mother on a cruise about fifteen years ago, Phyllis was on board and singing. And my mother went up to her, "I know your mama." (laughter). And they chatted it up for awhile. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what was the name of your group? Speaker 2: We called each other all kinds of things. We just couldn't establish a really good name. And I remember once we wanted to call ourselves "Blue Flame." And then we said well no, somebody's already calling themselves that. And we went round and round, but we disbanded before any of the names actually stuck (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, the three--you patterned yourself after, say, the Supremes or the Shirelles or something? Speaker 2: I guess you could say that we were your beer drinker Supremes (laughter). Yeah, we were, there were three of us. It was Debbie Johnson and Shelley Huntley and myself--Debbie Jackson, I'm sorry--Debbie Jackson and myself. And we would sing in the halls of the housing project. We were on the third floor. And the acoustics were really, really good. So you could hear every note as we were singing. So if anyone messed up, you'd know it immediately because of the way the sound echoed off the walls and inside the hallways of the project. Story_ID: 38937 Speaker 1: What was project life [in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] like then? I mean, we've noticed that most of the time--in terms of how they start off and how they end up--what was it like when you were there? Speaker 2: As you said, it went through stages. When I was very, very young, it was integrated. You had all kinds of different colors living there. And then as time went on, it became pretty much exclusively black, or at least 98 percent black. You would have some of the residential buildings that were specifically for the seniors where you would have a population of, or you would have more diversity in the senior buildings, but then it seemed that most of the whites who were in the family buildings were moving out. So, I would say by mid-'60s [1960s], the climate changed from an integrated atmosphere to one that was predominantly black at St. Clair Village. In terms of the culture and the atmosphere, you have families that looked out for each other. Everyone knew my mother [Georgia Ann Jones], everyone knew me, they knew when I was supposed to be inside. And when my mom was working, I became a latchkey kid. And so there were various neighbors who would know my whereabouts, know where I was supposed to go, and she gave them permission to spank me if necessary if I was acting out. So, it was a whole different atmosphere then, neighbors looking after neighbors--my mom, who unilaterally gave them permission to discipline me, if necessary. And by the time she came home she would know if I had violated any of her rules, because everybody was looking out for each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38938 Speaker 1: Alright, so at Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] then, now did you have any, were there any special teachers or mentors along the way, either in junior high [Knoxville Junior High School] or at Schenley? Speaker 2: Well, in junior high school that mentor was my English teacher, and that I believe was Mrs. Green. And she was the one who challenged me that if I was going to be so haughty and challenge her, that, you know, I should work with her [on the school newspaper]. And so that's when writing became a very important thing to me. Speaker 1: Now that's, we failed to follow up on that from the first roll here, but, okay. But she challenges you to join the paper staff? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You joined, and so what did you write about? What was that experience like? Speaker 2: Well, it was rough at first, because as I said, I wasn't the best of students, and I started becoming a better student when I had a dog in the race, which was the articles that I wrote, because she wouldn't unilaterally just publish everything. Basically you had to pay attention to grammar and punctuation and sentence structure and all of those things that I hadn't been paying attention to. So suddenly English and structure and language and grammar became very important. So, if she rejected an article it meant that I would go back and rewrite it or pick a different subject matter. But what would I write about? I'd write about the cafeteria, I'd write about fashion and what we were wearing. I'd write about, how, you know, whether or not--what is the right age when you're supposed to have your first kiss? That never got published, by the way, because she deemed that subject inappropriate. But that was the kind of thing that I was writing about, you know, in the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Well, you were getting into some depth, I guess in terms of the issues that were on the minds of fellow students? Speaker 2: Yes, at the time. And you know then there was a fair amount of drug activity then, especially marijuana in junior high school where people were selling it to other students and that kind of thing, and so--. But those issues were taboo. The English teacher had the right to say no, we're not going to write about those things. And so even though those were some of the issues of the day, she said that we had to stay on neutral ground and just write about things that were kind of generic. Story_ID: 38939 Speaker 1: Now was there, what were the adults around you saying about those kinds of things [drug activity in schools]? Were they, what kind of guidance did they give you? Speaker 2: Ah, my mother's [Georgia Ann Jones] guidance was basically, stay away from it. We would walk by and we would see people who she pointed out were probably drug addicts, and she wanted me to observe their behavior. She wanted me to look at the way they appear, and then asked me "Do you want to appear that way?" "Do you want to look like that?" "Do you want to grow up to be like that?" "Well, that's the result of drugs." And basically she didn't have to have me imagine it, because it was all around us. You know, you would just go down the street and look on the corner and you would know who the druggies were. And those were the people we were supposed to stay away from. It was a fair amount of gambling that started to emerge in our neighborhood then, and there was street corner gambling and people throwing craps, and all that kind of stuff. And it was a little bit of heroin activity at the time also. But most of that was on the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so when we would go and visit my [maternal] grandmother [Roberta Smith Cunningham], you'd really see what drug addicts, bad drug addicts--I mean, people really wracked with drugs looked like, because you'd see that up on Fifth Avenue and various areas in the Hill District. It was pretty prevalent. Story_ID: 38940 Speaker 1: So, at that stage, who were your heroes? Speaker 2: Ah, the heroes were right there in my family. I mean, if I wanted to look at an example of somebody who worked hard, it would be my father [Robert Jones], it would be my mother [Georgia Ann Jones], it would be all of my extended family. They were our role models, because they were the ones that we learned from. At the time, when you looked at television, there weren't very many people of color. I mean, the first time I saw someone actually point out to someone as an example was Diahann Carroll when she had her first show. And everybody was so proud that Diahann Carroll had her own show, and she was playing a nurse. And that was a really big deal at the time. And then after that, Flip Wilson had his own show, and I'm like, gosh, a black man has his own show on network television. You know, so there were pockets of examples, and then when Bill Cosby was on I Spy, I think, oh gosh, I mean, that was appointment television. We had to watch Bill Cosby because he was playing an equal to a white man on national television with I think, Robert Culp, I think? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, you know, those became examples of how you could actually make it, when those people and those black faces started to emerge on television. That's when our communities would get very excited about the possibilities, because up until then, you just didn't think that there were a lot of possibilities, but when you saw one example after another, then it stopped being unique and it started being, "Well, gosh there's another black person who's doing well, and here's another one." So then it became real, it's not like you're in a dream anymore. You can actually grow up to make your mark on this nation. Speaker 1: Okay. That was the age too when so-called black exploitation movies came out. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: I guess around '69 [1969], or '70 [1970] or so. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. And believe me, I saw every one of them. But Bill's were more like little action movies and stuff like that, and we really enjoyed seeing an all black cast because that was still rare, you know, that it would actually be on the big screen, instead of plays in the neighborhood and that kind of thing. And so yeah, that era was very interesting because--. Shaft and all that, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite one, a favorite character? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that--I guess not a favorite so much as just being able to enjoy going to film after film instead of one, and then five years go by and there's not another one. So it was great to be able to go and say that you're going to see, you know, a movie that had an all black cast. Speaker 1: Did you particularly go on a weekend? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Usually you try to go to a matinee, because that was the less expensive. But yeah we'd go downtown. That's when we would go downtown to the movies. It wasn't like there were all these suburbs with theaters, because everybody gravitated toward downtown when they wanted to see films. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you, can you remember when you first heard your first black anchor person on television? Speaker 2: Max Robinson, Max Robinson. And it was a trio of anchor people. He was in Chicago [Illinois] and then--I'm trying to remember who the others were. Speaker 1: Peter Jennings-- Speaker 2: Peter Jennings was in London [England], and-- Speaker 1: Who was in New York? It was somebody. Speaker 2: Gosh, and he's dead now, too. Ah-- Speaker 1: ABC News-- Speaker 2: It was ABC News, World News Tonight, World News Tonight. That's why they had the three anchors in the three different locations. But yeah, we were very excited about that. It turns out Max Robinson has family here in Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 38941 Speaker 1: Okay. So in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], how did you do in high school? Speaker 2: I did well up until the time that I got pregnant. And so I had a teenage pregnancy and I ended up leaving school. Speaker 1: How old were you and what year was it? Speaker 2: Thirteen [years old], and it was 1970. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had just started. That was your freshman year. Speaker 2: Yes. And so my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] was very upset, because I had been doing very well at Schenley High School, and you know, producing really good grades and really attentive in all my subjects, and so it was a great disappointment to her. So she sent me to this home for unwed girls. And don't ask me where it is, I cannot recall. But it was in Pittsburgh, and so when I gave birth, we went back and forth about whether or not someone in the family would raise my son, because we had two aunts on my mother's side who were never able to have children, and in my family, at least, no one ever put a baby up for adoption. They were always adopted within the family. And so there was a great deal of debate until my mother put her foot down and said no one's going to take the baby, we're going to keep the baby. And so my mother was helping raise my son, and we just had friction. You know, we had lots of friction because she knew how to be a mom, and I was learning how to be a mom, and we were going back and forth about how to raise my child, until finally I decided to leave. Speaker 1: Now was the father involved in any of this, I mean, you know, after the baby was born? Speaker 2: Well, at that time, my mother was out for bear. She wanted to legally prosecute whoever was the father. So I did not tell her at that time who the father was, because I was afraid that my boyfriend would be put in jail. Speaker 1: Was he an older guy? Speaker 2: Only a couple of years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't know anything of the legal system. I didn't know that because he's a juvenile too that probably wouldn't be an issue. But out of fear of mom, I didn't identify him until about three years later. And so he was involved after that, but not during that time, because I told him to stay away because I was fearful of what might happen. And so it wasn't until Robert was three [years old] that his dad started coming around and being a part of his life, because at that time I just kind of let go of the fear. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 38942 Speaker 1: Alright, so this friction is boiling up, and so what happens? Are you going to school now? Are you still going to this special school? Speaker 2: It was shortly after that. Robert [Ciara's son] was probably about--yeah, I'm still going to Schenley [High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--Robert was probably about two years old when I decided to leave home, and so I ran off. And there was a band that was playing the summer in New York City. And so I decided to go and try my craft at becoming a singer. And so-- Speaker 1: You're fifteen? Speaker 2: Yep. Ran off to New York, thinking that, you know, I'm just going to be a big star and I'll show everybody. Speaker 1: Well, was there an incident that precipitated you leaving or was it something that you planned on doing or what? Speaker 2: Well, to be perfectly honest, I was practicing with the band late at night going against my mother's wishes. She got sick of it and so she reported me to the authorities and we had a court date, and it was at that time that the judge deemed me incorrigible and took me into the juvenile system. And I was in the juvenile home and I had basically lost my freedom because I was staying out too late at night. And so because I was declared a ward of the state, my mother had no idea of what she had done, because she couldn't get me back and I had to stay there a period of time until they deemed it okay for me to have home visitation. And it was at that time where I had home visitation I decided to run. Because I couldn't, I just couldn't stand being locked up, so I decided that I was going to run. I ran off to New York with the band and they tried to do it for about a summer. We tried our best. We had, we played at places in the Bronx and White Plains, and I got a little job at an Orange Julius and rented a room. Like I said, Gladys Knight was never in any danger of any competition from me. And so after a summer when they felt like they couldn't make enough money with the band, they left to go back to Pittsburgh and I stayed, and I eventually got my GED at sixteen and decided that I wanted to go to college. So I started trying to see whether or not I could actually--I was very encouraged by the GED classes. They had-- Speaker 1: This is in New Jersey? Speaker 2: New Jersey. Speaker 1: Let me go back over that again. And you, okay, what was the name of the band? Can you give us the name of the band? Speaker 2: Again, I told them they should call themselves "Blue Flame" because (laughter)--just like the girls. And for a time we were Blue Flame. But they kept the name. Speaker 1: What was the genre of music? Speaker 2: R&B [rhythm and blues]. You know, we would sing everyone else's material. We didn't have anything original, we weren't writing our own music. We were sort of like a house band where, you know, if anybody had a request we could probably sing it or play it, and so that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay, so the whole band went to New York together? Speaker 2: It was just five pieces and me. Yeah, and these guys were older. They looked out after me like big brothers, you know, and they were pretty serious about it, but a couple of them had families and thought if we can't make enough money in the summer, we're going to have to go back. "Are you going to be okay?" "Are you going to be okay here?" And I said yeah, because I had a job at that point and I was able to rent a room in a relatively safe place on Mercy Street in Jersey City [New Jersey], and so it was all good, or at least I thought. Story_ID: 38943 Speaker 1: Alright, so you are able to go back to school and get your GED [while in New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Did somebody intervene, or were you kind of self directed about finishing up? Speaker 2: There were little angels in my life at that time and there was a program called OIC, Opportunities Incorporated or something like that. Speaker 1: That was Leon Sullivan's program, OIC. Speaker 2: So I went to OIC and you could get clerical training, you could, you know, learn to type and all of those things, and so I had a couple of people there say, "You know you got a great aptitude, you know you should finish school." I said, "You're right." And they said "Well, you can take GED classes to prepare you for the test." So I went to the GED classes while working part time and really enjoyed that. And when you're with a group of people trying to achieve a certain goal, it kind of catches fire and everybody was very determined to pass that test. So, you know, after I think it was about six weeks of training, we all hopped on the bus to go to Trenton, New Jersey to take our tests. In those days we didn't get automatic results, we had to wait until it came in the mail. And so I would check that mailbox everyday on Mercer Street, trying very hard. "Okay, I'm so impatient, I want to find out." And I passed and I got good scores, and so I was really excited. And through OIC I got a job lead to be a clerk for the welfare department in Jersey City, and it was a civil service job, so I went there. A couple ladies there said, "You're young, you shouldn't do this for the rest of your life, you should go to college." And I said, "I always thought about that, but how do you go to college when you're making what we make?" And that's when everybody clued me in to the idea of getting scholarships. And there were scholarships and grants in abundance in the early '70s [1970s]. There were opportunities then that don't exist now, so if you wanted to go to college it was a matter of filling out the right paperwork and getting the right grades on the test form, and you were in. So I won a scholarship to the University of Arizona and it was a broadcaster's scholarship, I think the Tucson Broadcaster's Association. And--. Speaker 1: Now why broadcasting? I mean, how did this come into--? Speaker 2: I always--of course, what do you like is one of the questions that they ask. "I like to write, you know, I want to grow up, I want to be on television, I want to be a journalist." So that's what I applied for. Speaker 1: Had you had any experience in broadcasting at all? Speaker 2: No, not at all, but you know I was always fascinated by the fact that there were television journalists who were in the thick of it. And if you remember those times, it seems like wow, it was the most provocative vocation to take on, because you got a chance to go to many different places and interview fascinating people, and like I said, you know, looking up and being able to see somebody like Max Robinson was motivation. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38944 Speaker 1: Now how is your communication with your mother [Gloria Ann Jones] and father [Robert Jones] at this point? Speaker 2: I didn't communicate with them for a couple of years. When I ran [to New York City/New Jersey], I just wanted to get my act together and once I did, I would call home, and when I passed the GED test, that was a pivotal moment. So I called home and my father just burst into tears, because he told me during the course of those two years, he'd actually gone down to the coroner's office to look to see whether they found an unidentified black female. He just didn't know whether I was alive or dead, so it was a great relief to him, and he just wanted me to come home and we'll sort it all out then, is what he said. And my mother, she and I still had friction at that time, and she said "What do you want, are you in trouble?" That was her first thing. I said "No, you'd be surprised to know that not only am I not in trouble, but I'm doing very well, thank you. I got my GED and I'm on my way to college." So I went back home for a visit before going to Arizona. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the toughest part of the period, that two year period? Speaker 2: Ah, the toughest part was learning how to be responsible for myself, knowing that if I made 1.60 cents how I had to make that stretch, how I had to pay my rent, how I had to buy food, how I had to clothe myself, save money for transportation, all of the things that have to do with being a grownup. That was the tough part, just this in your face reality that you had to be responsible for not only yourself but your own safety. And so I had a core group of friends who I relied upon to advise me on how to be this thing called a grownup. And I think I had an angel looking out for me, because I mean certainly a lot of things could have become of me that didn't, basically because I gravitated toward the right kind of people. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, who were some of the people who helped you? Speaker 2: Well, there was one particular lady at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] who always took an interest in me. And I remember saying to her "Do you have a daughter about my age?" She said "Oh no, she's older than you, but I see a lot of you in her." So, she would advise me. And then there were other kind of strays who were like me, who were kind of away from their families and we kind of created our own little nucleus. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was the status of your son [Robert] now at this point? Speaker 2: My mom was raising him. So she was pretty much raising him as her own, and when I came home I had to tell him I was his mother because Mom was actually telling him that she was his mom at that time. Speaker 1: Alright. So you go to Arizona [University of Arizona] now. Now this is--did you deliberately choose to go to Arizona because it was far away from Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: That was a little bit of it, but the other bit of it was there a boy, and his name was Larry Brown and he had gotten a track scholarship at the University of Arizona, but there were two opportunities, one at the University of Florida and one at the University of Arizona. And wherever he chose to go, that's where I was going to focus, you know, on getting a scholarship, so I chose the University of Arizona. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38945 Speaker 1: We were just talking off camera about the family sensitivity to divulging information and you were saying that there are plenty of things in your family that you're still finding out about and--. Speaker 2: Oh yes, when I was about six or seven years old I kept asking questions about why we had to go to the doctor and be tested, and no one wanted to talk about that, and years later I learned it was because my grandmother had tuberculosis, and so we all had to be tested to find out whether or not, you know, we were exposed to it or have it. And so many things like that, family relationships, someone inter-marrying with another race, and don't speak with that person ever again--there were lots of situations like that where, you know, you had to keep trying to open doors with your family and, you know, very often, until you found a talkative relative, you really wouldn't get much information. You know, for example, one of my aunts on my father's [Robert Jones] side had to be institutionalized because of a mental disorder, and no one ever wanted to talk about Katherine. It's just amazing. Things like that, that you would embrace today and say she's part of the family, mental illness is what it is, why don't we have a discussion? During those days, no one wanted to talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 38946 Speaker 1: Well, picking up. University of Arizona? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in Tucson [Arizona], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Tucson, Arizona. When I first got off the plane, it was August, and what a culture shock it was, to come from the northeast where everything is green, to go into a place where everything is brown. And I thought, did I make a mistake? But after a year, I grew to love it. It was unbelievable, living in the valley surrounded by three mountain ranges. When it snowed you could see it on the mountains, but it never snowed on the ground in Tucson. It was beautiful. I enjoyed that time very, very much. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you were majoring in broadcast journalism? Speaker 2: They called it radio and television then. So I went to both University of Arizona and Pima Community College because it was less expensive to take classes at Pima Community College that would transfer over to the U of A [University of Arizona]. So Larry [Ciara's friend] had his track scholarship and I had my scholarship, plus grants, and we were both going to college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were there any, I guess, special teachers or mentors, you know, at University of Arizona or Pima? Speaker 2: At the University of Arizona, there was one class in particular. I think it was a sociology class. And the professor was really tough as nails. I can't remember his name, but I recall it was this huge class. I had never been in a class that large, where it seemed like there were almost forty to fifty students. It was kind of like a mini arena sort of. It seemed--because you know the stairs would go up and the seating was up and he was down in the cavity of this room. And he said--first of all, I should precede it by saying nothing challenges me more than a challenge. Nothing gets me more excited to prove you wrong than if you say I can't do something. So, he said, "Look to your left, look to your right. Two of you aren't going to be here at the end of the semester, because you're probably just not going to get it." And so, he influenced me more than anything, because I felt like he was talking directly to me. And I kind of felt at that time, that I had missed out on high school. I had gotten a general equivalency diploma [GED], so I felt ill-prepared, but I wanted to prove everybody wrong, because I had done so well on the GED test. So, I thought, okay I missed out on years of high school, am I prepared for college? This man is talking to me. He's saying I'm not going to be here at the end of the semester. So, of course, I wanted to do very well in that class, just to prove that he was incorrect. And he was incorrect. Of course, I did better in classes that were about my major because I was so passionate about that. But I would say that the biggest inspiration were the naysayers who basically said you're not going to make it, minorities don't make it in this business, you're not going to find a job. You've got an Afro. What are you going to do about that? (laughter). You know, that kind of thing. So I think that was a great influence on me, the naysayers. Story_ID: 38947 Speaker 1: Did you find Arizona more conservative than the East Coast? Speaker 2: I found it to be in some ways more liberal in some ways at the time, because I hadn't seen so many interracial couples before that I saw in Tucson [Arizona]. And you know, in fact, the small number of black students on campus would remark, "Why are these athletes dating these white girls? You know, what are we, chopped liver over here?" And so we were always very upset that there was so much interracial dating, when in fact, we were forced to do it, because you know, there weren't that many--a two percent black population there. So in some ways it was more liberal. But I found that it was just a different kind of bigotry, because you would actually have conversations with people saying nasty things about Hispanics, saying nasty things about Native Americans and I would say "If you could say those things about them, then when I leave the room, you'll certainly say it about me." "Oh no, you're alright, Barbara." "What do you mean, I'm alright? If I'm alright, the guy who speaks Spanish is alright, or the Native Americans, the Papagos, they're alright." So, I found it was just a different kind of bigotry there in Arizona. I think that when you're a majority minority in an area, that's where they put their laser focus on in terms of their bigotry. We found, or at least I did, on the East Coast if there was going to be bigotry, it was aimed at, you know, the black people, and they were talking about you're ghetto, or you're this or you're that. But in Arizona it was all about focusing on Hispanics and calling them a variety of horrible names, along with, you know, people who lived on the reservation. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you weren't being a threat I guess in Arizona. Speaker 2: Apparently, but to some we were novel because you didn't see that many African Americans on campus. I mean, it was the first time that anyone had ever come over and said "May I touch your hair" because I had an Afro at the time and I think they thought it was going to be hard and brittle. They'd say, "Oh, your hair is actually very soft." I said, "What were you expecting?" And you know, it was interesting to me that there were some people who approached me like they had never met a person of color in their life, and actually some of them had not. Speaker 1: Okay. I asked because that's the era of, you know, Barry Goldwater and very conservative politicians and I just wondered-- Speaker 2: Well, if you're talking about the politics, I would have to say at that time I was not as politically engaged or aware, but in terms of the cultural field and my feeling of acceptance, I felt very accepted there. But I also felt a sense of empathy for other minority groups who seemed to be the focus of a lot of bigotry at that time. Speaker 1: Your answer was good, because that's really more of what the question was about, the atmosphere. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 38948 Speaker 1: So, how were your grades [at the University of Arizona]? So, how did you do? Speaker 2: I did relatively well in all of my courses except for math and I struggled in some science classes and I really struggled with language, and that's when I knew that things were going south when you had to take four courses for your Spanish. The first one, I got an A, the second one I got a B. The third one I got a C. I said, here it comes. The last semester, I need your help. That's when I turned to my friend, Lupita Moreo [ph.] and I said, "This is conversational Spanish. I can write it down, but I'm not speaking well at all. Do me a favor and speak to me only in Spanish for this semester so I can squeak by." So, to my frustration, she did. And she would not break from character. She would not speak to me in English even though I would plead with her. I got a C. (laughter) Yeah, I struggled in language. Speaker 1: Okay. You started in 1976 at the University of Arizona? Speaker 2: I started in 1970. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, you leave the University of Arizona in 1976, that's what it is. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You started-- Speaker 2: It had to be '74 [1974], it had to be '74 [1974]. It had to be 1974 because '76 [1976] is when I dropped out to take that full-time job in television. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were basically there for two years? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, 1974 to 1976? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38949 Speaker 1: So you were there during--now this is TV journalism. The hottest thing going on was the Watergate period, in '74 [1974] when you went out there. Did you pay attention to that? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh yeah. Oh yeah. I paid a great deal of attention to that. Ah, I was paying attention to that from--well, actually I was paying attention to a lot of things in 1972 because of the Vietnam War coming to an end and people coming home, and the whole idea of war was a topic of much discussion among the students at that time, and, you know, the fear of war. And so many people had lost family members or knew people who had died in Vietnam or come back with issues regarding Agent Orange, and it was just a horrible thing. The war was the worst thing ever, in our minds then. Speaker 1: Okay. Ah, so, right, that's true. Yeah, the troops started coming back in '74 [1974] too, yeah, as the Watergate story unfolded. Speaker 2: I probably have to check my facts to see if my years were historically accurate, but I do know that discussions surrounding finally ending Vietnam was a great deal of discussion. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, tell us about the job. How did the job come about? I mean, this thing, you know, when I was reading the outline, I said, this is miraculous. She jumps right from school to this job [Ciara left the University of Arizona after two years, in 1976, to join a full-time job in television]. Speaker 2: Well, as you know, television news was opening up in those days. There was a great deal of recruiting going on at a high level in the '70s [1970s]. But I was in a very small market where there really wasn't a great black population, so there was no incentive to hire blacks as much as, you know, Hispanics. But I did have a friend at school who worked part at the independent station which was then KZAZ. And so they were looking for a production assistant and I decided to go after that job. During the first round of hiring, I did not get hired. The second opening came up and they hired me part-time. And I moved heaven and earth within that television station to get on the air. I worked hard, I kept, you know, talking to the news director day after day, until I finally wore him down. And he said, "After your shift, after the late, late, late show, you can do a five-minute news update." But the problem was I had to write the script, go in, have somebody else flip the switch, and I basically read from a script with no teleprompter that I created at maybe 3:00 in the morning, that people would see. I had my big giant Afro. If you saw those tapes then, you'd say "Oh my gosh, how did that ever get on the air?" (laughter). But that was the beginning, until finally they had a part-time opening in news. So I married those two part-time openings into a full-time job, and that's when I knew I had to leave school in order to make it work. And so eventually I went into the news department full time and was a full time reporter, and it took me about six months to parlay that from part-time to full-time. Speaker 1: That's rapid movement. Speaker 2: It was rapid movement because of a very aggressive young girl who decided that she was not going to take no for an answer (laughter). Speaker 1: Now did you, so, you developed the capacity to write fairly well? Speaker 2: Yes. And I wrote for the school newspaper at Pima Community [College, Tucson, Arizona] as well. And so I honed my skills more there because you had, you know, you had an editor and you had other colleagues who were working on other work, so you had a chance to compare your work to other people who were also publishing, and, you know, the whole idea of how many words per column. That's when I started understanding print journalism and I started thinking, rather than TV, maybe I should focus on print. But I just couldn't seem to get a job at the paper, and so the first opportunity really was at the television station. So, despite the fact that I was writing regularly at Pima, the first opportunity to actually get on the air and act as a journalist would be in television. Story_ID: 38950 Speaker 1: Now did you have, did you pattern yourself after anyone who was on the air already? I mean did you have a hero anchor or--? Speaker 2: Barbara Walters, Barbara Walters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because at that time, she was making great in-roads at all of the network television stations and she was moving up rapidly and doing some great interviews and that kind of thing, so I thought, wow. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right, I remember Saturday Night Live was starting up then, and they used to do-- Speaker 2: "Barbara WaWa" (laughter). If you want to look at high profile people at the time who were female--because a lot of television stations, they weren't taking women very seriously. There were promos on the air. For example, when I got to this market, still in the early '80s [1980s], you had a woman on the air and they had a promo calling her 'Girl on the Go', showing her legs running up City Hall. It was ridiculous the way women were viewed and treated by management at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's since been, what is it, the Mary Tyler Moore show, and it's been parodied in the movies a lot, you know, the 'Anchorman' movie (unclear). Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But a lot of those--I've heard stories from news people that really, I've heard some horrendous stories. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean George Borzan [ph.] who was the anchor man at KZAZ at the time would actually--there were three women in the newsroom, and we were all sort of at this, it looked like a bar with typewriters. We were on stools typing, and he would go down the line and snap our bra straps, you know, just to intimidate us. During those days, we didn't even know about sexual harassment. You just knew if you wanted to keep your job, you would shut up and put up with it. And he would say things like "I don't understand why there's so many women in this newsroom." He said, "News coming from a woman's mouth sounds like gossip." That's what he said to us, bold to our faces. Story_ID: 38951 Speaker 1: The irony is that I became George's [Borzan; ph] boss [at KZAZ] before leaving, so that was sweet justice as far as I was concerned. It was, he was so ridiculous in his, you know, in his insults toward women. I really could not wait, you know, to see the look on his face when I was eventually promoted to news director before leaving. But it was interesting, because over a two year period, I was working all kinds of jobs. It was a small newsroom where you would shoot and edit, you know, your own tape. And we were on tape in the early '70s [1970s] when people on the East Coast were still shooting film, so we had better equipment. We were doing well, I was managing people on the assignment desk, and eventually Gene Adelstein, who was the owner and general manager at KZAZ, called me into his office and said that Johnson Scott, who was the news director, was actually going to run for office, so he had to leave the news department in order to run for office. But he wanted to know if I was interested in becoming news director. And so, I said, of course, yes. He said "I've watched you manage and I know you're young, but I think that you could really do a good job." And I said, "Of course." And so, a little small pay increase, I became news director. But it hadn't been announced yet and we were going to do that at a station meeting. And I was producing the nine o' clock show, the 9:00 p.m. that George anchored. So, it's interesting, I'm typing up some copy for George, and he was annoyed about something. He thought that the copy was partisan towards Democrats or something, and he railed against the copy and said that it was slanted. He said that he had enough of me, and he said, "It's come down to this, Barbara. It's either you or me." I've already been promoted. I said, "George, I'm sorry to see you go. You don't know it buddy, but I'm your boss now." (laughter). So, I love telling that story because it is just sweet justice for all of the times that he had been so disrespectful to all of the women in the newsroom that now he had to answer to a woman. So, he charged into Gene's office and said "Is it true, is it true?" He said, "Yes, it's true. Barbara is the news director now." I thought he was going to have a heart attack right there on the spot (laughter). But in 1978, I was the youngest female and first African American to be a news director at a commercial station in the southwest. Speaker 2: That is something. Speaker 1: At twenty-three [years; age]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay. Was that gentleman fired? Speaker 1: No, it's much more fun to keep him around (laughter). No, no, I didn't want to fire George. He was very popular in the area. Speaker 2: Oh, he didn't quit, even after saying it was you or him? Speaker 1: No, he didn't quit, and I didn't fire him, because it was much more fun to have him around. And, if you're going to be a good news director, you have to know that if you've got a popular talent, despite how annoying he is, keep him and direct him, and the fact that he had to answer to a twenty-three year old was bad enough. The fact that I was wearing a skirt really frosted him. But you know, he didn't get too cheeky after that, but he definitely had his moments where I thought that he was going to charge out of there and never come back (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 38952 Speaker 1: Alright, '78 [1978]. Now, by this time the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] has been formed. Were you aware of them? Speaker 2: I was so unaware of them until I came back East. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were not on my radar. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we'll save that until you get back East then. I just wondered if you knew of them at that juncture. Well, did you know of any, were there any local associations in Arizona or in the southwest, of black journalists? Speaker 2: No, I was very active with activities regarding the Urban League and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored people] at that time. That's the way I stayed connected culturally in the South because those areas were very active. Those particular organizations were very active in the '70s [1970s] in Tucson, Arizona. They advocated for, you know, jobs and you know, diversity on the airways, and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38953 Speaker 1: Alright, so how did things go as a news director [at KZAZ, Tucson, Arizona]? What are some of the stories? Speaker 2: Well, Gene Adelstein was a wonderful general manager because he was one of those types of people who trusted my demographic. If I'd selected stories that were interesting to me, he thought they'd be interesting to the audience. But he expanded too quickly. He kept buying television stations until finally, let's see, until finally around 1980, you know, he had to lay off half my news department. And that's when I decided to start looking elsewhere. But the types of stories we were interested in--well, you might remember the name Don Bolles. In Arizona, it's said that he was killed by the mob in Arizona. The Bonannos were there. There were a lot of mob type stories that we covered there. Mo Udall, he covered a lot of activity when he was alive, a congressman. Speaker 1: He ran for president, too, didn't he? Speaker 2: Ah, Mo Udall? Speaker 1: Didn't he? Speaker 2: That may have been his son. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: --who became an elected official in another state. Speaker 1: Stewart Udall. Speaker 2: Yeah, but Mo Udall was a congressman in Arizona. And so there was a lot of politics we covered then. I remember one of the first stories that I had the opportunity to cover as a reporter in Arizona was when Rosalynn Carter came to town. And at the time, John C. Scott who was the news director said, "Okay, I'm going to test you guys. If you don't know enough about government, you're not going to cover this story. And one gal eliminated herself right away and said, "What's government have to do with the first lady?" So, she was thrown out of the mix, and then there were two of us left who actually had to answer a question. And so he said "If you can tell me if the President of the United States and the Vice President are killed in a plane crash, who then would be next up to bat in terms of leading the country?" Speaker 1: I answered the question and so I got a chance to cover Rosalynn Carter, because you know, I said "The head of congress is going to be the Speaker of the House." So, he said, "You get to go cover the first lady." Thank God for that government question. (laughter) Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So you got a chance to really cover the top politicians when they came to Tucson? Speaker 1: Yes, not only did I get to cover the top politicians, but if ever there was a film star or somebody in town, I would assign myself to go cover it. I never will forget when Richard Pryor was shooting 'Stir Crazy' in Arizona, and we had an opportunity to go on set and interview him and Gene Wilder. And so that was a wonderful opportunity. And I met Sidney Poitier, who was directing the film. And so, there was a lot of action that came through Arizona, but it was also a military base because we had Davis Monthan Air Force base there. So there were military stories that we had an opportunity to cover as well because of that population. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 38954 Speaker 1: Now is Tucson the capital of Arizona? Speaker 2: No, Phoenix. Speaker 1: Phoenix, okay. Speaker 2: Now Tucson is a big university town, and of course, the Wildcats, you know, everybody is a big fan of all the college ball there. And a big deal time at the time, Fred Snowden, one of the few black basketball coaches at that time at [University of] Arizona, led the Wildcats during the 1970s. Speaker 1: How did your friend do, Larry Brown? Speaker 2: Larry did well. He collected a couple of gold medals during, not the Olympics, but there were some World games in Moscow [Russia], and he did well. I don't know where he is now, but he's originally from New Jersey and he had a good career in college. Speaker 1: Okay. I know Arizona, University of Arizona, was famous for track, Arizona and Arizona State. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was outstanding. I mean he came close to breaking some world records, you know, when he was at the peak of his career. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Alright, so in 1980 you decide that things may be, you may have to leave. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't like leaving Gene Adelstein because he had been such a mentor to me. He helped me grow as a journalist and as a manager at his television station. He was very encouraging to me when others were not. And, but my hands were tied. When he laid off the majority of my team, it was difficult for me to produce a newscast with just this skeleton crew. And we were competing against the network affiliates who thought of us as you know, also rans, so I was trying to be competitive with them and put in some good product, but it was difficult to do if half my team was gone. So I went to him and I said, "What are your thoughts on restoring these positions?" And he was frank with me. He said he had expanded with all these other television stations and he was cash strapped and he had to make the choices that he made to keep the rest of the television stations going. And so I told him, I said "I'm going to start looking to, you know, to look outside the market. And he understood, and said that he would be a reference and he understood I had to grow anyway and I was never going to be there forever. So, I started looking. I got an offer in Kearney, Nebraska, of all places. And I'd looked for a job in Wichita [Kansas]. There was a boy in medical school who was there. And then I also looked here in Norfolk [Virginia], and I just could not take that job in Kearney, Nebraska, no matter what. And there was some interest in Wichita, but I liked the idea of Norfolk better. And so I took the job in Norfolk in September of 1981. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Norfolk, Virginia. This is WAVY-- I'm sorry. What is it? Speaker 2: WVEC. Speaker 1: WVEC. Speaker 2: WVEC from 1981 to 1983. From 1983 to 1985 I was at WAVY. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went back to WVEC--wait a minute-- went back to WZEZ in 1989, I'm sorry. So three years at WVEC, five years at WAVY. So it must have meant that I went there until 1989, 1983 to 1989. And then from 1989 to 2000 I was back at WVEC and then came here in 2000, July at WTKR. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's kind of unusual, isn't it, for a person to be able to be employed twice at the same station and--all three of the--. Speaker 2: It's very unusual. And I credit the idea that, you know, that I've always had friends at all of the television stations. I maintained friendships even when I left television stations with management that I became close with. And everything, oh, everything begins and ends with a drink, and cocktail hours sometimes teaches you where you'll be working next (laughter). Story_ID: 38955 Speaker 1: In Norfolk, Virginia--what were your impressions of Norfolk? Speaker 2: Well, I'll be honest. At first I was delighted that I would drive down the street and I'd see a good population of African Americans, because I'd just left a city where I would hang out the window and wave if I saw somebody of color (laughter) because there were so few of us. So I thought it would probably be more culturally enriching to be in a place like Virginia. What I didn't understand is that I was coming back to a place where in some areas of the state they were still fighting a civil war. There was so much talk of race here. There wasn't a lot of talk of race in Arizona. I mean, of course there were pockets of conversations about it, but it was not top of mind the way it was in Virginia. You know, you had really divisive heated discussions about black and white people that I was not accustomed to, coming from a state where it was a majority white. So I just didn't get it. There was a feeling here that was just like post-civil war, almost. One of the first community forums I attended was in the Larrymore Acres section of Norfolk. And there was an old man in back of the room, and myself and another journalist. We were back there covering this community forum because they had a cross burning in one of the neighborhoods. And I'm like, where the hell did I come to? I mean, why did I choose this place where there's so much racial, you know, tension. And this old guy in the back of the room got up and started screaming, "The niggers just need to leave, they just need to leave." And I'm stunned. I mean, first of all, I've gone my whole colored career in Arizona without ever hearing anybody say the 'N' word. And I'd come to Virginia and I was just stunned stupid. I thought, oh my gosh. There was Doug Wilder, who was a state senator at the time, who would later become governor. Every year he was going before the general assembly trying to get them to ratify MLK [Martin Luther King] Day, and every year they're saying no, but they wanted to celebrate Lee Jackson Day. Eventually this state, which is the seat of the confederacy in Richmond [Virginia], married the confederate soldier and MLK Day into one big day, Lee Jackson King Day. It was an insult to the African Americans in this state, but that was the only way that they could get the legislation through, to put the confederate general and MLK on the same day, and then they celebrated Lee Jackson King Day for years, until the holidays were eventually separated. So now MLK Day is on a Monday and Lee Jackson Day is on a Friday in the state of Virginia. Speaker 1: That's incredible. I didn't know that and--Lee Jackson King Day. Alright, well this is different, then. Speaker 2: It was a whole different atmosphere. Story_ID: 38956 Speaker 1: In fact, the man who first hired me was Tom Chisman, who was the general manager and owner of WVEC [Norfolk, Virginia]. The reason why I left WVEC after a short period of time, from 1981 to 1983, is because I went up to Tom Chisman's office and I said "Look, I'm doing morning anchoring and reporting." I was doing morning anchoring on the cut-ins. I said "But I want an opportunity to grow." By now they know this kid's going to come in, she's going to look for opportunities, she's going to push, push, push, and she wants to get promoted. I said "I think Judy Berutti, who is the weekend anchor, is looking to leave. Should she leave, I'd like to be considered to be the weekend anchor here." He sat behind this big mahogany desk and told me flat out. He said "Barbara, I've grown up in this area, and this area is not ready for a black anchor." I said, "Excuse me?" He said "No, this area is not ready for a black anchor. We hired you for your spot because we designated that as a place where we could hire a black person." I say, "You're telling me that I've got a designated spot?" And in fact I knew that already, because someone told me that was the spot that they chose to be a spot to hire African Americans, but they don't last very long. They usually hire for a year or two and they're gone. And so I became aware that I was in a designated spot. I said "Do you realize that there--it's almost half the population here? Your demographics, you've got a lot of black people in this area. It would seem to me that you would want to put somebody on the air that they would tune in and watch. He said "No, I know this area and they won't accept it." So when the news director at WAVY saw me at one of the local hangouts where reporters go to drink, I had a cocktail with him and I said "Listen, if there's ever an opportunity over there, you've seen my work. If you like what you see, I'm interested in moving across the street." And six months later, he offered me a job and I left. Because it was clear to me that I could do one of two things. I could sue Tom and then become a pariah in the industry because everyone would think I'm litigious and I'm pulling the race card, or whatever it is that they say about people who file lawsuits against someone who just blatantly told them they're not going to promote them because they're black, or I can just find another job. So I moved over to WAVY in 1983 and-- Speaker 2: Well, let me just ask you this since you mentioned that, because I've heard people say this before, but is the broadcast industry that type where if you do file a lawsuit or something like they, the word would spread? Speaker 1: I think, yes. I think--there are rare cases where you won't be painted with that brush, but I do think it gives someone pause before they hire you. Okay, what kind of person is this? And if you don't have strong references to say there was a very good reason why that person filed that lawsuit, this was a blatant situation, that kind of thing--. In an industry where news directors and general managers don't want to get in a tight spot with an employer, it could follow you to your detriment if you filed a lawsuit, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a tight industry. People pick up phones all the time and say things. Speaker 2: So you had to, you had to think about how to negotiate that situation? Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had to think long and hard, because the secretary, Tom's secretary, was a good friend of mine, and her son worked at CNN. And she said, "Barbara, I overheard what happened, but if you sue, I didn't hear what happened." She told me straight up she would never testify against Tom. So, even though she heard it, it would be my word against his and, you know, it just seemed like a pointless fight at that point, you know, so I went across the street to WAVY. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38957 Speaker 1: You're at WAVY [Norfolk, North Carolina] now which rhymes with Navy-- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: --which is-economy of Norfolk kinda hinges on it. Now, what was that? Now, this is an affiliate of--? Speaker 2: NBC. Speaker 1: --NBC. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was fantastic, because most of the staff were my age, so we had a group of very young people. The station was in the toilet in terms of ratings. It was like you could try anything on the air because they thought we can go no further down than where we are right now. We can go up. So it was a period of tremendous growth for that television station. Because A: you had reporters trying new things. We got new eyeballs on that station and it grew, and despite Tom's [Tom Chisman, owner of WVEC, Norfolk] prediction, they hired the first black female news anchor at WAVY, Diana Morgan, who under her leadership guided the station to number one. She was the six and eleven o'clock anchor. And that black female anchor and the rest of the cast became number one in this market, with Tom Chisman saying it would never be accepted. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was Morgan there before you got there? Speaker 2: Uh huh, she was there before I got there. But again he said, "Oh that will never work." So then I became the weekend anchor, which was the job that I wanted at WVEC, at WAVY. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Do you, now you've been a reporter and an anchor. Which one do you like the most, doing the most, reporting or an anchor? Speaker 2: Reporting. I am a writer and storyteller and journalist at heart. I think that for me, and I only speak for my situation, anchoring was just a way to increase my salary, but reporting is what I enjoy the most. You know, there's no greater thrill than being able to tell a story and actually make a difference with that story. One of the stories I'm most proud of is a story I did on a gentleman by the name of Tony Distafono, and he had terminal lung cancer. He was self-employed and he changed his health policy to a new company at the behest of an insurance agent who told him that he would be covered. When he was diagnosed with lung cancer, they deemed it as a pre-existing condition and the insurance company refused to pay. Well, through my research and investigative reporting, I put that agent on camera, had him admit to what he did, went to the insurance company and basically asked them how do they sleep at night, until eventually Tony--his health issues were covered by that insurance company only through the involvement of my reporting on a television station. And then when Tony died, before he died, he wrote me a note saying "My family is not bankrupt because of you. If I had not gotten this insurance, my family would have been bankrupt." That was the sweetest note that I'd ever gotten from a family as a direct result of reporting, and I'm still Facebook friends with his family today. So, it's being able to make a difference and give a voice to the voiceless and actually feeling like you make positive changes in some of your reporting. Not all of your stories are going to have that impact, I realize that. But just pitching to a reporter is not satisfying to me. To say, "Back to you, Eric," or "Over to you Jessica"--I want to be the one delivering that news and telling that story or giving information that's going to be helpful to the person on the other end. That is what makes me jump out of bed in the morning, so that I can come to work. I can say after thirty-five years I'm still excited about what I do, and it's because of those opportunities. And quite frankly, when you're an anchor, you get to pick and choose the types of stories that you do. So you have a little bit more editorial freedom instead of chasing a fire or a murder. I don't cover those stories anymore. I get a chance to do the in-depth reporting that I enjoy more, or the types of fun things that I enjoy doing too, because I'm not one-dimensional. Everything doesn't have to be a heavy handed approach. There's still some fun things that I like to cover that give me satisfaction. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you're at WAVY until? Speaker 2: '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: '89 [1989], okay. Story_ID: 38958 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about--I have a note here to ask you about the Colonial Parkway murders [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Oh. Well, I was not involved in the coverage of those, but I remember well. It's still unsolved, many of those murders, and in fact at our television station now, our investigative reporter is still working to uncover, you know, clues to those murders. But they went on for a period of time. It was frightening for people in this area, because there was a serial killer on the loose. And despite our reporting of it, never ever actually identified and caught him. There were, you know, rumors that it had to be someone in law enforcement because of the way these murders were executed, and he got away, we're assuming he, but never quite nailed down who the Colonial Parkway killer is, or was. Speaker 1: Now these are murders committed at long distance by someone with a--? Speaker 2: No, those were, you're talking about the shootings with Muhammad and.--. Speaker 1: John Muhammad. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. No, those were up further north. Those were northern Virginia and [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] beltway. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: Colonial Parkway is near Williamsburg, Virginia in this viewing area, and those remain unsolved. Speaker 1: Okay. How did they take place? Speaker 2: Typically they were couples in cars that were killed. And many of these families are still trying to figure out, you know, why the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or local law enforcement just let the case grow cold. Speaker 1: So they were actually cleared over, and then-- Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But off the Parkway? Speaker 2: Off the Parkway, all in that area. It made for, you know lots of detours, and a lot of people didn't even want to take the Colonial Parkway for a time because of these murders. And then when we roll them out historically to say they're still unsolved, you know, it gives you pause. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38959 Speaker 1: Now you were with ABC-WAVY until 1989? Speaker 2: WAVY is the NBC affiliate. Speaker 1: NBC, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And, yes, I was there until 1989. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, why did you leave, I mean, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, Bill Bindorf [ph.], who was president and general manager of WVEC at the time, he and I remained friends. I knew him because he worked at WVEC under Tom Chisman. Tom was gone. That's the only way I would have considered coming back because now WVEC was owned by Corinthian Broadcasting and later Belo Corporation, and because Bill was a fair-minded guy and didn't talk like a bigot, you know, (laughter) we'd share a cocktail some evenings. He had a dream. He said "Listen, this Oprah Winfrey is getting to be a really big deal, and I'm thinking you could do a show something like Oprah Winfrey here." And he said "Can you figure out a way to do that?" And so I said, "Let's meet for cocktails next week, Bill." So, I came back to Bill and had a budget, a quarter million dollar budget. I said "That's the way you're going to do a show like that here." He says "No way in the world, no way in hell, Ciara that we're going to do a quarter million dollar show." I said, "Well, that's what you're going to need to do to do a show like Oprah." I said, "Besides, that's not my thing. I want to anchor." I said, "Sir, I want to anchor and report. When we have an opening, you know, call me." So eventually--this took place over a couple of years, and so eventually he called me and he said, "I'm ready to make a move, and I'm ready to change our anchor." What also helped was, Jim Kincaid, who was a former ABC correspondent who came here to be the main anchor man at WVEC, he and I were old pals from the time that I came to WVEC in 1981. He knew me to be a journalist. He thought his current co-anchor at the time was a lightweight. He didn't appreciate being paired with somebody that he didn't appreciate professionally. So, Bill said he wanted to hire me, but first we had to fly to Dallas [Texas], to WFAA, and have, you know, corporate sign off on us as a pairing. And so we flew into Dallas and after a couple of gin and tonics on the airplane, we went to the set and cut a demonstration reel for corporate to see. Um, great chemistry, especially since we had had a couple of cocktails (laughter). And we were loose and familiar with each other, yet professional, and that's what they saw, and so they signed off on it. And so that was the beginning of my career at WVEC with Jim Kincaid. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38960 Speaker 1: Now what were the highlights of your stay there [WVEC, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. Again, it has to do with military and politics, because at the beginning of Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm, I went to Saudi Arabia, to Dhahran to cover the beginning of the war. It was also a time of politics, with Chuck Robb. You might remember that there was the infamous story of him sharing a glass of champagne in a bathrobe with then Miss Virginia, and he was married to Linda, ah-- Speaker 1: Johnson? Speaker 2: Yeah, Robb. And so there was a lot of brouhaha about that, especially since she posed in Playboy Magazine after that incident and came to Norfolk, and about a thousand people lined up to have her sign their magazine. So there was an editorial debate in our newsroom at the time about whether or not we should cover a story because of a woman who claimed to have shared a hotel room with then senator Robb, or was it Governor Robb at the time? So anyway, there was this scandal surrounding politics. I think that happened a lot during that era. And of course Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm, and then I went back after Desert Storm and stayed in the same barracks, or quarters, that were later blown up in Dhahran, the Towers. So, politics, military--that would certainly be the highlight of some of the coverage. And then I decided to focus on the civil rights movement here in Virginia. Until I came to Virginia, I didn't know a lot about the Norfolk 17 and I didn't know a lot about, you know, massive resistance that occurred in this state, and how they actually shut down all the schools rather than integrate them. So, I decided to do a documentary with the support of my television station, a thirty minute documentary outlining the efforts of the Norfolk 17 to integrate Norfolk public schools. And I also went south to Montgomery [Alabama] and interviewed some civil rights activists there. I had a chance to hold the letter from the Birmingham [Alabama] jail that was typed by Martin Luther King, Jr. I had the freedom to do a lot of long form work at Channel 13 during that time. Also I did a story to make people understand what was happening in low income areas by doing a story, a long form story called "Letters from the Hood" where children would write about hearing gunshots when they slept at night. So I also covered [Ku Klux] Klan activity in Hampton Roads [Virginia], and we had some people go undercover to infiltrate the Klan and talk about their activities. It turned out that they were actually selling candy in black neighborhoods, and they were selling candy and raising money from black people to fund the Klan. So you know we uncovered a bit of stuff. We found out that this guy who was the head of the Klan locally was a part of the local Republican party, and they dismissed him from his chairmanship, so we did a lot of great work. Also, there was a segregated golf course in Portsmouth [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Now this was in the 1990s? Speaker 2: '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah. Some of that, but not at WAVY, yeah. But that didn't get integrated until late '80s [1980s], and it was on city land. But the '90s [1990s] was all about politics, military, and civil rights coverage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course one big story that I covered, well that was in 1987, that was the mayor being recalled from office. Speaker 1: The mayor of Norfolk? Speaker 2: The mayor of Portsmouth. Speaker 1: Portsmouth, Okay. Speaker 2: Mayor Holly. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: It was some hate mail scandal, and then there was a great uprising population to throw that rascal out. They threw him out and then he was voted back into office a few years later, and it was a recall that took him out of office again. Speaker 1: Okay. Same mayor? Speaker 2: Same mayor. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 38961 Speaker 1: So this sounds like a pretty exciting area to-- Speaker 2: It's an amazing area, news wise. A lot of people who don't know anything about Norfolk, Virginia--A: they don't know that we call it Hampton Roads. We're talking 1.5 million people covering an area from the northern neck of Williamsburg [Virginia] all the way down northeast to North Carolina and the seven cities in between. So it's, it's diverse, it's interesting, there's always something happening here. Speaker 1: Yeah, this, what you're saying is true and it's something I did not realize until we started coming out here doing interviews. You're talking about Norfolk, Chesapeake, Portsmouth, Hampton [Virginia], all these areas. Speaker 2: Newport News, Virginia Beach. Speaker 1: Newport News, Virginia Beach, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, I've often thought, why didn't they do something like New York and just have the boroughs, and just call it the Greater Norfolk area. But you just can't get everybody to agree on who would be the seat of power. Speaker 1: Right, right, that's a good analogy. They could be boroughs, which they really are. Speaker 2: That's exactly it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38962 Speaker 1: Now, you're at, this is the ABC affiliate you're at now, back at WVEC? Speaker 2: WVEC. Speaker 1: And now you left WVEC at a certain point to go to WAVY, right? Speaker 2: WTKR. Speaker 1: Alright, I wrote it down wrong. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yeah. In the year 2000 I left WVEC, and it was a tough decision because I really adored my general manager and it was just tough because I know that we had a personal, you know, and professional relationship. And he had fought for me at that television station, because in 1996 the news director at the time demoted me to a lesser show and I found myself doing the five and ten o' clock news as opposed to the 6:00 and 11:00--I think it was 9:00 to 6:00. Anyway, so basically this guy told me that no one wanted to see a full figured woman--not his words--mine, anchor the news. And so he thought that viewers thought I was too fat to anchor the news and so he demoted me. Now, he knew I was wildly popular but he did it anyway, and there was a great brouhaha in the community and kind of an uprising of sorts, a big petition and all kinds of stuff like that. So, I accepted the demotion and decided to do something else with the television station, and that was to become managing editor of L&C, which was a partnership between the Virginia pilot WVEC, the ABC affiliate, and Cox Communications. And they had a show on the cable number 5 that was continuous news. So since it was a management opportunity I accepted it, and did that. And then Mario Hewitt became, a brother, became general manager and decided that was kind of a stupid move, to demote me, and he put me back on the main shows. But when I left, which was your question, in 2000, that's why it was so difficult, because he put me right back in my main slot. Speaker 1: And I didn't point out that you received several Emmy nominations at that station, the one for 'Letters in the Hood' and one for, there's another here, Operation Haiti. Yeah, right, and you hosted, was this a weekly news magazine, 'This Week in Hampton Road?' Speaker 2: Yeah, WHRO, the public broadcasting station. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were working sort of in partnership with the PBS station? Speaker 2: So you could say I worked at four stations (laughter). Speaker 1: So, and during this time period you also started to work with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I want to point out there were several Emmy nominations, but we did win the Emmy for "Innocent Till Proven Guilty." Story_ID: 38963 Speaker 1: Alright, before we move on, I want to go back and talk about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], because the first note about NABJ, I have--when you get started with NABJ? Speaker 2: It was in the '90s [1990s]. I would check my records to say exactly when, but what was happening was happening on a local level here [Norfolk, Virginia]. In the '80s [1980's], Arthur Fernell who is now in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] working for Comcast, re-invigorated the local chapter of NABJ. And what was called Tide Water Media Professionals, Byron Pitts, who is now with '60 Minutes', helped with sound. We were always in somebody's kitchen, you know, talking about what we could do to bring African Americans and the media together. So we went from Tide Water Media Professionals to Hampton Roads Black Media Professionals under Arthur Fernell, and it expanded. Arthur is the person who made me interested in NABJ on a national level. When he ran for president of NABJ and won, he wanted regional directors who were of like mind, so I ran to be Region 3 regional director of NABJ and won, and we started really pulling young people who were in universities and people who were already writers and reporters on air, and having them understand the importance of being inside an organization that advocates for diversity, advocates for more people of color in management, and also advocates what you see on the air. One of the stories I like to tell is, a young producer who happens to be, you know, a young white girl, put on the air in copy that I was supposed read, "Norfolk police are looking for a black man, 6 foot 1, 180 pounds. So I told her, "We can't put this on the air." And she said, "Why not?" "You just said Norfolk police are looking for a black man, 6 foot 1, 180 pounds. So am I. I'm looking for a black man 6 foot 1, 180 pounds." I said, "You've just talked about half the population out there. You can't just put a generic description to make people fearful of all black men." And those kinds of educational opportunities were happening through NABJ. We were having workshops for managers to have them understand issues with copy and content, images that you see on the air, all of those things that help perpetuate stereotypes. When I understood the value of that, and knew how NABJ could actually correct behaviors that were putting images that were influential in the minds of viewers on the air, I knew that I had to be a part of that. So that's when I started running for office on a national level, and became a member of the National Board in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: I have here that in 1996 that you produced--let's see, what is it? Speaker 2: Oh, we produced a show that aired on BET [Black Entertainment Television]. It was our awards program [National Association of Black Journalists; NABJ]. It was the first national show. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So, Art Franklin and I were co-executive producers of the show. It was a very challenging thing to do, because up until that point we didn't know if a lot of people knew what NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] was, so we decided to put our Hall of Fame and awards program in a half-hour version of it, a stop-start production, and then put the finished product on BET, so more people would understand what we were about. And so that's what we did. And it was a big endeavor in Nashville [Tennessee] that year, but we did it and we hoped to put NABJ on the map by producing that nationally for BET. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38964 Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about Operation Haiti, too. But this is before the earthquake? Speaker 2: Oh, long before the earthquake. Speaker 1: This is another crisis in Haiti. Speaker 2: Yes, it was. I was on board the Mt. Whitney at first, which was a command vessel for the so-called invasion of Haiti, if you can call it an invasion, when the people on the shore had no armor, they had no rifles or guns. They were armed with broomsticks for the most part. And there were more journalists on the beach than, you know, Haitians during this so-called invasion. But after that we went down on a somewhat regular basis with the [U.S.] Marines, because the Marines adopted an orphanage up in the hills in Haiti and it was at that time that I really understood how impoverished Haiti was. And we featured some children who were actually living on the street, just trying to get by shining shoes. And you know, it was a very eye-opening experience. And what was the, I guess you could say the good part was that the military was acting in a humanitarian way with the population during that particular coverage piece. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now it was also 1997 that you received the Edward R. Murrow Award. What was this for? Speaker 1: Oh gosh. I think that that the Murrow Award was for the coverage of--oh, it's back in the '90s [1990s]--okay, what could that have been? Um, in--I have two Murrow awards. The last one was for, and it's not contained in my bio, the last one was for spot news coverage when an airplane went down at Oceana during an air show. And I'm going to have to look up the other one that happened in the '90s [1990s] to find out what that one was about. I want to say that it was for 'Reading, Writing and Resistance', which was the documentary I was talking about. I think that that may have been-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for the Murrow Award. Speaker 2: Okay, and that was the documentary about the Norfolk 17 and the desegregation struggle and-- Speaker 1: Right, massive resistance. Speaker 2: Okay, alright, okay. We interviewed Andrew Heidelberg [Norfolk 17 member; also a HistoryMaker] last year. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Story_ID: 38965 Speaker 1: Well, so this brings down--tell me if I'm rushing too fast here, but... Oh, during this period, I guess in the late '90s [1990s], you're finishing up your undergraduate degree at Hampton [University], too, right? Speaker 2: Well, yes, because my grandchildren were starting to get older, and I thought, I've been doing nothing but yapping about education all this time with them. Parroting my mother [Georgia Ann Jones] back in the day when we didn't get along very well, how could I be the pillar of example if I didn't finish up my degree. It was also a time where I was emceeing the Hampton Jazz Festival every year, and I would see Dr. [William R.] Harvey [president of Hampton University] year after year. And Dr. Harvey would say, "Umm, you've haven't finished your undergrad, and so when you do, you know you have to do it at Hampton." So one day I surprised him and I said, "I'm going to follow up and I'm going to do that." And so I enrolled and I was going to school early in the morning and then going to work at 2:30 and working until midnight, staying up until 3:00 to complete my assignments and starting the cycle every day after that. And it took me, it took me three semesters to finish up my work. It was a great deal of work. And I graduated summa cum laude. Speaker 1: That's great, that's great. But this is, I know recently I heard Tavis Smiley say that he hadn't finished his degree. Speaker 2: I didn't know that. Speaker 1: Yeah, in his autobiography. There seems to be an error where, you know, we assume that everyone on TV in these spots had degrees, but that's not necessarily true. Speaker 2: Peter Jennings never finished his degree. Jim Kincaid, who I worked with for years, and worked as an ABC correspondent, never finished his. Ah, there are a great number of people on the broadcast side who got in during the '70s [1970s] who never went beyond high school. Things changed in the '80s [1980's] and '90s [1990s] and it became a prerequisite that you had to have your bachelor's degree, but many of us who started in the '70s [1970s] were seemingly excused from that, because my employer knew that I was dropping out of school to take on that part-time job and never said a word about it. So things were just different in those days. It was more about your experience and what you were capable of doing more so than the degree-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --during those days. Speaker 1: Right, right. So, okay. So, but you actually did finish yours, which is-- Speaker 2: I did, but it was because of self-imposed pressure. I did not want my grandchildren saying "So when did you graduate?" and my not being able to answer that question in a way that would, you know, be satisfactory as far as I was concerned. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38966 Speaker 1: Okay, so, in 2000 you changed stations again? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you come here [WTKR-TV; CBS-affiliate, Norfolk, Virginia]. So did your responsibilities, how did they change? Speaker 2: Well they changed because for a year I couldn't be on the air. I had signed a no-compete clause on my last contract with WVEC [ABC affiliate, Norfolk], which meant that I couldn't be on the air for twelve months. I came to this television station because these were going to be the years that I would be at my maximum earning potential, and if I wasn't going to leave the market, then I needed to make a move that was going to be beneficial for me in terms of, you know, financially. Um, you know, there's a period of time when anchors can maximize their value and, you know, you have to take advantage of that, which I did. So it became something of a bidding war between the two television stations, and I ended up coming to WTKR as an anchor and managing editor with the same title. I didn't have a cable channel to manage as I did over at WVEC, but I had editorial control. So for the first seven years that I worked here, that worked well and I was able to help contribute to the content discussion in the newsroom. But like all places, there is sometimes a change in management which prevents you from doing what you originally set out to do. And in 2007 we had a news director here who didn't want to have me be the main anchor, so he put me into a couple of different shows. So, in 2007, the same year that I became president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], my responsibilities changed to become the noon and five p.m. anchor, which worked out well, because here's what they agreed to do. They agreed that since I had national responsibilities, I could work part of the day for NABJ and part of the day for WTKR. So for my tenure from '07 [2007] to '09 [2009] as president of NABJ, I had the kind of latitude to travel, go to conventions, take advocacy trips, and do all of those things by taking these other shows. So that worked out well for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38967 Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your position here at WTKR [CBS-affiliate, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Ah, most recently they formed a show a couple of years ago on the four o' clock that's almost all female, and that show's number one now. And so I'm very happy to say that they felt confident that I along with my colleagues could make that time slot work, and we're doing it. So I'm on the air from four to six [o'clock], and I report during the day. Highlights? Well, I had a chance to do my one-on-one interview last year with President [Barack] Obama. Ah, I also-- Speaker 1: Well, how did this come about? A one-on-one? Speaker 2: A one-on-one. Speaker 1: Now, you're not the, you're not Tom Brokaw or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or, you know, Barbara Walters. I mean, how did this happen? Speaker 2: Well, I wish I could say that it was some brilliant move on my part that made it all happen but it was basically--the Obama administration decided that on swing states they should allow opportunities for some of the main anchors to have short interviews with the president. So I was one of four, you know, markets where they allowed us to do a White House interview with the president. And when the opportunity came to this station, because of I guess my longevity and veteran status and my active role in covering local politics, I was selected to be the one to represent this television station. And so I was thrilled to have the opportunity. Now, I met Mr. Obama prior to his becoming president because he spoke before NABJ and UNITY, so I had met him twice before, and it was a different Mr. Obama when he's president. He was a little bit more, it's almost like he's been snake bit a bit by the press. So this casual kind of relaxed fellow that we saw during the campaign had morphed into his role as president, so he was a lot more serious. Ah, not a lot of joking, but he did flash that famous smile at me during our interview, so I was happy with that. But he definitely had changed with the job. He was much more presidential, I guess you could say. That's how I categorize it. Speaker 1: Okay. It's here at this station that you won the second Edward R. Murrow Award too, in 2008. I was just reading it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 38968 Speaker 1: What else, what else [highlights of Ciara's career at WTKR-TV; CBS-affiliate, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Let's see. Well, you know, it's so hard unless I'm sitting there looking at my bio to even remember some of the things that I've done. But I can tell you that there's a lot more human interest stories that I sometimes cover now. I like trying to do stories to--our theme here is taking action and getting results, so for example the last year we launched something called Operation School Uniform, where we engaged viewers to actually buy school uniforms for children who live in homeless shelters. And so we engaged their audience. They felt like they were making a difference and of course it made a difference for those kids. Because while their parents are struggling to figure out where they're going to live next, they don't have the money to make sure they go to school with brand new clothes. And I mean, if you remember back to when you were coming up, you remember the kids who didn't have brand new clothes. They, you know, kids are horrible. They make fun of you and torture you and, you know, anything that you can do to make that first day of school better and have them not feel like they're different than other kids, it changes their life. It changes that child's feeling about him or herself. So we launched that and I was very proud to be a part and actually be the cheerleader for that project. But there have been many different stories that I've done here that's just hard for me to have instant recall. But the Rosenwald project recently, I can tell you that the Rosenwald Fund--there was a local veteran who starting tracing for her family, her family was a part of the Rosenwald study, and slowly many of them were dying off, because like the Tuskegee experiment, they were not given the cure for syphilis. And then there were congenital problems that went through the family as a direct result of that, and we highlighted that. Um, it's almost like I'm sounding like I'm kind of bragging. It's just, you know, some of the everyday stories are important too in covering local politics, and just, you know, again, with the military--because I like to cover of some of those stories--where they're going, where they're stationed, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: With so many municipalities, you know, it's almost like boroughs, as you were saying before, and with so many people in this urban area, is it difficult to keep track of everything that's going on? Speaker 2: Well, we don't have a beat system the way we used to, where different people would cover different localities. But I find that in this very active social medium time where we are right now, viewers are not afraid to tell you what's happening in their communities. They will tell you what's happening on Facebook, they'll tell you what's happening via e-mail, so if you're not keeping up with it, they're bringing it to you. Many of our viewers are very interactive right now. They want the story told in their neighborhoods. So, we don't have a lot of trouble keeping up because the viewers are so proactive in communicating. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38969 Speaker 1: Now in 2007 you were elected president of National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]. Ah, how did this come about, I mean--? Speaker 2: Well, it was a tough campaign, because I only won by I think thirty-seven votes, so it was a squeaker. Uh-- Speaker 1: So, they run you as a popular candidate, you know, as an at large candidate, I guess, or do they--? Speaker 2: Well, there's no real nominating process. You decide to run and you basically throw down, you know, throw your hat into the proverbial ring and, as did my opponent, and we were both NABJ members. We brought different strengths and weaknesses to the table. I had been a regional director for two terms and came back hoping that my name recognition in one of the more populated regions would carry me through. But this person had also been very active with NABJ and had run for president twice before and had a very strong machine behind her. And I think either way, the membership would have benefitted, no matter who won that race, because we were both very passionate about NABJ. Ah, but I got my family involved, my husband, my in-laws, my son. We ran a campaign. We had buttons and mailers and we had political forums, and you know--so you had to get up and basically say, "Here's what I'm going to do for the organization." And after about a year of campaigning, it came down to Las Vegas [Nevada] in 2007 and when the votes were counted, I emerged victorious. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now are there terms for the president of NABJ? Speaker 2: One two-year term. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So the organization's constantly refreshed? Speaker 2: Constantly refreshed. Now, we've often discussed at NABJ that there should be some kind of tier system, so there'd be some institutional knowledge and that kind of thing, but it hasn't happened yet. I believe that someday soon there's probably going to be a referendum on the ballot to bring that about. Because I think one thing that gets lost is there used to be a time when the immediate past president was still a member of the board for the following term. And then there was a referendum on the ballot during Herb Blow's presidency which changed that and made the board smaller. While a smaller board was better, the institutional knowledge of the immediate past president went away with it, the immediate past president. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38970 Speaker 1: Now in 2007, and I don't know where this fits within the first year, which was half of your term I guess. Uh, CBS gets in trouble with Don Imus. Speaker 2: Actually it was NBC and MSNBC. Speaker 1: Oh, he was on MSNBC? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright, alright. Okay, so that's not so difficult to deal with. I was going to say--(laughter). Speaker 2: No, it wouldn't have been difficult if it was CBS. Speaker 1: I thought it was CBS. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't CBS. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I'll scratch that off. Speaker 2: No, but CBS had its issues, too. We went through that at CBS, because with the passing of-- Speaker 1: Ed Bradley? Speaker 2: Ed Bradley. We were faced with 60 Minutes without a person of color. So I was in New York almost every few months lobbying CBS to at least consider some of the veteran journalists that are out there who could take that slot. Not because Ed Bradley was black, because it was about A: you need another voice of diversity on that show. So we were saying you need to hire a minority for that show, because you don't--most shows with that many correspondents have one or two. They had one, and still do have one. So we were constantly in the face of NBC network. Were there times where I felt that you know, it was biting the hand that feeds? Yes. But I felt it's important to raise these issues of diversity and content, you know, with the networks. So, yes. The whole Don Imus thing blew up while I was first vice president of broadcast and then president. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And as president, you spoke for the organization in terms of how the organization felt about--what was the position of the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: Well our-- Speaker 1: First of all, what were the Imus remarks, and then what was the position of NABJ? Speaker 2: Well, you may remember that there was a college, a female college team that had won a huge win. I'm trying to remember what it was, some kind of national win. And it was, I believe it was Rutgers [University]? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 38971 Speaker 1: We're talking about the Rutgers' [University] women's basketball team. Speaker 2: Yes. And there was a conversation on the Don Imus show where they said some rather insulting things about these girls, and we were mortified. And so we responded with a news release and a demand to NBC to get rid of them. But it's not as easy as that. If you're going to flex that kind of muscle with a figure as big as Imus, we had to go to the financial end of the deal. So we started approaching the sponsors of the show, and asking "Do you want to be aligned with a man that would use this kind of language about a national basketball at the height of their college careers, where they should be celebrating and happy and yet they've been slapped nationally by this figure with these insulting remarks?" And so after a fashion, a lot of other people started climbing on board and making the same demand of NBC to dis-associate themselves with Imus. So he decided to apologize, rather late, I might add. And then you know the Rutgers basketball team and their coach wanted to put it behind them and so did NBC, because we had a very good relationship with NBC at the time, and we thought "You guys know better than this, and I'm sure you don't want to be associated with this." And so they ditched his show on MSNBC. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, that was a triumph in your first year as president? Speaker 2: It was a triumph not because someone got fired, but someone was held accountable because of these race based remarks. So we were--while he has the freedom to say it, he also has to understand that with that freedom comes consequences. And so what we were basically saying is we're not trying to take away his right to free speech, we just want to say whoever gets up on that bully pulpit has to understand whatever you say, you may cost yourself a job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, yes, in a way it was a victory, because I will tell you that after that, many people understood what NAJB was all about. Before that, there were a lot of folks who were "What is NABJ, and what do they stand for?" So I think in terms of marketing, it happened to be a very good marketing tool because you could say we advocate for fairness and images. We advocate for jobs, we advocate for diversity, but we advocate for, you know, respect. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38972 Speaker 1: Now tell me about UNITY. I really, until I read your outline I really didn't realize UNITY existed. And it's a-NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] is a member of, or was a member, of Unity. Speaker 2: It was a member of UNITY. And there's a long protracted story about how we became dis-associated with UNITY as well. Speaker 1: What is Unity? Speaker 2: UNITY is a coalition of Hispanic, Native American, African American and Asian American journalists. Each of these groups have their own memberships. UNITY basically is a convention. Every four years these groups get together and have a combined convention. In 1994 the Ford Foundation decided, wouldn't it be a great idea, we'll fund it if we create UNITY, so that all four of the organizations could be under one roof, so we did that. When the funding ran out, the organizations had to decide how they were going to go on with UNITY, or if they were going to go on with UNITY. And so each of the organizations decided to pay into the UNITY organization to keep it afloat, so that on the fourth year we could have conventions together and share the profits. And so what it was, was an opportunity for all four organizations to share ideas, talk about how to move the organization forward, talk about the different challenges that each of the organizations faced. So, it was an opportunity to just--basically to share similar struggles and challenges, and this is how we're doing it, sharing information, in the idea of bettering our goal of advocacy. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a difference in how the various groups view their role in an organization like UNITY? I know we've discussed this with people who are in the various--the Screen Actor's Guild, and others. But is there a difference? I mean how--is there a difference between the way black people see themselves and others see themselves? Speaker 2: Yes. Um, I can come with a very good example. The Native American organization doesn't take funding from businesses like Bacardi. Ah, the African American organization and NABJ will take sponsorships from liquor companies. And so there are cultural differences as well which don't permit them to do certain things. For example, when I was vice president of broadcast, I pushed through an initiative so that we could have a gay and lesbian task force at NABJ. Many of the other organizations of color for reasons of their own, shied away from that and didn't want to be inclusive of that. But after NABJ passed it to become a task force, then NAHJ [National Association of Hispanic Journalists] created one as well. So, we have growth spurts and we do things just a tad differently. Story_ID: 38973 Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell us--at some point NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] left UNITY. What happened? Speaker 2: Well, I was, while I was president of UNITY, I learned that the organization through the contributions of all of the member associations, had amassed a million dollars, just sitting around, at a time when all of the organizations were struggling. And this is when we were having record layoffs in journalism. This is when we were, when newspapers were downsizing tremendously. Our members were losing jobs, yet UNITY which really doesn't represent anybody, because it's just an umbrella that happens every four years, had amassed a million dollars. None of that money was going back into the associations that contributed toward it. You know, we had basically created a budgeting structure which benefitted the organizations that didn't have members against the memberships that did. The associations that actually had programming and structure and staff to support the Asian, Hispanics and Native Americans and Blacks, were struggling, and UNITY, which happens four years, had a million dollars. That became a sore point, because what it was saying was we were funding something that wasn't benefitting our association. NABJ is 50 percent of UNITY because of the members that we bring to the convention every year. I was involved in the early negotiations to re-do that structure so that associations got more money at the convention and UNITY got less, because we didn't think that UNITY needed to exist for four years. It could just re-appear on the fourth year for the convention. No one wanted to agree to do that, even though it would benefit the associations. They couldn't agree on a structure. It was taking money out of our coffers. So the new president decided, you know what, let's take this to the board, this isn't working. If we dis-associate from UNITY and have our own convention, we keep our dollars and they don't get our dollars. Because if we can't get the associations to agree that it benefits them better if you have a payout structure where the majority of the money goes back to the associations, we couldn't see why that didn't make sense to everybody. So that's when the board voted to get away from UNITY. Although there are some regional events where you're still doing UNITY and the associations are getting together, we didn't want to do it on a formal required basis. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38974 Speaker 1: Now in 2009 there was an incident here in Norfolk [Virginia] where you were covering a story and there was an altercation. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: There again one of the stories that--some of the stories I take pride in have to do with helping people who don't have a voice. There was a business called Virginia Employment Services here in Virginia. They would advertise that if you pay them $300 they would find you a job. And what these folks ended up doing was taking the money of the unemployed, mind you, and then basically giving them job leads that were fraudulent, they were false, or they were out of the newspaper. They were something that these people had access to if they had a computer or the morning paper. They were--and then refusing to give them their money back when they didn't follow up on their promise to give them jobs. The last woman who went in, Maria Garcia, who wanted to get her money back, got into a shoving match with one of the employees. Well, she filed assault charges and they filed assault charges right back. And we went to go cover Mr. O'Leary, because he would never return our calls. We never had him on camera, he never had to answer for anything that his organization had been doing, and we're not talking one individual. We covered dozens of people, dozens of people who were frauded out of their $300 when they could least afford it. They were unemployed. So, while I'm not in favor of, you know chasing people down typically, I felt like I really had to get this guy to answer these questions. So when he was leaving court and the charges had been dismissed against him--because it was his word against hers so they nullified each other, I went after him, with a microphone, to get him to answer some of these questions about the unemployed. He said some insulting things, and I just kept going after him until he got into his car. He broke the microphone off of one of cameras, we tussled a bit as he went to his car, and the video kind of went viral. But I ended up being the one on the hot seat because people were questioning why I was so assertive in pursuing this man. Like everything, the video needs context. You need the context of what came before and what came after, and what happened during. I was in hot pursuit of a man who the courts found guilty of frauding these people out of their money. And then he goes out of business and goes bankrupt and doesn't have to pay a dime. So, again he gets away only to live another day and maybe re-open under another name, but I've kept an eye on him. I took the heat for the interview, I took the heat for chasing him down, but I will also keep pursuing him if he opens another business like that, frauding people out of their money when they can least afford it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I can understand that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's something going on here with income taxes, now. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Mo Money. Yeah, note to self. Don't sign up with a group called Mo Money. Yes, they're much like the poor man's H&R Block, and like many of these organizations, they promise to pre-pay you your check prior to the money coming in from the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. And so we're pursuing that story now. We're in hot pursuit of--and some of these people are actually getting their money now. I'm pretty sure that it had a lot to do with media attention on the company because it's a franchise, and the national people aren't so happy about the ink and the broadcast about their business dealings. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38975 Speaker 1: Another story here is-- Speaker 2: There are many stories. (laughter) Speaker 1: There are many, but there's one here that occurs I guess the same year, I mean 2011, last year, the same year that you had a chance to interview President [Barack] Obama. It was a story covering a terror arraignment at Guantanamo Bay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Can you discuss that with us? Speaker 2: Yes. This is the terrorist who is accused of participating in the planning of the U.S.S. Cole bombing prior to 9/11 [ September 11, 2001; terrorist attacks], and there had been questions about when or if this individual would actually face trial. We'd been waiting a long time for there to be even the first hearing. So, when the commission at Guantanamo Bay decided to have its first hearing on this alleged terrorist, we knew that because many of the Norfolk-based sailors lived here, like the Guns (sp) that we had to be there to pursue that story. And so it's just the beginning. It will probably be two years before the conclusion of that terror trial, because it is excruciatingly slow. They do not have to adhere to the same speedy trial rules that govern United States courts because it's a military commission. But yes, that's the first of many things that we'll be covering regarding the terrorist, the accused terrorist involved with the bombing of the U.S.S. Cole. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38976 Speaker 1: Now also in 2011 you were inducted into the Silver Circle of the National Capital Chesapeake Bay Chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. So this is quite an honor. And I hear this year you will be, you are also selected by the Thomas Nelson Community College in Hampton to receive its Sixth Annual Presidential Leadership Award. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you're getting the recognition. When you look back on everything you've done to this point as a journalist and a news anchor and a news director, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a little too young to think about that (laughter), she said, hoping for you to agree, but-- Speaker 1: I'm nodding. Speaker 2: (Laughter). He's nodding for the record. Well, I'm always thinking of the next story, to be honest with you, Larry [Crowe; interviewer; The HistoryMakers]. I don't think a lot about legacy at this point, but because of the honors I'm starting to get, I think I should start having that conversation with myself. But I guess if in terms of a legacy, I take a great deal of pride in the fact that I help develop talent, and help develop the next journalist. So, if my legacy is each one teach one--because I tell everyone that I help get into this business that they need to pay it forward. Whatever opportunities they're given, whatever advice, whatever knowledge they acquire, that it's their responsibility to share it, so we can build better journalists for the future. So that's what I'm trying to do. I'm trying to get people to not only concern themselves with their own career, but to ensure that we're going to have journalists tomorrow who adhere by the same standards that we grew up with. Is it true, is it fair, is it necessary? Those are questions we need to ask before we put a story on the air, and I want them to share that and live that as journalists. So, if it's a legacy, it's a legacy of learning. I want us to learn every day that we come on the job. I want us to jump out of bed every morning the way I do, excited about the next opportunity to, you know, deliver some good information. I just want us to be good at what we do so that we don't, we're not looked upon as the last profession you would want to engage with. I want us to build respect in our industry. So I've worked toward that. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a journalistic philosophy? Speaker 2: That would be it. Is it true, is it fair, is it necessary? If it doesn't meet those three questions it probably shouldn't be on the air. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 38977 Speaker 1: And when you look back on everything you've done at this point, again, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: I think if I could look back and ask what would I do differently, no, I guess I would do it all just the same. Because everything that has happened in my life I think has happened for a reason. Sometimes I wonder what would my life be if I didn't run away from school, or if I didn't run away from home? What would my life be if chose to sue Tom Chisman [WVEC-TV, the ABC-affiliate in Norfolk, Virginia]? What would my life be? But when I look back, I think that all of those decisions led to greater opportunities and wonderful things in my life, some of them, but I think they helped build my character. So I'm good with where I am, and I feel pretty confident that those choices were made for a reason, and the outcome I'm enjoying right now. Story_ID: 38978 Speaker 1: Okay. You live in such a rich cultural milieu here in the Tidewater [Virginia] area. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community here? Speaker 2: I guess my hope and concern is that will we stop just--I think we need to move on from some of the race-based questions. You know, it's like, I want us to move on to economic empowerment, some of the same things that the Urban League is working on right now for the population. I want our schools to be better, that's number one. You know, I really do see the dropout rate here as just unconscionable. I think that the SOLs [Standards of Learning] are a joke. We're teaching our kids to pass tests and not actually teaching them anything. You know, when I went into a history class and it was the fifth grade and I heard a student say that Martin Luther King was a slave, my heart fell on the floor. You know, what are we teaching our children? You know, so, if there's a hope, I want us to get back to those conversations that I know we used to have in our family where we share some oral history, that we share information and knowledge, you know, about our relatives. I do that now in my family because of the secretiveness in my family. My husband's family is the direct opposite. They can trace back generations. So, I want that for the future generations. I want them to put down their iPods and iPads and have conversations. I think it enriches us when we talk. I guess that's the reason why I got into the communication business in the first place. I enjoy the discourse and the conversation and the sharing of knowledge that you only get face to face. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 38979 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family today. You're married. Your son [Robert Ciara] is grown. Speaker 2: He is so grown, I'm starting to lie about his age. But since this is eventually going in the Library of Congress, I will not lie about his age today. (laughter) But my husband is Arthur Jarrett, Jr. and he belongs to the Wynn [ph.] families of North Carolina. That's on his mother's side. And his uncle, James Wynn, is on the Court of Appeals, and he was nominated by President [Barack] Obama. A large, wonderful family that taught me something about a different side of the layers of family: Families are actually our best friends, you know. You don't have to look so far outside the family. My son Robert is the father of four, so I'm a grandmother four times over. My oldest granddaughter, Taisha Monique Ciara [ph.], is a graduate of Norfolk State University, and she is the proud mother of a four-year old, so I'm a great-grandmother. And the three other kids are all getting out of school soon. Maura is the second grandchild, Maura Ciara. She's at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University] and this is her second year, she's in her sophomore year. And Jarrett Ciara is graduating this year. And Sarah is seventeen [years old] and she'll be graduating next year. So, that's my brood. Speaker 1: I notice you've incorporated Ciara in the names of--- Speaker 2: Of all the kids. Yes, because when my son came here in 1997, yeah, 1997 and all the kids were young, he said, "Did you start your own, did you mean to change your name to create a new dynasty for our family?" And I said, "In part yes." I said, "When you come from a family of Smiths and Joneses, you know, there's just nothing there that sets you apart from the rest." And he said, "Well, I'm going to change my name." And he did, and then eventually changed the names of all of his children, so that we create from here since we can't even fathom what it would be like to find ourselves among the various Smiths and Joneses on both sides of my family. Story_ID: 38980 Speaker 1: Now is there anything that I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Yes. Before my father [Robert Jones] died in 2009, the one thing he wanted me to do was to learn a great lesson about the medical history of our family. We have the trifecta of issues that face many African American families. We had diabetes, hypertension and heart disease. Now on my mother's side of the family, we have hypertension and some cancer. He basically said, given that genetic code that you have, I really want you to work hard at educating everybody in the family about how damaging it is to have a poor diet, not check yourself medically, and just simply not take care of yourself. Because it was complication of diabetes that took my father Robert Jones before I think he should have left this world. And so as a direct result of that, it's been almost three years now, I haven't picked up a cigarette. I used to be a social smoker. When I had a cocktail, I would also have a cigarette. And his words ring in my ears. I stopped smoking and I'm incorporating more healthy habits into my life in terms of diet and exercise, and that's what I also share with all of my family now. Because, you know, my father, that was basically his last message to me, that this could be you, you know. And so through a series of strokes and issues regarding diabetes, I'm now very active with the American Diabetes Association, because I think education in the African American community is going to prevent a lot of illness. And basically it's Type 2 diabetes that's killing off generations of African Americans. So when I'm talking about education, it's not just the knowledge that you need to pass a course in school, but the knowledge of body and self, something that we haven't really embraced as a people and as a culture. You know, very often we like to joke about the bad eating habits we have during the holidays, but we restrict it to the holidays, and so that the rest of the time of the year we're making changes to make healthier choices so we can live longer. Because we can these days, we can live longer. So, I'm passionate about that. I just don't think enough has been talked about in families regarding the obesity rate, and that turns into diabetes sometimes. So I guess that's one layer I think is important to know about what my family's doing. Every year we participate--I'm a co-chair of the Diabetes Walk, and all of the kids participate. And now--we used to make them, and now they want to do it. So, I think it's engrained in them now. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 38981 Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Maam, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Um, um, wow. That's the toughest question I think you've asked, because this week a man that I really loved and respected died, and his funeral was yesterday--Peter Decker, Jr. [ph.]. He was a philanthropist and a lawyer and judge, and I can't tell you, I don't think any other lawyer died and five thousand people show up at the funeral. And it was because of his basic goodness. And you know, I think that if I want to pattern my life after someone, it's just doing the right thing when nobody's looking. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Thank you so much. Speaker 2: You're welcome..