 Story_ID: 95800 Speaker 1: My name is Reginnia Williams and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. The videographer today is Matthew Hickey. I'd like to begin the interview by asking you to state your name, first, middle or maiden, and last name and spell all three for us. Speaker 2: Okay. My first name is Marcella, M-A-R-C-E-L-L-A, middle name is Millicent, M-I-L-L-I-C-E-N-T, Boyd is my maiden name, B-O-Y-D and Cox, C-O-X. Speaker 1: And would you state for the record please where the interview is taking place, the address. Speaker 2: The address here is 15357 Euclid Avenue in East Cleveland. It's one of our funeral homes here in East Cleveland. Speaker 1: And please state for the record also today's date. Speaker 2: It's June 15th, 19, I mean, 2004. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 95801 Speaker 1: Now the next set of questions we refer to as being "People" Magazine-ish type questions and they may sound a little silly, but I'd like a serious answer to them. First, I would like to ask what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I think lasagna. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: I don't think so, no. I really don't, you know, raising kids right now, I haven't done but so much traveling here recently, so I don't have a very favorite, no. Speaker 1: And favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Story_ID: 95802 Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. The first section of the interview, and these are life interviews so we like to go from birth up until the present time. So, I'd like to begin by asking you to talk about your early life, and especially your immediate family. Can you tell me when and where you were born? Speaker 2: Born in Cleveland, Ohio, April 24th, 1954, and if memory serves me correctly, I think it was in Forest City Hospital, the old Forest City Hospital. I think my mom said I was born there. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're a native Clevelander. And, can you tell me please your parents' names? Speaker 2: My father's name is William F. Boyd, Sr. and my mom is Mary Webster Boyd. Speaker 1: And are they both native Clevelanders as well. Speaker 2: Yes, yes they are. Speaker 1: Do you know their birthdays? Speaker 2: My dad is February 7th, 1915. My mom is May 20th, 1917. Speaker 1: And, we know that the Boyd Funeral Homes, is really a family business? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the name that comes to mind for me because I'm a native Clevelander too is Boyd and Sons, but we're speaking with you today as a member of the family, and also someone who's been actively involved in the business end of the family enterprise as well. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's kinda, you have no choice at something. You grow up in the business, I guess it becomes a part of you. Speaker 1: Alright. Now I know also and throughout the interview everyone will notice that the history of the family business and the family history itself of the individuals, is gonna overlap because it's just the nature of things here in the Boyd family. But, I want also to ask about your grandparents. We're coming up on the 100th Anniversary of the Boyd Funeral Home [E.F. Boyd and Son, Inc.] business in greater Cleveland, and so I wanna ask about the founder of the funeral home and the family history there. Speaker 2: Okay, well, of course that's my dad's father. His name was Elmer Franklin Boyd. And he started the business in 1905. He was born in the late 1800s but I can't quite remember the exact year, and he started the business after moving here from Urbana, Ohio, and attended Cleveland School of Embalming (now the Cincinnati College of Mortuary Science), and then I think he graduated, must have been around 1904, 1905, and then started the business. We just received information that the business, my grandfather, that the first person he buried was at the end of 1905. We always thought it was in 1906, so we've always kinda put that in all our literature that the business was stated in 1906, but we've just gotten information recently that it was 1905. And then, let me see, my dad, my grandfather was married to Cora Stewart Boyd. She too came from Southern Ohio, and her family. They both had decent sized families and moved here and got married and then my dad was born, again like I said, 1917 [sic, 1915], and then he had a sister. She passed some years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was really, it's really just and Son, because it was E.F. from Elmer F. and then my dad was the and Son, William F., right. So yeah, that's when we started back in the early 1900s. So again, like you said, we're coming up on an anniversary here so that's why it's so important right now we gonna celebrate in 2005 or 2006, so? We're working on that though. Speaker 1: The documentation, we find is very important, even with the oral histories, the documents also help us to tell a more complete story. I want to focus now, that we have the names of some of the ancestors on record, to focus a little bit more on your immediate family. Now you tell me that William Boyd, that's your father? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And your mother's name again? Speaker 2: Is Mary. Speaker 1: Is Mary. Okay. Story_ID: 95803 Speaker 1: Did you have siblings growing up in the household in Cleveland [Ohio] as well? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the youngest of three. The oldest is my brother who's William F. [Boyd, II], or he's affectionately known as Pepper, and he's William F. the second. And then I have a sister, Marina Grant, Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant, the full thing. And, it was the three of us. I'm the youngest and I come much later and my brother being the oldest and then my sister. They're much closer. And then I came substantially later. Kinda surprise kinda kid. My mom [Mary Webster Boyd] wasn't expecting me. Speaker 1: But all of you grew up here in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now did you attend the Cleveland public schools? Speaker 2: I went through elementary and into, I graduated junior high school. For elementary, I went to Miles Standish [Elementary School]. It was over on Park Eight, I think it's in East Boulevard area, Glenville area, and then I went from there on to Collinwood [High School] for junior high school and finished ninth grade there. And then I went a year away to school for boarding school and that was at Emma Willard [School] in Troy, New York, and then I came back here and finished at Lutheran [High School] East, up here in Cleveland Heights. Story_ID: 95804 Speaker 1: Okay. Now while you were growing up in Cleveland [Ohio], and I know this because of some of our brief conversations before the actual interview started, you've already talked about growing up in the business, or with the business. It was such an important part of family life. Can you tell me what that was like, having the family and the work overlap that way. Was that difficult? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, I guess to some extent, yeah, and to some extent, no. I mean, I accepted it as my dad's [William F. Boyd, Sr] vocation and, you know, I was around the funeral business a lot going down to 89th Street from our home. We were living in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] at the time. And I remember doing a lot of visiting to the funeral home and being in the morgue. I have a vivid remembrance of standing outside the door of the morgue and being real curious about what was going on inside, but my dad kinda discouraged me from going in and, you know, and the door was kinda shut in my face kind of thing, and I just, he never, I just was not like really encouraged to go into the business. It was a decision I made later, but I was around it. I mean there was no way, going to look for my dad, having to call the funeral home and knowing the exact path my dad took from the house to the funeral home at 89th Street, 'cause that was the location. Then we only had the one location. And, yeah, I can remember that quite vividly. I mean standing out that morgue, and I think today still, I hold a fear, because I'm not a licensed mortician, I'm a funeral director, but see in Ohio you don't have to have both. In some states you gotta have both to be licensed to do anything. And, but here in Ohio, you don't, and I just to this day, I'm still timid of the morgue. I can go in, I can witness, but when it comes to actually hands on preparing the bodies, that-- I can't handle it, I can't. That's just not my strength. Some people have strength in one area. My brother's licensed and my sister just kinda, she's in the finances. She's not licensed at all, but my brother [William F. Boyd, II] and my sister [Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant]. And then I have two nieces in the business, his daughter and my sister's daughter, who are both licensed now and in the business. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the funeral home business itself, you said it was your choice to enter that field. So your father [William F. Boyd, Sr.] didn't push any of the children to (unclear)? Speaker 2: No. He'll tell you to this day if you ask him, he never encouraged any of us to go in it. But, I mean, I'm sure you feel a certain kind of invisible pressure to go in because you know it's a family driven business. I mean, that's the way it is everywhere. So, you know, at some level, you probably wanna do that, and at least consider it pretty strongly before you just say no. But, yeah, I went into it and picked it up and I mean I really enjoy it. I think when I first started in the funeral business, I really, and it's funny I was talking to somebody on the phone about this the other day, but it's just a whole different side of life. You know, compared to somebody who's dealing in just with retail, you know. Something that's very upbeat and happy most of the time. People are coming because, you know, they're looking forward to the things they do in here, whereas the people at the funeral home, the families we serve are never particularly having a good day. You know, I mean, that's just, that's a fact. Nobody particularly happy to be there. Nobody's looking forward to coming there. They do it 'cause they have to. So you see a whole different side of people and you get a whole different appreciation for life. You really do, you don't take it so for granted 'cause you know, like my dad has always said, you know, "you can't take life for granted." You can't take it for granted. You don't know what could happen. You got to be thankful for the time you have while you're here. Story_ID: 95805 Speaker 1: Focusing still on your childhood in Cleveland [Ohio], I know most of your school years were spent, as you said, in the public schools here in the City of Cleveland itself as part of the Cleveland public school system, but outside of school, I'm wondering if there were any special holidays or any special experiences that you associate with growing up in Cleveland or especially, well they're all relevant, but especially memorable for you when you look back on your life? Speaker 2: If I had to remember things when I was a kid, I'd probably say that when I was going to Miles Standish [Elementary School], there used to be a huge, you know, playground, and all my friends, I can remember my summer so vividly as a kid, 'cause first of all we got on our bikes and just canvassed the neighborhood, but then we always used to play kickball. And you don't see kids playing kickball anymore. At least I don't see them, but that was some of my fondest memories are playing in the summers that I spent as a kid just canvassing that Glenville neighborhood there because see we had freedom as kids that kids don't seem to have today to be up all hours of the night, you now, not having to worry. I can remember, I lived on an alley as a kid and I'd go down the street to eat popcorn and watched the scary movies with Ghoulardi [stage persona of DJ Ernie Anderson] and stuff on Friday night. And then we would watch each other, a couple of us walking home down the alley. And we'd be spooked to death, but we really, really had to worry about somebody raping us or jumping us, you know, or assaulting us, whereas, that just seems to be so much present today for kids. It's just-- It's not the freedom. I can remember as a kid Halloween, oh God, we just went everywhere. We didn't have parents that had to walk us to the doors, and you know, sitting in the car, sitting right there on the street making sure you just went to the door and came back. We went everywhere. We had a lot more freedom. Our kids, I feel that for kids now 'cause they just, you know you got these little wrist things. I remember when my kids came up, you could get, you go in the store, you put one part one of the wrist on the kid and you one part one on yourself so if that the kid didn't get too far. I just, I don't know, we didn't have to worry about stuff like that when I was a kid. We didn't. It's so different now. Yeah. Story_ID: 95806 Speaker 1: Well, you were born in a very important year in African American History in 1954 with the Supreme Court ruling, Brown case [Brown v. Board of Education] coming just a couple of weeks after you were born actually May 17th, 1954, but it suggested to a lot of African American people that the society was opening up and I wonder as a young person coming of age in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], if you were aware of-- that you were in this new era, where there was supposed to be new opportunity? Speaker 2: Well, my dad [William F. Boyd, Sr.] was on the school board and I can remember the boycotts and I can remember the sit-ins trying to get equal advantages, you know, as far as education in schools then. So, I can remember him being involved in that and I can remember the tension in the neighborhoods, and see then I was out in Collinwood [High School] when the race-- the riots were going on, the race riots were going on, and I can remember the strong polarization, and I can remember being very intimidated walking through the classrooms, the hallways, at Collinwood because we were some of the first blacks going out there. We were bused out there for an opportunity, an educational opportunity, and, I mean, I was traveling a distance from where I was at like maybe 93rd and St. Clair and going out to 152nd and St. Clair, and it, you know, we went out there and I can distinctly remember one morning, because the tension was so deep that we were crossing, leaving the bus station, crossing 152nd, going up the front steps there 'cause there were a bunch of steps going up to Collinwood's front door, and there was a circle of kids around the school, Italians, ethnics in the area who just stormed us. They stormed us going up the steps. And bats, chains, bricks, coming after us, and I'll never forget it. And a friend of mine tells me to this day, she took the hit for me 'cause she wound up pushing me out the way and getting hit, and we just went on up in the school. And scared to death, and scared to death. Speaker 1: Now this is in 1960a, in Cleveland? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So this was before a court-ordered busing for desegregation? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now was this for an enrichment program at Collinwood, or, why-- Speaker 2: It was what they called a major word program,-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was supposed to be one of these "gifted" kids and we go the chance, because, you know, I performed on, you know, exams or whatever and my grades and stuff, to get an opportunity for even more in depth study at Collinwood. So I know a lot of us, you know, who had left Miles Standish and left area schools, Doan Elementary [School], people were going leaving out there and we went out there and we were one of the first to get, be out there, to integrate it. And we were not well-received. To say it lightly. We just were not. Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Collinwood? Speaker 2: Until ninth grade. I was there seventh through ninth, seventh, eighth and ninth. Speaker 1: So the middle school. Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: And then you went to Lutheran East? Oh, no, the boarding school [Emma Willard School in Troy, New York]. Speaker 2: Then I went away to boarding school for a year. Speaker 1: Alright. And what was the name of the boarding school? Speaker 2: It's called Emma Willard. It's in Troy, New York, outside of Albany. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: I went there for a year. Speaker 1: Alright. And then you came back? Speaker 2: I came back here and my eleventh and twelfth grade I was at Lutheran East [Lutheran High School East]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 95807 Speaker 1: Now, I have to ask just because we're in 2004 and everybody's taking that backward glace, you look fifty years since Brown [Brown v. Board of Education] and what success we've enjoyed as a people and opening the doors of educational opportunity to more students in the society. Looking back on your experiences in public and private school settings, so the city and suburban settings, do you think you got a good education in Cleveland [Ohio]? Do you think those efforts-- Speaker 2: Oh, when I was going to Cleveland Schools, they were some of the best in the country. There was no question about it, they were some of the best in the country. Glenville [High School], where my parents [Mary Webster Boyd and William F. Boyd, Sr.] graduated from, was always known for being an exceptionally good school. It started changing as I started getting into high school, but they were always really good schools. Public education was nothing to, you now, it was a great opportunity. Speaker 1: Would you say that of the year at Collinwood [High School] as well? Even with the racial tensions. Speaker 2: Even with the racial tension, yes. I, uh hum, I still keep in touch with people that I knew from there. Yeah, I think it was a great opportunity even though, you know, usually, you know, whenever something is integrated, there's resistance to it. I mean it's not like you know you just walk in the door and, I mean, that's the price you pay. You had to pay it. It has to be done. We can't stop it. Speaker 1: Were there ever a point in those three years at Collinwood where the students began to cross the color line and real friendships were formed, or was the tension always there during your three years? Speaker 2: Well, I know for me it was always there. I don't know too many of the people that I know from there now who still, you know, have friends that they, white friends that they had from then. I can't really say. I just know for myself, I don't, I don't, and if I see somebody it's just in passing but not a friendships I would say, not friendships, no. Speaker 1: That was a difficult time in Cleveland's history, but also an interesting time with folks celebrating the fact that we had the first African American mayor of a major northern urban city. We're sort of vying with Gary, Indiana for that title [HM Richard Hatcher], but Carl Stokes was there and a lot of people in the community were optimistic about blacks being able to improve the quality of life enjoyed by most of the citizens. Do you remember the Stokes days? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, I don't know if I specifically remember that as much as I can remember, you know, the kind of interracial dinners you'd have inviting white families in your home and then we'd sit down at a dining room table, a black and white across the table, at a, you know, formal type of dinner but it was still inviting a family into your home of a different ethnic background. And then just sitting there and trying to work through the race relations. I can remember things like that. But now to say that I can remember specifically when Mr. Stokes was mayor, that or a particular instance in that time, I can't, I can't. Story_ID: 95808 Speaker 1: Graduation came from Lutheran High School [East in Cleveland, Ohio]. What year was that when you graduated? Speaker 2: 1972. What's that now, thirty-two years ago? Time passes so fast. Speaker 1: Did you plan to go to college right away out of high school? Speaker 2: Um hum, um hum. I went to, that year I got an opportunity to go to visit Georgetown [University in Washington, D.C.], and you know, they were trying to recruit more minority students and then I got a chance to go. And I got accepted but I didn't go because I just didn't have the confidence in myself. I knew it and I just stepped right back off of it. And I wound up staying here. I went to Baldwin-Wallace [ College, now Baldwin Wallace University in Berea, Ohio] for one year and then I did some years, again at Cleveland State [University in Cleveland, Ohio], after that. And then from there I just ran, fell right into the business. Speaker 1: Okay. This is our generation. I was about to say your generation. Our generation is being interviewed a lot this year because we were that generation where integration was tried, when folks experimented at group. I guess the Little Rock Nine got the most attention in 1957, but it just seems that twenty years since Little Rock and they were always different efforts, you know, to sort of push the envelope and get black and white students working together in a classroom first, and, hopefully, in a larger society. At the college level, did you feel that pressure again to integrate? Speaker 2: You know, I, and I, this is something that I think about, off and on since you touched on this, I don't think, and I can't tell you the exact instance that caused it, but I don't think I ever got over that intimidating experience when I was, we were hit at school like that. When I was at Collinwood [High School] like that. And to this day, I feel very stand offish in certain audiences, you now, groups of people. You know I work in a black business. My client base, is predominately, you know, if not 100 per cent, you know 99.9 percent, black and that's my comfort level. That's where I feel the most comfortable around my people. When I get around a larger population, I don't feel comfortable. I just don't. And I think it's because of what I dealt with. There's a, my daughter is in a school here now, a private school here now and turns out one of her classmates, her mother was at Collinwood when I was there. And it's just a sense of distrust I have for her. She's Italian, and I just don't, and I'll never have it. And I know it because it's just a resentfulness in me. It's just there and I try, you know, in disciplines, I try to be about it, and it's still, the emotion still overtakes me. Story_ID: 95809 Speaker 1: There's, this year, and I think it's a healthy kind of discourse, but I'm very much aware of it, especially in academic arenas about desegregation itself and whether it was a good thing, or if folks had good intentions but their methods was sort of wrong-headed. A lot of folks are questing the logic of sort of mixing people up, you know, based on the color of the student's skin, and requiring them to learn in the same classroom settings. What are your feelings at this point about segregated versus integrated schooling, and do you think it's possible for students to get a good education? Speaker 2: I think it has to be. I think there's gotta be a way made that, that the races do get along comfortably because I don't think that the world can survive without trying to increase the sensitivity to one another. See year's ago like when you're speaking back in the '50s [1950s], people were just, you know you saw the images of the riots and that in the South and that was the images that a lot of people had of blacks, I mean, they didn't deal with them in a one-on-one in their neighborhoods, in their, you know, communities, so I think, yeah, I think it's uncomfortable and it causes a lot of ill feelings. My daughter right now doesn't hold the same feelings or the same level of discomfort that I do. I feel like I never can measure up, I'm never quite the educational equal, I'm never quite, she doesn't have that resistance. My son doesn't either and they were both more of the minority again in their schooling, but they don't have that second guessing to themselves because the mix is there. They feel very comfortable. They have a lot of friends. It's wasn't like that for me. I always felt on the outside. I always felt over to the curb, kicked over to the curb somewhere. I didn't feel embraced, I didn't feel comfortable. And so yeah, I think it had, I think yes that desegregation even as uncomfortable on as many lives that have been, the blood has been shed, it has to be done. I think you have to fight for equality, I do. Speaker 1: And I don't want to belabor this, but I think the story that you're telling is one that your father [William F. Boyd, Sr.] can't tell. It's part of the reason I'm talking to you today-- Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: And not someone else in the family. But in 1954, the Supreme Court said that separate could never be equal [Brown v. Board of Education], so the schools had to be desegregated by 1955, they're saying "with all deliberate speed." Hurry up and do something about the segregated schools, but, and I just want to get, maybe this is a yes or no answer that might get some elaboration, but do you think that, again, people can get a quality education in a segregated setting. I know you've already said that it would be good for races to work together. Speaker 2: I think it would be good, but I don't think that just because it's not-- I'll tell you this, I'll say it like this, I hear a lot in Cleveland [Ohio] right now about diversity and trying to push diversity in. Everybody being diverse. I think diversity does yield a more well-rounded view of things and I think the more that you include diverse types of opinion and have respect for other's opinion even though it doesn't agree with yours, yes, the overall outcome is going to be something more than being totally separate and one over here and one over there and thinking we could never mix. I don't believe that. But, I think it's just a lot of deep seated feelings in people. Story_ID: 95810 Speaker 1: Alright, as we finished up that last segment, you were beginning to discuss this idea of segregated education and whether or not black children could get a quality education in a segregated setting. So would you like to finish your thought on that? Speaker 2: I think it's possible. I mean I think that the historically black colleges speak to that. I think that yes, I mean there are a lot of fine doctors and professionals who come out of these black schools and go on to higher education that are outstanding kind of doctors. I don't that whether it's an all-black situation or all-white situation, I think it's more diverse when you include the two and it can be, you can think or have maybe some other things you may not think of being segregated, but I don't think it should affect the quality of the education, no, no, not at all. Story_ID: 95811 Speaker 1: I'd like to ask also about your daughter's educational experiences if you could share her name. If you think that's appropriate, or if you could just tell us more about Laurel School. Speaker 2: Okay, she, well she's seventeen now, she just finished her junior year, about to enter her senior year, and she's, her name is Ina, I-N-A, named after my mother's mother, Elizabeth Cox, and she's been at Laurel, she been at Laurel since 2nd grade. Before that she was at Montessori School, Ratner Montessori [Lillian and Betty Ratner School], out in South Euclid. And, I don't know if she, I feel blessed 'cause I have two bright children, two bright children and I'm very proud of both of 'em. My daughter is the compulsive student. Loves studying, loves reading. You know she's the kind of kid that you gotta tear her away from books at night to put her to bed 'cause she's like, "I gotta do this, I gotta finish," you know, and she's the type of kid that'll go to sleep at two o'clock in the morning. If she's got to get up at 6:30 to get to school, she's up, she's not telling me "Ah ma, I can't make it today, I just can't make it." She's, she's all that I wasn't as far as a really strong student. I was, you know, had the ability but I wasn't as compulsive and as geared, studied as well as she does. She's a, she's an exceptional student so she has really, you know, reaped the benefits from going to Laurel and going to that private setting. And I really like the fact even if she's with all girls. Now you talk about something segregated, I like the fact that she's with all females, instead of mixing it up because I think the emotional issues get so great as they get through the, through the schools and boys start becoming more important that it keeps their mind focused on books and being strong students instead of all that emotional stuff going on with some boy being my boyfriend and having to worry about pleasing him with something I got on or, you know, it's just I really like the fact that she's been in the female school, don't segregate it as a female, all females. Yeah, yeah. And I think the school has really trained her because Laurel tries to develop female leaders, you know, women who can take on huge, you know, being head of some company or something and really being a leader as a female and not backing down and feeling less than just 'cause you're female. She has got all the strength to go out into the world and do that. I keep telling her even though she's burning this midnight oil now with the studying, that by the time she gets to college, she'll be so engrained in the way she studies and the method she studies, then it should be much easier for her. And that's what my, that's what my goal is, that, you know, she then she gets the scholarships to get to a good school. Yeah, yep. Story_ID: 95812 Speaker 1: May I ask a question about that environment at Laurel [School], and you said it's been a very positive experience for your daughter [Ina Elizabeth Cox], but there were some critics who look at the history of the very exclusive private academies like Laurel and Hathaway Brown [School]. Speaker 2: Well, I'm a tell ya, I applied to Laurel twice. I didn't get in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I tried the (unclear) twice in my, I think it was sixth grade and ninth grade, and I never got in. And so when my daughter got in, it was my way of reaping that chance that I didn't get it, you know. So I, and to see her ghost do so well in it, it, it's just been, it's been like a Godsend. It's been like me being able to relive the life that I was never allowed years ago. Speaker 1: With a place like Laurel. Laurel is in Shaker Heights, Ohio. For the folks outside of northeast Ohio, it's a beautiful community that had a history of keeping African Americans out. It was that exclusive, and there were restricted covenants that used to be written into the deeds so that you couldn't sell your home to an African American even if they had the money to buy it. And there's some very expensive houses in Shaker Heights. Speaker 2: But it shows you the mindset of how threatened people felt and how that's got to change. I mean, it has changed in spite of, I mean, I don't know about certain homes if they rewrite those things when people are in the morgue, but I think it, it's gonna come anyway. I mean, you can't stop it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: People are gonna have deal, they're going have to be more accepting. I was reading an article just recently, I was at the doctor's office reading the AARP magazine and the headlines, you know, the feature story on the front was talking about 71% of Americans approve of interracial dating, interracial marriage, which is a total shift from what I knew when I was coming through school. I mean, that was taboo, you know, you just didn't get, you know, you didn't get any support from it. You know, people still, and even here now, you see an interracial couple somewhere and you're just kinda of looking. But, I mean, things changed then. I was really shocked when I read this article 'cause I just knew it was still 71 percent the other way, and they were saying that they had done a poll and it was through a reputable poll company and that's not necessarily the feeling anymore. I mean whether white people really feel that their level of what is really integrated and what our level what we would expect, we still think we're getting the opportunities, (I'm sorry about that) but, I think it's not as bad, you know, the taboo is not as bad or strict as it used to be. So, for my daughter to be able to go into Shaker to go to Laurel, man, please, it's wonderful to me. Speaker 1: And no bats and no chains. Speaker 2: No bats, no chains, no intimidation and they seem to, and all the instances where my kids have been to school, I cannot really remember a hard time where they've had to deal with some discrimination. A hard time that they've had somebody calling them out of their name, or not wanting them by their house, or, you know, I mean, I live in East Cleveland [Ohio], most of her friends live out on the outskirts of the city and there's not a lot of back and forth of people coming to visit her. But overall though, they seemed very accepting of her, and I'm just on a different level when it comes to that. Speaker 1: So is that a measure of our success since 1954 then, that she has gained that acceptance, and that other students have those opportunities? Speaker 2: You know what it made me do is look back and be really mad at myself for not pushing myself to do things that I really felt uncomfortable with. That's what it's made me do. And I should have gone on and gone to Georgetown [University in Washington, D.C.] and even if I had not done as well as I wanted to, if I had braved it out and maybe that's, that's the one thing because she's just, she's a great kid. She's a great kid and my son too. They both, his name's Tim, Tim Cox, and they're both great kids and they've had the opportunity to afford them for their education and they've done well with it, so. Story_ID: 95813 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So can we move now from this discussion of changes or improvements in education to changes in some of our neighborhoods in Cleveland [Ohio], especially some of the communities that you've mentioned. I know you said you grew up in Glenville? Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: Okay. And if my memory serves me correctly, they used to be majority Jewish neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yes, when my parents [William F. Boyd, Sr. and Mary Webster Boyd] went to Glenville [High School], it was majority Jewish. Speaker 1: Um hum, and so in thinking about the 1950s, Glenville would have been a neighborhood in transition as African Americans moving out of Central. Speaker 2: And that's where the riots were. They were in, they were in, the '60s [1960s], they were in Glenville. Speaker 1: Do you remember the Glenville riot? Speaker 2: To some degree, I don't remember actually seeing stores, that, like 105th or in that area that had really been burned out. I don't have a recollection of that. I can remember, I can remember the, 'cause we moved, let's see, I moved when I was sixteen out here to East Cleveland, and I've been here pretty much ever since, in this area ever since. So, I cannot really, I remember the headlines and the paper, things like that, but not really being in the midst of, physically. No. Speaker 1: Okay. So your home actually never was threatened-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --By the riot itself? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Those were hot times in Cleveland, in the 1960s. Speaker 2: Ooh yeah, that was that burn baby burn and oh man the headlines and everything, you know, it was something. Story_ID: 95814 Speaker 1: So in '66 [1966], 67 [1967], you know at the beginning of the Black Power Movement and you're just entering puberty in middle school and were you attracted to the movement at all, the Black Arts Movement or any part of it, or where was your thinking politically, as a young teen? Speaker 2: I think, you know, I think my thing politically I didn't really get, you know, you knew about it and let me see, that's when I was probably away at school [Emma Willard School in Troy, New York] because a lot of the women that I was at school with were getting involved in the movement, getting a lot of information. There were people that were ahead of me who were, you know, raising their fist in assemblies at school and stuff, so, yeah, I can remember. Speaker 1: Raising their fists symbolizing-- Speaker 2: This kind of stuff-- Speaker 1: what was that for the youngsters-- Speaker 2: For the gentlemen [Tommie Smith and John Carlos] that was at the [1968] Olympic games [Mexico City, Mexico], when he received his trophy and I can't remember his name, a black athlete, and he raised his hand when he received the trophy, and that just became, you know, became a symbol for us. Speaker 1: For black power? Speaker 2: Um hum. For black power. And I can remember wearing an afro, but you know, with an afro in my hair, when I just my hair go natural and, um hum. That was trying times because, see my parents [William F. Boyd, Sr. and Mary Webster Boyd], who had always been schooled to raise to think, you know, I'm supposed to straighten my hair and you know keep it real neat and processed, you know, they-- my mom, you know, it was culture shock for her when I put an afro in my hair, but, hey, I did it anyway. I of my three, there were three of us, listened to my brother [William F. Boyd, II] and my sister [Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant] and I was the most outspoken, the most rebellious, and, you know, and being more insistent in things. My brother and my sister grew up during the '50s [1950s] and they was a different climate for a high yellow African American back then, and when I came up later in the '60s [1960s], there was a shift. I mean, light skinned people were not favored, were not favored. I got a lot of flack from even my own people, but, I mean that all inside of my race and I don't mind it anymore. I feel very accepted. I feel very comfortable, like I said earlier. It was a maturing process for me too, and even still to this day I wear my hair very short. I wear it natural. I don't like curling. I don't have the hair for it. It just isn't becoming and I don't like it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let's stay focused on you for a moment. Speaker 2: Um hum. Story_ID: 95815 Speaker 1: One of the things that think most people know about Marcella Boyd Cox, she wears these beautiful bright colors. She is very outspoken. She is involved in several important African American organizations in the city [Cleveland. Ohio]. Speaker 2: I try to be. Speaker 1: And it's one of the reasons I think you belong with the other HistoryMakers in the archives-- Speaker 2: Oh, thank you, sure. Speaker 1: --but can you tell me about some of those organizations that you've supported in recent years, some of the causes that kept you focused on the African American community? Speaker 2: Well, being alongside in step with the business, because I tend to be the more touchy-feely member of my family, so I get more into grief. I get more into trying to help people deal with grief. I'm not licensed or anything like that, but I've done a little bit of reading, enough good reading so that I understand really have a real handle on what people go through when they have a death in the family. See the African American population as such does not embrace that type of help. They don't embrace grief counseling, just opening up to the pain that they're suffering when the loss is felt, especially with the violence in the community. So I've tried to weave stuff in with my family who's not real sensitive to what I, they can understand where I'm going with something. But I really trying to, I'm working with a rabbi right now, trying to get some offerings to people because there is no grief support inside the inner city. There is no grief support, so, and yet one of the most healthy things for people to do when you have a severe emotional pain, is to talk about it, you know, talk it out. Don't try to hold the pain in and just go to your minister or your bible, you know, be constructive about an application about getting some real help. And so I'm really trying to work through that as best as I can 'cause I think that's gonna, I think that's the answer for a lot of social ills for blacks. It stays within them because, and they don't vent in constructive kinds of ways. They don't vent in healthy kind of ways. They do it in destructive ways. And I think that has to be changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's got to be, instead of somebody pulling a gun on somebody to deal with an issue where we don't agree, or knifing them, then you need to, you know, go to play basketball, work out, you know, something that's gonna be a lot more healthy, productive for them and the other, and others around them, you know. And then I work on a things with National Coalition of 100 Black Women. I've been a member of that for a couple of years, I think, a couple of years now, and mentoring in the community again, and with the National Council of Negro Women. I'm getting more with that. I've been a member for years, but my schedule just hasn't allowed, but I'm getting more involved with that, and again, it's the mentoring and trying to, you know, help black people. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about some of the activities that the local chapter of the Coalition of 100 Black Women have been involved in recently? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, can I have you wait until the sirens go by? Speaker 1: Okay, it's been-- we've done work with SIDS. They had a conference back in the fall, had a speaker in who was speaking to people about SIDS and how to get help, and you know, the warning signs, that kind of thing, we've done that. Speaker 2: And can you just tell us what that acronym stands for, SIDS? Speaker 1: Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and seems to have, affect the black population a lot, you know, kids who just die for no rea-- you can't see any real reason. They seem to just die in their sleep, or you just go into the crib and the kid's dead, and you haven't noticed any other things necessarily health-wise going on with the child. So I'm trying to get information out to help mothers, you know, learn how to put kids on their backs instead of on their stomachs to sleep and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. And that's a project of the Coalition? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: I know that you have an annual luncheon which is a very big affair in northeast Ohio where you honor other outstanding women? Speaker 1: Yes, it's call the Women of Vision, our Women of Vision luncheon where we honor an African American woman in the Cleveland [Ohio] area who's been a leader, a visionary, who's tried to help a lot. Our last, the first and last we recognized was the Congresswoman, Stephanie Tubbs Jones. Speaker 2: Okay. In 2004? Speaker 1: Yes. It was just this past Spring. Speaker 2: Okay. Is it primarily a fundraising activity or just an awareness raising activity? Speaker 1: You know, I mean fundraising, yes, but it hasn't been a major vehicle for fundraising. I think it's more about just recognizing, just recognizing women who have achieved, black, African American women who have achieved in this area. You know, personalities, radio personalities, TV personalities, educators, politicians, teachers, doctors. They've tried to pull everybody who they think has done an outstanding job of trying to set an example for other women in the community. Story_ID: 95816 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I'd like to talk also for a while now about the funeral home business, okay, and the place of the Boyd family, in the history of the funeral home business in northeast Ohio. Now, you said the business now we know for the record was founded in 1905, by your grandfather [Elmer Franklin Boyd]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Your father's father. And can you tell me please where the business was located at the time of it's founding? Speaker 2: At 25th and Central. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I think in 1938, '39 [1939. sic, 1919] it moved to 43rd and Central to a home, it was a house. At 25th and Central it was like a store front. And then we moved to 43rd and Central. Oh gosh, (unclear) about getting it straight. No, I think we moved to 89th Street, I think it was in 1938, '39 [1939], but I can't remember exactly the dates, but it's been those three different locations, and then like the main location now is at 89th and Cedar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in '72 [1972], we opened up this facility in East Cleveland, and then in '87 [1987], let me think, '87 [1987] the chapel was built. In '96 [1996] Emery was opened and the chapel out Southeast in Warrensville Heights, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now with all of the moves that you've described, you know from the two addresses in Central and then to the main location at 89th and Cedar, and now to East Cleveland and then to Emery Road in Warrensville Heights, Ohio, it seems that your business has expanded or moved with the black community-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because Central in the early 20th Century, was the black ghetto. And it seems that as the neighborhood expanded and the population grew so too did the business. Is that pretty much an accurate assessment from your vantage point? Speaker 2: Yeah, because then from 89th, again we moved out here in '72 [1972] and that's when- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I've got ten minutes left on this tape, and we are rolling. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And we were talking about the growth and expansion of the business and the African American community from, from Central to Cedar. Okay, now was that, did the family look at that as a major move? Speaker 2: Um hum, um hum. There was another funeral home there. It's called Slaughter Brothers [Funeral Home], and Slaughter Brothers was a really big firm here back then, in late '30s [1930s] and that, and yeah, it was a big move, but my dad, my grandfather died in '44 [1944] and he had told my dad [William F. Boyd, Sr.] when they made this move, he was doing it for him, you know, the future was with him, not that he had any idea that he was that ill, but he just had told my dad, "this is what you wanna do, I'm going to go into this, we'll go into this expense but you're the one who's going to have to carry it." And my dad said fine, and he did it. And then when my grandfather died in 44 [1944], you know, my dad would tell you, there was the rumor that, you know, the business people were telling him, you know, the business wasn't gonna make it, they couldn't, he couldn't make it without his dad, and that was never, he was gonna be successful, but it didn't turn out that way. Thank heavens, you know, it didn't and my dad has got a very engaging personality. He's very outgoing, loves serving the public. So when you were asking me some while ago, well how do I feel about going in the funeral business and that, I tell you I had to learn to acclimate myself and really be into learning and turn myself around from being, hating being in a depressing place all the time and around depressed people, and you know, kind of ominous, you know, environment, to really liking the fact that I was helping somebody when they were down so emotionally. I mean that's the gratification I feel a director pretty much will get out of it that he's helping people. I mean, sounds corny but it's true. Yeah, so that's the way I look at the business the way it's matured. And you got to be dedicated to the public because, see people, are usually, can be so mean spirited when they're not feeling good with the death, you know, that it just cause, it's a whole different emotional response, again from somebody just going to the mall, it's just, it just a whole different side of life, whole different. Story_ID: 95817 Speaker 1: I know another native Clevelander [Cleveland, Ohio] who referred to Cedar Avenue as the "boulevard of broken dreams." That there was, it was the heart of the black community in the 1930s and '40s [1940s], Allen Cole had a studio there for a long time. Antioch Baptist Church was there, sort of an anchor in the community, still there at 89th and Cedar, sort katty-corner from the Boyd Funeral Home. Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: And lots of churches have been there for years, and now another, Pernel Jones [and Sons Funeral Home], another major funeral home right down the street on Cedar-- Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: --but if others had experienced broken dreams there it seems that Cedar was very kind to the Boyd Family and your business there. Speaker 2: Well, I just, like early century when my grandfather [Elmer Franklin Boyd] was coming into the business and decided to be a funeral director, he had tried some other things and then decided to be a funeral director. There weren't a whole lot of opportunities. I mean you were a teacher, minister, funeral director. I mean even now the funeral director in the black community is a noted position, just like a teacher, just like a, I was thinking of beautician, the bar owner. Those were all kind of occupations within, you know, the black community, and yeah, yeah it's been kind, it's been kind, and, you know, of course we're really proud of the fact that we been able to weather a 100 years. I mean, and my parents [William F. Boyd, Sr. and Mary Webster Boyd] still, sometimes I think we still, we just shake our heads because we can't believe it. I mean, it's a 100 years, but it says something about the cohesiveness of a family to be able to carry things from one generation like that and still pretty much be successful. It's a jolt for me. I'm very proud of my dad. My dad is the type of personality that, he's so engaging it's hard, he's one of those folk, and he loves to talk, and I picked it up from him, just loves to talk and be around people, and you know, he can sit down, don't know you and carry on for hours. He does that and he used to do that in his arrangements. I find myself doing the same thing. I really love getting into the personal stories of people when there's a death and really, really trying to show them how, you know, we can be helpful for--. Story_ID: 95818 Speaker 1: Now I had the opportunity to hear [HM] Julian Bond speak-- Speaker 2: When he was here? Speaker 1: --a few weeks ago, in May, I think it was May 7, at the Renaissance at Tower City Center. Speaker 2: Right, the City Club. Speaker 1: And one of the things he said was in the wake of this whole movement for desegregation, well integration as a policy, especially for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], a lot of African American institutions failed. A lot of African American teachers lost their jobs during the desegregation efforts and when people had the choice between going to the African American business person and going to a white-owned business, they would choose the white-owned business. And that was unfortunate, that so much was lost, even as people gained access to additional opportunities, but that didn't happen with the funeral home. Speaker 2: No, it's still a pretty much segregated business. It's still pretty much segregated. Speaker 1: How do you account for that? Speaker 2: Because I don't think, I think the prejudice runs so deep, the roots are so deep, that they prefer not to be involved with black families, deal with black bodies. They just don't-and the economics were such, it's very different for the white funeral director compared to the black funeral director. The economics are, you know, white funerals tend to be-- cost more than black funerals do, for the same goods and services. And, so, you know, I'm sure that they felt that black people couldn't support, you know, what they had, you know, to use their services like that. So usually if you find white people-- black people going to black people now, they got to have the cash. They got to. They can't be, they don't have it, they don't have any money. That's not, no. Speaker 1: I know from personal experiences that funerals can be very costly-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and with some of the changes that we're seeing in our society with younger people dying as a result sometimes of gun violence, sometimes because of AIDS, the families are having to deal with the cost of funerals, and early on, in a person's life when maybe at earlier period, it would have been the elders, you needed to have the funeral services. Have you had to make any major changes in how you deliver services in recent decades, to deal with that? Speaker 2: Now see when my dad [William F. Boyd, Sr.] was coming through the business through the depression and stuff, now that's when people really didn't have, that's when people really didn't have. There was no money, there was no insurance, there were no job insurances. People couldn't go, you know, some place like a Ford that insurance. People now tend to have some, something somewhere. They usually have some kind of insurance or some type of job or something that they can go to for hardship kind of allowance. Something that tends to, I find that more than people just coming and saying they have nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And even if they do, usually they pool among family members and they can still have a burial or our service of some, yeah, even if it's cremation, they can still have a service. Story_ID: 95819 Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about the funeral business in the African American community and why it has survived, even as other businesses failed in the city, when folks had the opportunity to go to other places, perhaps in suburban areas, perhaps to business men and women who were not members of the African American community, and you said that one of the reasons that the Boyd Family Funeral Home [E.F. Boyd and Son, Inc. Funeral Homes] survived is that people have resources to work with. Speaker 2: A lot of times they do, even if it's through some kind of state aid, even though they've cut back on that, you know, over the years, but, you know, the VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] used to supply a kind of benefits for veterans and then social security used to do something. Not much, not much, but it was something whereas now, they don't even, the government cutting back on that, but a lot of times, people have, they got some kinda of something somewhere, even if it's a grandmother who's been stuffing food, I mean money in her mattress for any kind of things that would happen with the family. Somebody usual does. Speaker 1: Okay. And you find that the families come together in that hour of bereavement to make the funeral service-- Speaker 2: When you say come together? Speaker 1: Well, to make the funeral service possible. The funeral is an important sort of moment for folks to come together. Speaker 2: Um hum. It's still highly recognized as a time to, you know, people, it's like a reunion for people, like with a wedding. When somebody dies people come from far and near for the services, yeah. Everybody wants to be able to have a chance to speak with the family, support the family. I'm sure there's some that's just curiosity seekers, but overall people, people don't come to a funeral again 'cause they really looking forward to it, they come to support. They come to be a support to the family, to hear the stories that are said about that person while they were living and what they contributed and the impact they had on family members and different lives and that. Yeah. I had a service here, a memorial service, which means that the body wasn't present, the other day for a man who was cremated, and most of the time we'll have a memorial service, but somebody can be buried and the body still not actually, actually at the funeral. But the people laughed and joked the whole service. And it was a uplifting kind of service instead of all the down, feeling sad, and people crying. I mean that's an expression too, but it was so refreshing. This family laughed the whole time and, you know, you could feel like this person that they were memorializing was a life well-lived. I mean he had no regrets. Everybody who comes here leaves and you just wanna make sure that when you do transition that it's done in as loving and respectful and as dignified manner as possible, and that's what the funeral is about. Expressing that love, conveying that love that you had for that family member and what they did for you, if it hadn't been for them where would you be. The stories that wrap around who that person was. All the pictures they bring out. There's all kinds of ways of expressing the love that you had for somebody. Story_ID: 95820 Speaker 1: Last year I discovered a really wonderful book by Dr. Michael Gomez "Exchanging Our Country Marks" and one of the things he writes about is the importance that African American slaves placed on the funeral service, and religious rituals in general, but especially baptism and funerals. Those important moments of transition in life and he said one of the things that they stressed was that people would come even if they didn't know the person who was deceased. They would come to the funeral, the entire community would come because they knew that if they could celebrate the work of that individual life, then all of their lives had meaning, and I just wonder, now here at the beginning of the 21st Century, if you, if you believe that that still holds true? That the community comes to these services not just because they knew, that they necessary knew the person who died, but it's still part of the life of the community, the service itself. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the whole ritual of a funeral in today's age were questioning a lot the value of funerals. Why do we do 'em? People feel bad, why bother going to something that makes me feel bad anyway. I mean, you know, just we're gone bury this family member or what we call, funeral directors call, a final disposition, either they're gone be cremated or the body is going to be disposed of with burial one way or another. I think it's a need of people to collect and spend that time together to say goodbye to that person. I think, I think it's very important in the whole grieving process that you do it. That's healthy to me. That's a healthy expression when you come together, sit down and say, talk all those stories and yeah, they are uncomfortable. They make us feel sad, but that person was worth that to me. Whoever that person that they're memorializing to say that they made a real impact, they made a real contribution because anybody who's here, generally, I don't care what persuasion you are religiously, you don't want to feel like you just here for nothing. You're not just here taking up space. You wanna feel like whatever your contribution is worthwhile and is gonna have some substance to it and I think that the way the funeral comes together is just to speak to those very things that they've done. I think it's a, I'm prejudice, I grew up in the business. I been around it all my life. But, yeah, it's very worthwhile to me and I think it always will be. See when you speak of the slaves years ago, and I'm not familiar with the book you spoke of, but I know for slaves, the reading I've done, it was delivering them from all the trials that they were--and the pain and oppression they were dealing with. This was their way of being delivered from this and going on to a heavenly reward. They were being released from the pains of living on this earth and going home in glory. So you've got your songs like "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" and all those things are gone to speak of a much greater reward when people get to heaven and you just have to suffer here temporarily to go on to achieve something much better and I think it's so important because of the struggle of black people, and the discrimination and the things they've had to suffer here to go on and know that, you know, I'm going on to a place where that kind of thing don't make any difference. Yeah, I mean I think the funeral is always going to be an important ritual for black, white, whoever. Everybody has, every religious persuasion that I'm familiar with had some way that they send people home. You know Indians, Islam, everybody has some kind of religious service that surrounds rituals sends when somebody dies. They just don't throw the body off in the trash can and then everybody go on like, you know, nothing's happened. It's a whole big to do. It's a whole big--and it's a lot of ceremony involved, a lot of pomp and circumstance, but it's what you do to take note of the fact that this person was living and not just throwing them aside like they did nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Well if that spirituality and that religion continues to matter in the 21st Century, there are people who are convinced also that race matters. That African American funeral directors have reasons to be associated with each other because most of the services they have to perform are not necessarily the same services that white funeral home directors have to perform. Now would you agree with that? Speaker 2: Um hum. Story_ID: 95821 Speaker 1: So do you belong to an association that includes other African American funeral home directors? Speaker 2: Not in the local area [Cleveland, Ohio], but state and national. You know there's a National Funeral Directors and Morticians Association was the black arm and the National Funeral Directors which is the white arm, and then we have a Buckeye State Funeral Directors [and Embalmers]. They just had a convention last weekend. I didn't make it, but yeah, and I'm a member of those. I can't tell you I'm active. I used to go, as a kid, that was our summer vacation, to go the funeral directors' conventions. My kids, my friends used to tease me, how you going, but you know funeral directors can be very lively sorts when they're en masse like that, and so you have a lot of fun and it's a lot of networking and that was my summer vacation as a kid, it was about a week long. It always is, still happens the same time of year every year, has for as long as I can remember and we just had the best fun. We really did. Speaker 1: Okay. So what kinds of networking activities do you engage in, a funeral home director? Speaker 2: At the conventions, they have continuing education, or, you know, information about beefing up your skills from computers to handling dead, you know, techniques for handling dead bodies to crime scenes, or at least getting you exposed to how the whole process is. Say for instance I went to a seminar some years ago, say if we had a whole, you know, we had a disaster, or a catastrophe happen and, you know, people killed out-- had a disaster at the airport where a plane was blown, you know accident, and then how the triage is set up, and how the bodies are identified, the methods of identification, all that kind of thing, so they give you information about that, and then they go from there to, you know, the hospitality suite and people having a lot of fun in hospitality, getting to know each other. I mean, conventions are conventions, you know, they encompass a little bit of everything. Story_ID: 95822 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask a question that's important, an important concern for us now at the beginning of the 21st Century and maybe medical science will make it less of a concern years from now when people are watching this video. Well right now, AIDS is a major concern in the African American community and there are lots of young people, especially young men, gay men, who are dying of AIDS and still people want the funeral service. Is that something that funeral home directors have really had to deal with in a serious way or have your methods for, you know, preparing the bodies for the services been very carefully handled in the past, and so this isn't a major issue for you? Speaker 2: Well now when you speak of AIDS, you speaking specifically the way the body's handled, or just the service, or-- Speaker 1: Well I'm on the outside looking in. I'm just, I'm talking, I guess, specifically, because of the way that it's a blood-born disease. Speaker 2: Right. And it's an infectious disease just like hepatitis, just like pneumonia, so the funeral director, I mean, embalmer has to use a lot of precaution, a lot of precaution used, you know, double suitings with gloves, mask, the whole full, you know, shoes, everything's covered and there's a lot of precaution taken with AIDS cases. Yeah, yeah. And, of course, but the services are pretty much the same. I mean it's a lot of pain sometimes, sometimes you may not even know that that person died of AIDS. As a funeral director, I may not know until sometime later. That's not something that may not come out in the family, in the arrangement time. I may not know, and sometimes even, you know, usually the embalming room has to be alerted from the hospital or the morgue or wherever somebody passed that even though if it is an infectious kind of thing like that, they had to be given advance warning. But that doesn't always happen. So, you just gotta use, you gotta use precaution with everybody. Speaker 1: Always. Speaker 2: Um hum, okay. Speaker 1: Has there ever been a time when funeral home directors were reluctant to perform services for people who had died from certain illnesses? Speaker 2: And again I'm-- Speaker 1: To your knowledge. Speaker 2: --not in the morgue. I'm not in the morgue. I've never heard of that. I've never heard that you know, we don't wanna service AIDS cases or not for us. We've never said that. I mean you have to take care of them just like you would take care of anybody, I mean, what if it were a family member of mine, you now. So, no you gotta treat 'em just like anybody else who's passed. I mean, it's unfortunate, but and we're there to help the family. Speaker 1: Well I just ask the question because I know there is so much stigma and so much fear because people just don't understand the nature of the illness itself and they can see how devastating it is when someone is diagnosed. Speaker 2: Well, look, as far as I'm concerned, everything, how can I say this, I mean we're all are gonna leave here at some point and unfortunately, AIDS tends to be a very kinda, it's a bad, I mean it's a bad--seems not to be the most wonderful type of death. I mean it's lingering and it's very hurtful, very lot of pain involved. I think you just got to, you still got to treat an AIDS patient though and their family just like they're anybody else. You don't treat them any different. In fact, you try to go beyond trying to make 'em feel comfortable. I mean, 'cause again, like you say the whole stigma around it. For a lot of people it's hard to talk about. They don't wanna ever admit--I had a family not too long ago. It came out sometime later that the child had died of AIDS and a male, but it never came out early on, and was I gone treat her any differently? No, in fact, I tried to embrace her more 'cause I know she's dealing with a whole different type of pain that's really more substantial than somebody who'd been ill for a long time, older, died of natural causes, then for what she's dealing with, losing, you know. Parents never think they're going to bury their children and, you know, it gets into different issues. Um hum. AIDS for us is not, I can't tell you, of all the things I've heard recently with the statistics and that, and the young people dying of AIDS, and that I can't say that I've heard of a lot of people for us who are really dying from it. Usually, that's not the immediate cause of death. It can be something like pneumonia, it can be cancer. It's not necessarily AIDS and we don't get into a whole lot of conversation about, you know, what somebody died of, you know, the sensational stuff, we just don't, we just don't. I mean I happen to know this because this woman came here to make the arrangement. Other people who are handled through 89th Street, I don't necessarily see or hear or even out to the other chapel that they died of AIDS. It just doesn't come up. And I'm sure there are statistics there, but I don't know them personally. Story_ID: 95823 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask also about the work of women in this business because it's always had the name of, if not Elmer [Franklin] Boyd,-- Speaker 2: Male, male dominated. Speaker 1: -- then William [F.] Boyd and Son, so-- Speaker 2: You don't see and daughter, you don't see that. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Recently though, I had a conversation with a reporter from the Plain Dealer who was telling me that the numbers are showing that more women are going into mortuary school than men now. And she asked me the very question, why, why are more women going into business? I really, and again, this may sound really trite, but it's only cause you're giving back to people, it's only 'cause. There can be no other reason, there's not a lot of money to be made in the funeral business. You can go into the corporate world have better compensation, better benefits, better hours and, you know, have a job making sufficient income. The funeral business is long hours and dealing with people who emotionally are just overwrought. And are not, sometimes the nicest, and you gotta be dedicated to helping people. That's all I can say. That's the best way I can say it. I mean it sounds so trite, and it sounds so corny, but I don't know any other reason why. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really don't. Speaker 1: Now what is the official name of the family business now? Speaker 2: Of our business? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It's E.F. Boyd and Son, Inc. My grandfather, the E.F. Boyd and Son. Speaker 1: And you don't see daughter being added. I just wanted you to state that for the record. Speaker 2: No, I would see it changed to Boyd Funeral Home, maybe, but I don't see where we might drop the E.F. and the Son and just make it Boyd Funeral Home, but, you know that's a mouthful. You call in to a business and you want to hear the name of the business announced and you can't say E.F. Boyd and Son Funeral Home. You just say, you know what, we just say Boyd Funeral Home and I can see at some point, it'll probably, but my dad [William F. Boyd, Sr.], I don't know, he--no I can't see that anytime soon, but yeah. Speaker 1: Well, there's a lot of history in that name. Speaker 2: Um hum. Speaker 1: Because it takes us back to the beginning of the century. Speaker 2: Yeah, and my grandfather [Elmer Franklin Boyd], his father and all, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 95824 Speaker 1: I again wanted to stay with the story of the women in the family because you, we talked about your paternal grandparents because again, it's your grandfather [Elmer Franklin Boyd] is launching the family business, but I'd like to talk about your mother's side of the family for a little while. You said your mother's name is Mary? Speaker 2: Yeah. Webster [Mary Webster Boyd]. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about her parents? Speaker 2: Her grandmother, her mother, my grandmother, was named Ina, like after my daughter, well, my daughter named after her. Ina Bell Guy Webster, and she again was from southern Ohio. Was it Steubenville and Urbana kinda of area, and then her husband's name was Franklin (unclear) Webster. He was a chiropractor here. She was just, she was a housewife. They got married a little later in life so they only had my mother as their only child. And, you know, they were both--my grandmother lived with us when I was a kid. Both of them lived with us and she passed. It's a funny thing, my mother's mother and my father's mother [Cora Stewart Boyd] passed within days of each other back in 1960. And, my grandfather lived with us for some years longer. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, was your mother also actively involved in the business when you were growing up? Speaker 2: When I went to junior high school she got in the business. She got her license as a funeral director and she worked along side my dad. My brother [William F. Boyd, II] had started in the business before she did, and then after that my mom came in the business and then I came in and then my sister [Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant], and then the two nieces. Speaker 1: Okay. And are both your parents still actively involved in the day-to-day operations. Speaker 2: Not day-to-day operations. They're pretty much retired, but my dad is very active on going on services when his health allows. My mom's pretty much home. But my dad is still out on services as much he, as much as his health will allow. Yeah, yeah. He still moves like a minute, you know, he's still something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 95825 Speaker 1: Well, it feels now that the interview actually is winding down, but this is your story and so before we actually conclude our discussion, I just wanted to ask if there was anything else that you wanted to share in talking about your life and your work here in northeast Ohio? Speaker 2: You know, I feel like doors are unfolding. For a long time I went through a lot of personal emotional issues and, you know, just like there was no light at the end of the tunnel. And more and more I'm seeing things where, I'm seeing things happen that even my parents [William F. Boyd, Sr. and Mary Webster Boyd] are saying that the Lord has a strong hand in it, and it's just coming out of nowhere. And I can't really give you a hard instance of something that I can think of right now, but I just feel so much more fulfilled, and I feel like there's things yet that I have to do. I feel like I still have a mission out there that I gotta accomplish, whereas years ago, I was like, oh my God, you know, it was, it was a rough time, it was a rough time. And I can see things getting a lot easier. I'm feeling a lot more fulfilled. I've been out here at Euclid as manager for about five years. It'll be five years in the fall. And see I can remember years ago, twenty years ago, and I never thought that would have happened. I never thought I'd ever have the strength emotionally or the tenacity to really fill a job like this and do it well, and yet, you know, I've been doing, I've been doing pretty decent, and for that I'm proud of myself. I still see things I want to do educationally as far as finishing my degree, and I always wanted to be an attorney years ago. And you speaking of Jess Capers [ph.] earlier, and Jess Capers [ph.] was trying to route me on to be an attorney and it didn't happen. But I still have dreams to finish school, and I really like what I'm doing. I really like it. Speaker 1: Okay. So the family business, you see it being part of your future in the same way that it's been an important part of your past? Speaker 2: Yeah, fighting tooth and nail to keep it going and whatever it's gone take 'cause see my dad's, he's fading off of the scene, the daily scene, and he's been such a force behind the business. That driving personality of his to be in for so out in the public, and be so involved, and I feel, you know, you know you feel the pressure. You gotta, if you gonna business successful, you gotta keep doing that kind of things he did to make it successful. You know, you can't take it for granted like it's always gone be there just because it's been a hundred years. I mean, if you don't do the kinda things that the public demands and give the public what they need, they can forget about you and I'm trying to work very hard to make sure that doesn't happen. Yep. Speaker 1: And I guess I wanted to ask too because this is an African American video archival project, if you see this remaining as an African American business with the society opening up with those doors opening? Speaker 2: Well, it's changing, it is changing. We find more white funeral homes are burying black people and you see it in the papers, I mean, more and more you see it so I think it's gone shift. Yeah, I really do. I think that the doors are gonna open in that regard and it's not gone make any difference. It's not gone be of prime importance as it has been. I think that's gonna change. And I also hope that, you know, whites will feel comfortable being buried by blacks. I mean more so now, it's whites, blacks being buried by whites. It's not too much this direction, but I would hope, I would be, especially when we are out in Warrensville [Warrensville Heights, Ohio], I would hope that people will feel comfortable to want to patronize us there. But I mean, that a ways, that's probably down the road a bit, but it's a dream. Um hum. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I thank you very much for allowing us to come into your business and your home today. And we thank you for being a part of The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Well, thank you. I appreciate this opportunity, you just don't know. Yeah. Story_ID: 95826 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is here at the Euclid Chapel [E.F. Boyd and Son, Inc. Funeral Home on Euclid Avenue in Cleveland, Ohio]. This is the show room here, the casket showroom. I'm actually standing in the middle of what was the middle of the floor at the time with a particular casket there, just standing in front of it. All you can see around all behind it, all the different caskets on the different, you know, stands and that. The lighting and that you can see. Yeah, I'm just standing there. This was supposed to be used in the paper for a article they were running about the funeral homes when I first came out here, letting people know we were out here, 'cause again, see we been out here--owned it since '72 [1972], had services and that, but we never had a whole facility, full service facility more or less, where people could make arrangements, do all their arrangements, select the casket and everything here. That was pretty much done down at 89th, and then, be five years ago, I came out and then developed all this. Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We just need one second, the picture, that's fine, that's (unclear) the picture, but go ahead tell us this. Speaker 1: Now this is last summer. It was last July, in fact. I was like emceeing a reception for the Alzheimer's Association. There was a woman who had developed a play, African American Woman, written a play and we were just introducing this to the public. We were one of the sponsors for it, the Boyd Funeral Home was one of the sponsors. Again, that's my parents [William F. Boyd, Sr. and Mary Webster Boyd] there, and the lady from the Alzheimer's Association. I wish I could,--of the aging center at the hospital, University Hospital, and the play was designed, it was called For Pete's Sake [by DaNine K. Ward], and it was coming up that fall in November, actually at Tri-C Metro Campus [Cuyahoga Community College] for a few, you know, play for, I can't think of that word, but I was just introducing this to the public last July and the point of the play was to give more information about Alzheimer's and making people, African American public, give them more education about how to handle somebody with Alzheimer's and increase their awareness and then get people to participate in research 'cause there hadn't been a lot of research about Alzheimer's and how it affected African Americans. And so they were trying to engage again, the support of the audience after seeing how, you know, Alzheimer's plays out through a family setting in the story that they had "For Pete's Sake" about somebody with Alzheimer's. So I was emceeing this. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And when was that? Speaker 1: Last July [2003]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And then the play was, they were actually, the plays were actually presented, the play was actually presented last November round Thanksgiving. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, now, of course, this is my dad and my mom, William F. Boyd and Mary W. Boyd. It was taken a couple years ago and, I think, was at their home where we took these pictures. My dad is again, the second generation of the business. And my mom. They been married 63 years, 65 years, something like that now. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, it just brings tears to the eyes. It really does. Okay, now this is my son [Tim Cox] and my daughter [Ina Elizabeth Cox]. This is at my son's cotillion, Jack and Jill Cotillion when he was 17. He's, again, he'll be 20 next week, so this has been about three years ago. And this was held downtown [Cleveland, Ohio] at the Renaissance Hotel and they were taking these family portraits and me and my daughter and I there right around my son, real proud that day. It was a real proud moment for me that day. My son, who had never been actively engaged in Jack and Jill because he had been a member since he was three and always kind of shunned it, and never really wanted to participate, when we had to do this and do all the rehearsals, he became a different-"Mom, come on, you're missing your step. Mom, come on, come on," and he made me so proud that night. He was, it was just really wonderful. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Alright. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is my niece and her family. Her husband and, this has been a few years ago 'cause they're all pretty, you know, the youngest is like about, the baby there, she's about seven, I think, now. But this niece is my sister's [Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant] daughter. Her name is Lisa Taylor, and her three daughters are Marina, the baby is Marissa [ph.] and Cecily [ph.], sitting on her dad's lap, and her husband's name at that time, his name is James Taylor, and this again, this was taken at my parent's home some years ago. But she now works in the business. She's heads up the pre-need department for, she's a licensed funeral director and heads up the pre-need, helping people make pre-arrangements for themselves. Story_ID: 95827 Speaker 1: And this is my brother, my oldest, the oldest child. His name is William F. Boyd, II, and we call him "Pepper," and his daughter and wife. His daughter's name is Courtney [ph.] and his wife's name is Lavern [ph.]. And again, this was taken at my parent's home at the same time that the previous picture was taken with other family members, with my niece. But it's the three of them. She is the same age as my son [Tim Cox], so--. Yeah, that's the three of them. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about that. Speaker 1: Aw man, I--okay, this is my children [Tim Cox and Ina Elizabeth Cox] again, and myself. You can see this was a few years ago 'cause I got a little more black hair in the top, and my children. Again, that was taken at the same time as the previous two pictures, different parts of the family. We were all taking pictures. I can't remember, I think the particular occasion was just to get together to take pictures. It was supposed to be for advertising. We had a group family picture that we took. These were just different parts of the family. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, ready. Speaker 1: Well, like Dr. Williams was saying, I may be known for my bright colors and speaking out, but I always used to have, I used to always have parties. And, when I could afford to do 'em. This is a Halloween party. It was actually here. I used to have parties here in the basement. I lived here when I was much younger. When I first got married. And I used to have parties in the basement because this used to be a restaurant, so there's another entry into the basement. The people didn't have to come through the funeral home, and so, it was a party room. And this is a Halloween party I had here and yep, everybody was in costume. It was a costume party and, you know, I had a lot of fun that year. I don't think I've had a party since then. That's been a good number of years ago. Everybody loved dressing up. You can see the girl here on the end. She was the bride of Frankenstein, and right, I don't know if you can see it too well, maybe in the mirror you can see it reflected. There was a casket that I had laid out, and when people first came into the basement off from the parking lot, they'd run into an area open where this casket would be and she was laying in it. It was, scared people to death. Scared people to death. It was something. She had, she had her dead rose in her hand and all the makeup. It was really, really--people had a lot of fun. You either like Halloween parties like that, or you don't. And we had a lot of fun that year. We had a lot of fun. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You ready? Speaker 1: Now, this was a benefit for Council for Economic Opportunities for Greater Cleveland [Ohio]. I was on the Committee to get this fundraiser together. They just started having a gala a few years ago, and I was the family member, I was one from the family, I was on this committee trying to--cause it was a whole new concept for this non-profit here. It's called CEOGC and they have a fundraiser down at the Browns Stadium [now FirstEnergy Stadium] and these are all my family that came out to support me and some friends. You know my sister [Marina Elizabeth Boyd Grant] and her husband on the left side, and their daughter, who we got picture of earlier, my mom [Mary Webster Boyd]. That's a relative of mine there. My dad [William F. Boyd, Sr.], myself and I had a date with me that day. Yep. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Are you ready now? Speaker 1: Okay, this is Wayne Dawson and myself. Wayne Dawson is a reporter, anchor here on Fox. He's on the Fox news channel, and I was receiving an award. It was called the Crescent Award from a bishop here in East Cleveland who's very active. His name is Bishop Prince Moultry and he felt that he wanted to recognize me because of the support of the funeral home [E.F. Boyd and Son, Inc. Funeral Homes] and I have given him over the years and tried always, you know, see to his interest being supported with financial help from the funeral home and he was debuting a CD he had done. This was just a few months ago. I'm thinking maybe the end of last year. And, and he gave me an award. I was really thankful, really surprised. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, this photograph? Speaker 1: Now this is my daughter, again Ina [Elizabeth Cox]. Gosh, some years ago. She must have been 7 or 8 and we, it's a birthday party. Her birthday's in March and I had a party for her, skating party, ice rink party up at Thornton Park in Shaker Heights. So yeah, this is one of my favorite pictures of her. She was having a great time that day. I got her all dressed up and she had on first little lipstick and stuff. She had a, she had a ball that day. It's been a little bit ago. Speaker 2: And, this is my son [Tim Cox]. It's taken right in this room. He and I, taken right here. And the story behind this, when Denzel Washington was making Antoine Fisher, he was going to use the funeral home and that day he was here and my son got, you know, he was here to meet him. He wanted to meet him and stuff, and so he was here that day and he had just been out at the chapel that day looking to use it. And he was going to use it for a scene and then wound up cutting the scene and we didn't get in the movie. I was heartbroken, but yeah, that's what, that's the story behind that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 2: What you see before you is an article that was written about my dad and my mom was in Cleveland Scene magazine, February 2002, and it talks about my dad's story about segregation in the funeral business and growing up in the funeral business and how it was segregated and stuff. It's a real revealing story. I was just reading there trying to refresh my memory that, you know, black funeral directors were not accepted in the state associations and the local associations years ago and my grandfather [Elmer Franklin Boyd] developed the black funeral directors here in 1927. And talking about how things have always been separate, you know, segregated in the funeral business. That's what that whole article was about and my dad saying he'd like to close the casket on segregation and hopefully people will see beyond, you know, just patronizing somebody 'cause they're white or patronizing somebody 'cause they're black, but because of the service they offer. That was that. That's that story there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Another article featuring here my dad and myself, there you see in the window of the hearse. This was in the Plain Dealer here [Cleveland, Ohio], February 24, 2002, talking again about the family-owned funeral homes in the black community and--I don't know, they, they spoke with us. I remember the reporter came out and took a lot of pictures but again, talking about blacks patronizing their own in the funeral business and whites patronizing whites, but it's still, you know, again, in the funeral business, I mean in the business community at large, and for black people, the funeral director is a large part of it. He's a community resource. He winds up being like a psychologist, you know giving people advice on business, how to handle--he turns out to be a source for a lot of people to just come and talk to him. My dad has turned out to be that for our family anyway. He is like the patriarch, of course, but people always seek him out for advice and because he's a businessman and knows how to run business successfully. They always seek him out like the funeral directors generally are. Funeral directors are usually large part of their communities. They're involved doing a lot of things giving back to the community 'cause a funeral director feels a strong obligation to give back. After all he gets his bread and butter from the community so he's got to give back a lot. And, I mean this story talks a lot about that, being involved. Yep..