 Story_ID: 89113 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I am Lula Cole Dawson, L-U-L-A, C-O-L-E, D-A-W-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Jonesboro, Louisiana, April 15, 1931. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am first a housewife, by training I'm a sociologist. Speaker 1: Alright and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April, I mean June 6, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at 1601 Kalmia Road, Washington DC. Story_ID: 89114 Speaker 1: Now ma'am before we go into depth, we have five People Magazine-ish short questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer. The first question is ma'am what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: That is difficult. Food is my favorite food (laugh). I guess chicken. Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere, no I have no favorite place. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: This too will pass. Story_ID: 89115 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Alright, well tell me something about your family. How far can you trace your family back? Speaker 2: I can trace my family back--let's see I guess four generations. I had a great great grandmother who lived to be 102. I was about six or seven years old when she passed. She remembered some of slavery and she told fabulous stories. Speaker 1: Can you remember a story? These are valuable. Speaker 2: I can't--well she used to talk about how difficult life was. She talked about being born in Florida, her name was Florida and she said her name came from because she was brought to Florida. She was reared in Florida and they brought her--somebody from Louisiana brought her and they started calling her Florida. That's one story I remember. She used to tell a lot of ghost stories. She told of a lot of the problems that she had as a young girl moving from place to place and her master and all that kind of stuff. We always sort of laughed when I got older because we felt some of that stuff wasn't true that she told us but it was very interesting. Every two years we had a family reunion and the whole family from Detroit [Michigan], from California and of course Louisiana would come and visit her and she would late at night, you know--for us late at night for the children would sit out on the porch and she would start telling stories. Of course, you were scared the whole two or three days that you were there because she told such fabulous snake stories and old time stories and all that kind of stuff. And at the same time, I don't remember this but I've heard family talk about it, the governor who was Huey Long would come every family reunion and visit--to see her and of course, the family was there. When I say family, I'm talking about seventy five, one hundred people from everywhere would come around. And the thing I remember most about that was we used to have church--you go to church that fourth Sunday and you would have everybody from everywhere would come and it looked very big to me at that time. You would eat--you would have the service and you would eat and people would bring food and that kind of thing. It was a very interesting time. I still remember some of that. Speaker 1: Her name was Florida? Speaker 2: Her name was Florida, yes, Florida Cole but she said that's where that name came from, I don't know. Speaker 1: And she lived to be 102? Speaker 2: 104 Speaker 1: 104 okay. Speaker 2: And interestingly enough, she died by falling and breaking her hip--two or three days later she was gone. Speaker 1: So how long ago was she born, (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't know; I never went into anything like that. But I must have been--she died when I was about five or six or somewhere in there. So that was sixty some years ago. Speaker 1: Okay so she was about 104 in 1935/'36 [1936]. Speaker 2: Yes, she was about 104 then. Speaker 1: Were there any other stories about your ancestors? Speaker 2: Family? Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, that side of my family-my father's side the women lived a long time. At one time I had aunts-his aunts who were 98, 100 and my grandmother--his mother lived, I guess she was 90 something and my mother just passed two years ago--that's from a different side of the family--she just passed two years ago, she was 96 when she passed. So the women are long livers, I don't know what that says but the women on both sides of my family are long livers. Speaker 1: Okay what about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: That's what I was talking about for my great grandmother. Story_ID: 89116 Speaker 1: My mother, I haven't talked about her side of the family. She was a--she came from a family of nine and she was the oldest girl and she lived longer than any other, as I said she just died two years ago. She--at that time in Louisiana you didn't have--you had education but very few people got education. She went to what they called a boarding school until her mother passed. She got an education but not much. Neither one of my parents were college trained at all. Speaker 2: Now what was your mother's full name? Speaker 1: Norma D. Cole--Marchen (splg.), Norma D. Marchen Cole. Speaker 2: Okay and when was she born? Speaker 1: She was born in 1904. Speaker 2: Okay and she was born in Louisiana? Speaker 1: She was born in Louisiana. Speaker 2: So she was at a boarding school for a while? Speaker 1: Yes she went to a boarding school and then when her mother passed, she and my daddy married. Speaker 2: Okay, how did she and your father meet? Speaker 1: At church, a church conference or something like that. Speaker 2: Did they have any kind of story about how they met? Speaker 1: Yes, they used to laugh all the time about my father who is in one community and she was in another community and he would come to you know I think it was the third or fourth Sunday, he'd come to vis--to go to that church and that's where he met her. Story_ID: 89117 Speaker 1: What I was saying--I was very, very small and we had this porch--a huge porch at her house out in the country. They had pallets out there for young kids to sleep on and our uncles and granddaddy and all of the older people--older men would be out under a tree or something drinking--talking and drinking bootleg whiskey I guess. All I can remember is that everybody was having fun. The women would be in the kitchen cooking, the men out under the tree caring on and usually they would have a barbeque--they would have a pig or something and they would barbeque it. The men would barbeque in the yard and we would be on the--the youngsters and I'm talking about twenty five, thirty, forty kids sleeping on pallets on the porch and grandmamma would be there in her rocking chair telling all kinds of fibs--well I don't know if they were fibs but they were certainly interesting. She would tell about ghost stories and old times and that is still vivid in my mind. I remember that very well and also on the Saturday--the big day people would come to visit and people would stand out on the road to see Huey Long and his entourage come. Now as I said, I don't remember too much of that but my parents and my fre--you know, the relatives and everybody talked about that. Speaker 2: Do you know what the relationship was between Huey Long and your--? Speaker 1: Well he was born--Huey Long was born here in that part of the state and the Long family was still there. She was just the old fashioned old mama. Speaker 2: Now did she live on land that Huey Long owned? Speaker 1: No, no she had her own land. She was very enterprising. I don't know. I never knew anything about my great grandfather, I guess he had gone or whatever but she had land that is still in the family. She started my father in saying that God didn't make--wasn't going to make anymore land and that was one thing you could have and nobody could take from you if you were very careful. And he, he. My father started buying land. Speaker 2: That's what people say that nobody could make anymore land. Speaker 1: God wasn't going to make any more land, that's right. Speaker 2: Does she live adjacent to Huey Long's--? Speaker 1: No, Huey Long was in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], this was up in north Louisiana. Because she was--do you remember--I remember later seeing that the big men would come and see the good old mama--a particular family or something. I don't think he had that much to do with the family. He wasn't that concerned about it but she would get her cane and she'd raise it at him and all the papers and all that kind of stuff would talk about that (laugh). It was nothing to be proud of but--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: A good press opportunity for Huey Long. Speaker 1: It was a good press opportunity for Huey Long, that's right. Speaker 2: He could get the black votes, I guess. Speaker 1: Well at that time blacks weren't voting. Speaker 2: Oh okay, that's right. Speaker 1: But he took care of his black folks. They weren't voting, I don't think--I think he did that because he didn't--probably that family genuinely liked their people and their property probably was--I don't know but that's what he did. I know that every two or three years, that was a big thing. Story_ID: 89118 Speaker 1: Well now tell us about your father. What is his full name? Speaker 2: My father is--he's passed. He is Jerry Cole. A very interesting gentleman. He didn't get much schooling. His father was an old fashion school teacher but passed when my daddy was nine years old and he had three siblings. My grandmother was one of those old fashion ones who didn't work outside the family. The women didn't work, the men were the workers and he had to start work on the railroad as a--nine, ten years old to support the family which he did. Speaker 1: What did he do at that age? Speaker 2: He was a water boy on the railroad and I guess did various kinds of things for the people on the railroad. Then he was eighteen, nineteen when he married my mother--twenty, I think when he married my mother. By then he had started working in the paper mills and he worked--they lived on one of those paper mill place from what I can gather and when they had what three or four children before I came. When I came along during the [Great] Depression, he had to go to Oklahoma to work in the oil mills to make a living. So he didn't see me until I was about six months old because he had to go out of the state to Oklahoma. Then he came back from Oklahoma back to Louisiana and he started his own company, Puffwood. You know what Puffwood is? It's one of the biggest paper factories in Jonesboro and he was the first black to get a contract with it--paper mill company. Speaker 1: Now Puffwood---(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Cut the trees certain lengths and bring to the company--to the factory. He did that, I guess at his--he had about fifteen to twenty fellows working with him. He had a really growing business and he maintained that until he died. But he really became what we call sort of not well off but made a good living during the war. He had three or four buses that he would pick up people--workers for Alexander--Alexander was seventy two miles away and he would pick up people--workers for the mine factory and the army bases and things like that in Alexander and take them to work once a week and bring them back at the end of the week and he did very well at that. At the same time he had Puffwood Company going--this bus company and he would buy land and plant timber. A lot of people talk about picking cotton; I can talk about planting pine trees because he bought a lot of land which he still has. His one aim was that his children's children's children would have something to live on. They would never be wealthy but they would have something to live on. He was going to buy enough land to see--he would tell us don't sell this land and it's true, we are still able to sell timber now. We will not be wealthy but we won't starve either--that's all of his--the grandchildren and everything else. He was very far-sighted in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 89119 Speaker 1: What kind of little girl were you when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I was a reader. I used to love to read and my daddy was very rigid and strict on bedtime. So my thing was I took a flashlight and hid it and I would get in my room under the covers and read because at a certain time, your lights had to be out. I read everything I could get my hands on and that was one--the man who started public schools for blacks in Jonesboro, Professor Hawk we called him, had a library and he would let some of us come and get some books and things. So I would do that every week, I would get books. Speaker 1: What were your favorite books? Speaker 2: Oh my favorite books were some of the classics you know. I'm trying to think of a name of one now. But anyway it was some of the classics that--it will come to me in a minute, some of the names of them. Speaker 1: Were you reading things like 'Little Women'--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: 'Little Women', David Copperfield I remember all of that very well, I read all those books at that time. Speaker 1: Mark Twain? Speaker 2: That's right but he would let us borrow the library books, there were no public libraries for us there. In fact, I didn't even know what that meant at that time. But he would let us get books and as long as we brought them back and kept them in good shape, we could get books the next week. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah that's something that the community did on its own. Speaker 2: That's an interesting thing. When I was in Africa, I used to try to pass that kind of knowledge on because it made a heck of a difference in your life. During my mother's time, there were no public schools and as I said, Professor Hawk started one in Jonesboro. They had public schools when I was there but we didn't have a public library, we didn't have any of those things and we didn't know about a lot of that stuff but my principal, Mr. Wilson, Professor Hawk who had been a principal before but he was too old at that time, they told us about Africa. My one big wish was to go to Africa just because they had told us what a great country it was. They told us about the early history of some of the tribes and it just made it so interesting to us before even we even thought about Africa. Story_ID: 89120 Speaker 1: So this is-what was the name of the school you attended? Speaker 2: Jonesboro Colored School. Speaker 1: Jonesboro Colored School. Now do you know if any of the-if Professor Hawk is it, H-A-W-K? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Okay, was he a member of Marcus Garvey's organization or anything? Speaker 2: I don't know anything about that kind of thing. All I remember was that--evidently he was in something because there was always talk about him being careful. I know he was involved with the union. Now at this time I was very small so I don't remember any of that. I didn't know any of that but I did remember all the people talking about he'd better be very careful because he did a lot of organizing of the unions at the paper mill and he was involved with other kinds of things. But they had-when he'd have those organization meetings and things, you know, I don't think the older people talked about it other than I could hear them shoo shooing (laugh). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's dangerous business. Speaker 2: That was dangerous business, right. Speaker 1: Even white people were afraid of organizing unions in those days. Speaker 2: Very, very difficult, yes. Story_ID: 89121 Speaker 1: So that's where you went to grade school--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: High school there. Speaker 1: They had a high school there? Speaker 2: I was in the last four years. They started having in the fifth year, the eleventh grade-I was in the, I mean the twelfth grade I was in the last class with the eleventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay so high school and grade school the same school. How many teachers did you have? Speaker 2: We had two buildings, one elementary building and one high school building. Our high school building had about five rooms and we had about--in high school, I guess we had about six teachers and about seven or eight teachers in elementary school. But you know we just had limited resources and the parents had to--my mother was a big organizer. She would-I never shall forget our first football team was in my lifetime-my high school and they had to buy-organize and buy uniforms. We didn't have a gymnasium so they converted one of the rooms in elementary school to a gymnasium--I mean to an auditorium and she organized. The women they would have fish fries and other kinds of things to buy a curtain to put in the auditorium. Those were really tough times and as I, when I got in high school, I never knew but every summer when two or three kids who had gone away to college would come back, they would go to the high school, they would work at the high school for two or three weeks and I never knew until I finished college, in fact I learned about it when my brother finished high school and the principal--he went back to the high school for that summer, two or three weeks. He had to work to but he worked with my daddy. What the principal did because the black high school had to use the white books--the old books and there were all kinds of terrible things written in there, you know, names and everything like that. Speaker 1: Addressed to the black--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Niggers, mark out some things, pages torn out. What he would do, he would have you to come and go through every book. If there was epithet in there, you marked it out, if there were a page missing, you found another page and rewrite that page. I did that for three or four years when I got in college. That's where we were. When I think about diversity, I start thinking about that (laugh) in my life time. Speaker 1: It's one thing to say that things were tough, it's another thing--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: When you lived it. Speaker 1: The details make the difference. Speaker 2: Oh I'm telling you. We're talking about that time in my life; I never rode a public bus. My daddy would not let the women ride a public bus. Think about it, I had stores that I could go to that he had accounts; a drugstore, a five and ten cent store and one other department--sort of department store. Mind you Jonesboro didn't have that much but you had more than that and I could only go to those stores because he didn't want us insulted, didn't want us--our feelings hurt or anything else like that. He put a fence around our house because he didn't want those salesmen to come in and they'd come on in your house, turn on your radio, sit around, anything and nothing you could do. Speaker 1: Being white gave them a special--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: They were special. Speaker 1: It's a wonder how people--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Survive at all. Story_ID: 89122 Speaker 1: Well now tell me about--now in high school and grade school were there any particular teachers that made a big impression on you or helped you? Speaker 2: Yeah the principal of high school and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Wilson. She taught math and he taught anything and everything. In elementary school I had one teacher who was very good, I can't think of her name. I'll think of that in a minute. But they were--they made you believe you could do anything and the whole thing was you must be on time, you must be clean, all those old things they stressed that in order to do well you had to do this. You had to dress--your gloves, your hat and all that stupid stuff. But all of that you were just reared up with and your teachers enforced it. You really--if you were late that was outrageous. You just had to be on time and you had to be honest. My daddy--you could not lie to my daddy. If you lied to my daddy, you were in real trouble for a long time because he believed that if you lie, you'll steal. Story_ID: 88098 Speaker 1: In Jonesboro [Louisiana] there is a railroad that comes through the town. Whites live on that side, blacks live on this side and when radio came, the first I remember of the radio was Joe Louis in 1938. Joe Louis was fighting Max Schmeling or somebody like that; I've forgotten who it was. Speaker 2: Yeah I think so. Speaker 1: But it was so many people. My daddy was the first one to get a radio in my neighborhood--I mean in the black community, a lot of whites didn't have it either. When Joe Louis fought that night, he had to put--we had this house with this swing porch come around, he had to put that radio in the window and people sat out on the porch and on the grass. I'm not talking about ten or five; I'm talking about a hundred more people sat out in the garden to hear this radio of Joe Louis fighting and the whites a lot of them didn't have radios so they would come. They would stand out in the street on the road in front of the house. Speaker 2: Because they didn't want to integrate. Speaker 1: Ooh no integrating (laugh). No integrating. They stood out there and the blacks sat out on the ground in the front to listen to that radio. I can-- That to me was a picture, I can still see that. Now I was a small girl but I still remember that. Speaker 2: That is something. Speaker 1: Oh yeah and people would say Jerry [Cole, her father] we're coming to hear the radio tonight. You got to do this, can you turn it up louder; I remember all those things. Speaker 2: That was a big draw having a radio. Speaker 1: Oh that was something. Our first--do you remember the refrigerator with the thing up on top? It had the motor up on the top. Before that we had an icebox and the iceman would come to the community selling ice and you bought a five cent piece--you know a block. Then my daddy made some money and he got an electric refrigerator. We put it in the living room (laugh). We teased them about that, oh he was--people wanted to come from all around to come and see it. Speaker 2: And the motor was on the top? Speaker 1: The motor yeah, a big round thing on top of the refrigerator. It was old fashioned you know but the motor was on top. Speaker 2: About what year was that? Speaker 1: Lord Speaker 2: Was that before the radio or after? Speaker 1: That was about the same time but that was in '38 [1938]/'39 [1939] before '40 [1940] I think because I remember I was very small. Speaker 2: I take it your family had a vehicle too? Speaker 1: My daddy had a car. There were about ten black men with cars and my daddy always bought a Buick, big time (laugh). But he had a lot of trucks because he was--he had the Puffwood Company. I learned how to drive on a truck. Story_ID: 88099 Speaker 1: But he, he--my daddy did very well, he was a hard worker and he really worked very well. He really got his--when he started getting a little money, I think. He had--let's see if I can remember the story. In the early--late '30s [1930s] or sometime in there, people had really a hard time and he had bought his first land up near Mendon which is about twenty five to thirty miles from Jonesboro [Louisiana]. He didn't buy the land. He only bought the land because the man who had the land came to him and wanted to--his wife had to have an operation and he didn't want to borrow the money, he wanted to sell this land so his wife could have this operation. I can't remember what it was but it certainly wasn't a hundred dollars. I can't remember how many acres it was either but it must have been about twenty five or thirty acres or something like that. But my daddy let him have the money and I shouldn't tell this but I do remember my mother saying you know that land is not worth anything, that's nothing but hilly land. You can't grow anything on it. Jerry [Cole, her father] why did you do that and my daddy went on to say because the man wanted his wife--his wife had to have this money for an operation and my mother was saying well you could have let him have something like that but that land, you're just throwing away money. Over the years, during the war [World War II] some of the white men would come to the house and wanted to buy this land and they would talk to mama because daddy would be out working. Finally mama said no Jerry don't sale that land, if they want that land out of all these years, there is something going on and we don't know what it is so don't you sale that land. My mother was very strong (laugh) and my daddy said well if anybody wants to give me two hundred dollars--two hundred dollars then was a heck of a lot of money. Mama said no, no Jerry you keep that land, that's all I can remember. You see, as a kid, I'm listening to this on the sideline so I don't know all the ins and outs of it and parents really--older people didn't talk to you--they didn't talk much at all when you are growing up. But by the time I got grown, I would ask them about some things, some things they would tell you and some things they wouldn't. But at that time all I could hear was my mother saying don't you sell that land. Mr. Frye one of the white guys who had some money around there and he was the kind who would buy--especially in the black community, he had rent houses and all of that. Mama wanted to know why did they know about this land near Mendon, that had nothing to do with Jonesboro, how would he know? Well to make a long story short, there had been some federal agents down there looking at land and they had looked at that land and they wanted to build bomb factories. They came to find out who owned it but the people in the know there--the white guys found out about it and they were going to take it and buy it and make the money. Mama insisted that he was not going to sale it and he didn't sale it and that was his first money. Speaker 2: Okay so the government bought it? Speaker 1: Yeah and it was quite a bit. I mean for us at that time it was quite a bit. Speaker 2: So he made more than made that $25.00 Speaker 1: Oh God he made thousands, he made thousands and that started him. Speaker 2: So that was what really kicked him over the top? Speaker 1: That made him then move from--he was never hand to mouth because he was always a hard worker but that really made a difference in a lot of things. He was able to buy and all that kind of stuff. At that time--maybe I still think some of it was probably paranoid on his part but he never put any money in my brother or his name, everything was in my sister, my mother and my name because he felt--and he never put it in one place, he put it in Monroe [Louisiana], Shreveport [Louisiana], Alexander [Louisiana], and Jonesboro [Louisiana], he had bank accounts at all those places. He felt that if you start accumulating too much in one place and they knew about it, you were in trouble. Speaker 2: Do you think that he was wise? Speaker 1: Of course he was wise, he was very wise. Story_ID: 88100 Speaker 1: Do you know of stories of black people down there that were--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: I know a story of my father. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: Again, I was a little girl and we were in--my daddy had built this house, this was before he built on to it. I think it was like five rooms. One night, I don't know the time but one night I heard all this noise out and I looked out the window and saw nothing but lamp, I mean, torches now I didn't see this but my mother and daddy talked about it later, they talked about it later after I had gotten into college and grown. When I tried--before I would ask what was this and they would not, never tell you because one thing they didn't want you to be afraid--those were some strong people. I was in college when I found out about this. That night, what had happen there was a black boy they were looking for--claimed to have molested a white girl and they came to the community. Now I'm talking about fifty or sixty Klansman and they had torches and they came knocking on doors and my daddy happened to go to the door in his pajamas or whatever he slept in. They brought him out on the porch and they surrounded him and they--men with shotguns and these torches asking him questions. They had him with his foot out looking at the bottom of his feet to see if he had been out. My mother went out there, stood in front of him and started screaming and yelling why are you doing this, who is this, what is this, my husband has been here with us, you are frightening me and my children, what is this and she would carry on boy. They finally said no let's leave him alone. I remember seeing those lights; I remember the noise, as I said vaguely. For years I asked my mother and daddy who was that, what was going on because I didn't know but they would never tell me until I got grown. My brother didn't even wake up. But they, that kind of thing they just never talked about. Speaker 1: That's the kind of thing you should never forget either. Speaker 2: Oh you don't. Believe it or not, really believe this or not when I started--when I get sick or something in the back of my mind I can just see that, I can see the lights. Do you understand what I mean? It still made that much of an impression on me. Speaker 1: So it is not as much paranoia--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It's the life you've lived, yeah. Speaker 1: It's caution. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was something. Story_ID: 88101 Speaker 1: Well now when you were in high school, were you involved in any other activities other than academic activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, church. The only two things you did were church and school. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Browngrove Baptist Church and the minister stayed there fifty years, the first minister. Speaker 1: Fifty years? Speaker 2: Fifty years. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Reverend Boyer, William Boyer. They've had four or five others since then but I don't know their names. I know Reverend Boyer. My husband still teases me about Reverend Boyer. When he wants to talk about Jonesboro [Louisiana] he talks about Reverend Boyer who is a very strong man. Our church would--a lot of kids couldn't go to college and they had college fund in my church. Story_ID: 88102 Speaker 1: My father--this will be interesting to you. We did not know that my father had schooled other children than the three of us--I have a sister and a brother and we all were schooled. I didn't know anything about the schooling of them until he died and about six or seven people--grown people--teachers and one lawyer I think, stood up and said without him, I would not have been able to go to school only my mother knew. Speaker 2: Your father helped some other people? Speaker 1: God did he ever and I do know this, if somebody would get burned out of their home, I don't know if you know about how they used to have these fires and the person would lose everything--he would go--a lot of times with me or my mama and buy stuff. Buy a big box of groceries and towels and sheets and stuff and that evening he would go to their house and me or my brother and we'd take out the stuff and put it on the porch and we'd drive away and he would never say anything. He never talked about the good things that he did. He never wanted--he didn't want any praise or anything. What he did, he just did it. But everybody thought of him as being tight. When I married I had the first big wedding--that's white or black in Jonesboro [Louisiana]. I'll have to show you some of the pictures. We walked down the aisle and the minister asked who gives this woman to be wed, he said I do and the church broke out (laugh). He ruined my wedding; they said that's the first thing he ever gave away. Speaker 2: He was cautious and careful. Speaker 1: Oh Lord, he wasn't a big talker but he was very, very concerned about you having as he used to say girl do you have a Sunday coat and a--he called it a Sunday coat--and a school coat? You had two coats and at least two pair of shoes. I never had to--any of us, the three of us--had to worry about college, we knew we were going to college. We knew he was going to pay for it, we knew we were going to graduate school, knew he was going to pay for it. There was no question about it and as a kid--you better not bring any Cs in there. As I tell you, he wasn't educated but he was much, much smarter than most college educated people. But when you come home, you had to show him your report card and he would look at it and he'd say now what is math. You had to tell him what math is, why did you make a B? Well daddy, I'm not, no, no, no why? You don't get enough food? you clothed us, I mean when you went through that every semester. Oh you got an A in reading, what's some of the things you could read. You know anything like that. He was very--he was on you, he knew what was happening. Now my sister who is twelve years younger than I, didn't have to go through all this, this was me and my brother. She was as they say--she was an afterthought and she got away with a lot of it but she still had to live up to some of it. Story_ID: 88103 Speaker 1: So you are a pretty good student, then? Speaker 2: Had to be, you could not bring my daddy home bad grades, not at all. Speaker 1: Like how many students were in the high school? Speaker 2: I think there were forty two in my high school and out of that forty two, five went to college in my class and three finished college. Speaker 1: Okay, now what college did you choose and why? Speaker 2: There was no other place to choose. We had Grambling [State University in Grambling, Louisiana] which was about twenty miles from where I lived and we were familiar with Grambling. A fact about it--we went up there quite often to Grambling to what was happening. Then we had Southern [University] which was to us the big school. So we were going to the big school where things are happening. Speaker 1: Down in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: That was in Baton Rouge. All three of us went to Southern. Speaker 1: So you went to Southern and you graduated from high school what year? Speaker 2: 1948 Speaker 1: And you started Southern that same year? Speaker 2: That same year. Through summer school and everything, I finished in three years. Then I worked there for a semester and a summer. Story_ID: 88104 Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you like Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: You know that's fascinating. Southern I loved, I really loved Southern and it did a lot, it really did a lot for me. It's difficult to tell you, you know you're much younger so--and this was in the deep south. We--the first time I ever had asparagus was at Southern University. Speaker 1: Asparagus? Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know anything about wine glasses, salad forks. That school without really saying you're going to learn this, they had--on Sundays for Sunday lunch in the dining room, you had nothing but grape juice or something like that but they had a wine glass, a water goblet. They had three or four not a fish knife but they had some of the other--salad fork whatever. They had a setup--a family style setup on the table so you learned. You would get used to that kind of thing. Now a lot of things we never heard of--the kids had never heard of but they taught you without telling you--they taught you what life was, what you might meet and what you should meet; how to eat, how to seat yourself at a table, how to use a soup spoon. When you look at a lot of these young kids now, they don't know it. But we had it automatically. When we went to--you know what Southern is--is outside of Baton Rouge and Scotlandville. One person until you got to be a senior--one girl had to have somebody else with her to go downtown and when I first got there, you couldn't go downtown without your gloves, your stockings and properly dressed. Speaker 1: Okay so you just couldn't go downtown--(simultaneous)(unclear)? Speaker 2: You had to be properly dressed and carriage and everything. Now you might think that's old fashioned-well I don't know what some people call it but young people don't want to do that kind of thing but it did make a big difference in my life because in the foreign service there was a kind of thing-a lot of the foreign service kids didn't even know anything about it and I'm talking about white kids and-not kids but foreign service officers. They didn't know how to entertain; they didn't know a lot of this stuff that we had to do. Speaker 1: What you're talking about I think goes back to some of the original intention of black colleges. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: To refine people. Speaker 2: To give you things that you'd never had the opportunity to meet and we didn't. Nobody in Jonesboro [Louisiana] at that time, I don't care if they were president of the college and you had a few of those. See when I went to college you could not train for anything but a teacher. Before I left they had a law school but at the time in Louisiana you didn't have but three or four black lawyers. You only had about three or four black teachers--I mean doctors. You couldn't train to be at Southern University--you couldn't even train to be a nurse. You couldn't train to be a secretary; you only had about five or six secretaries down in New Orleans [Louisiana]. There was nothing I could train to be but a teacher, a preacher or an undertaker. As a black person--when I went to graduate school, I couldn't go anywhere in Louisiana. I couldn't go anywhere in Louisiana. They paid me--the state of Louisiana paid me to go to Boston University for graduate school. There was no place in Louisiana I could go to graduate school. I don't mean me, everybody--every black. Speaker 1: Yeah that seemed to be the arrangement in several southern states where if you finish school they would actually pay you to go someplace else rather than go to their graduate school. Speaker 2: That's right. I was paid to go to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 88105 Speaker 1: Now were there activities in at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that you participated in? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was very--I was a leader and as I said, I finished in three years but I--we had a student center there that I was very active in, organizing and getting started as a worker eventually. But as a student, I was very active with the YWCA and the student council and trying to get that student center which is going very strong. They had a student center but it wasn't really organized. When I finished, the president gave me the job to work--to help to organize it on a proper basis. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the YWCA, was this your first encounter with the YWCA? Speaker 2: My first encounter with the YWCA, yes. I just found it fascinating and it was very helpful. Being the president of the YWCA, I went to conference all over-my first airplane trip I had was going to Kentucky to a YWCA conference and the next time I went to Atlanta. That kind of thing, it really broadened my eyesight, the YWCA and I took the activities that I learned in the YWCA and all that kind of work I did--I took it with me when I went to Africa because it had helped me so much that I thought wherever I went I thought it would--I tried my best to help organize that and everything. Story_ID: 88106 Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that could do anything to inform your interests about Africa at all? Speaker 2: We had--no my interests started in Africa--about Africa from my principal, Mr. Wilson in high school. He was the one who just loved Africa and loved the kings and the queens and gave us information and made us think that we should go there. That we didn't come from nothing, that our background had been something and that we had a lot to live up to. Two or three times a year, we would have different functions about Africa and all that stuff. He didn't know that much either. After I got there I saw that he didn't know a thing (laugh) but it was very interesting and it certainly wet my appetite for it. In college we were more interested--that was before the civil rights thing started and when we were in college what we thought about was how was this going to be organized, what could we do to change some of this. At the YWCA we used to interact with LSU [Louisiana State University] YWCA and YMCA. Now this is certainly going to sound terrible but it's the truth, I was the first student at Southern University to bring a white girl to the campus and spend a week with me. That campus went wild including the president. She was YWCA and I was YWCA. Speaker 1: What about on the other side, they had such strict--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: You weren't going to LSU, they would come to us but we could not go over there. The kids couldn't bring us over there but they would come to us. There were a lot of white kids in the YWCA and in some of the Christian organizations who related to us back then. Speaker 1: So what did the president's office tell you? It wasn't authorized or something? Speaker 2: No he just wanted to know did she stay in my room, where did she sleep. He just thought that was fascinating that I had gotten that friendly with this girl. Speaker 1: That's something. Were there white teachers at Southern? Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: The whole staff and faculty--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: The whole staff was black. Speaker 1: She was probably the white person on campus. Speaker 2: See in Louisiana you had so many kids who were white fathers. It was a known fact that we had a lot of senators and congressmen and everything else that had white children--children who were black but they were paying for them to go to school. In Louisiana, that was not, you always had that problem--I don't know if that was a problem. Speaker 1: Yeah but that's something I heard about during slavery and the nineteenth century but you're talking about 1948. Speaker 2: I'm talking about '48 [1948], '49 [1949], '50 [1950]. They had--I know, I won't call the name but this guy used to come in his limousine every semester. His daughter would go to the president's office; he would meet her in the president's office. He paid--he gave her money for clothes and stuff, he paid her tuition to the school, everybody knew it. You had about four or five cases like that. Speaker 1: You can give his name. Speaker 2: No (laugh) I don't want to be sued. Story_ID: 89123 Speaker 1: As I said, they had--I knew of at least four families--men who had a white family and he had a black family and a certain time of the day he would visit his black family. They didn't have a black man in the house. He had this wife--not wife, his girlfriend and his children--half white children and sometimes he would send her on to school. Everybody knew it--the white knew it and the blacks knew it. You didn't talk about it but you didn't bother with that family either. Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: And the white family sometimes, you know--they never interacted. Speaker 2: Now the white community had to know this too. Speaker 1: Oh they knew it. Speaker 2: And they had--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: But they didn't talk about it either. Speaker 2: That made for--I guess all this makes it very complicated relationship in the south. Speaker 1: Oh very. Well let me tell you, it's a strange thing and I thought about this one. Norma Dee who was named after my mother, father was white. Her--I'm not going to call any names-she ended up being a schoolteacher. Her mother had three or four children and really for all intents and purposes looking at them they were white--the kids. They were white because the mother was your color, the kids being a white father, they just were white but they were black. They lived a black lifestyle with their mother, his other part of the family was over there and she-Norma Dee looked just like one of his daughters--his white daughters. This happened--she went out of town once now as I said Jonesboro [Louisiana] about three or four streets, it's not a big city, it's a small town. She went down there and one guy who was sort of off--white guy pushed her and she took her umbrella and beat the living--she beat him down and she ran home back to the colored community. Boy that hit that town like everything. What was going to happen? The police came looking for her and the gossip goes all over. Every black family was tense, the children come in and all that kind of stuff. Honey that white daddy got in there, you didn't hear anything else about it and Norma Dee went where she wanted to go and they did send her away for the rest of that summer and she came back and went to college. Speaker 2: Do you think that these relationships explain--these paternal relationships with white men help explain some of the latitude that blacks had the ability to acquire things and do things in the south? Speaker 1: Oh yes that's very true because he built Ms. Farley a house and the land and the house was in her care and two--I think two of the children went to school--went to college--went to Grambling College. They ended up doing teaching. One was a principal--the boy was a principal and the girl was a teacher. So he lived up to some of his responsibility. Well I should say he lived up to quite a bit of his responsibility because he did take care of the family. And the interesting thing about the whole thing though, nobody looked down on her. My mother never had much to do with her but she thought it was outrageous but she went to church, went to the same church we did. Some people were sort of hush about it. She was an usher and everything. Speaker 2: These are really complicated relationships. Speaker 1: Very complicated. Story_ID: 89124 Speaker 1: Now one of the women whose husband--paramour or whatever you want to call him, they really had a terrible time and nobody respected them because he would get drunk-the white guy would get drunk and come over there and it was just awful but the law or whatever didn't do anything about it and I do remember some of the deacons and the people would talk about this is just outrageous and they wouldn't have this in their community, that kind of stuff. But as I said, Ms. Farley and some of the others you never heard anything about it. Without Norma Dee getting into that trouble, I don't think there had been an issue. But I will say that he stood up for the family and the others seem to stand up for their family. I don't think any of the others went to college or anything but they did do alright. Speaker 2: So if a white man from a higher status had kids or something--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: A lot of them sent their kids to college. Speaker 2: White people of lower status couldn't really mess with them. Speaker 1: Nobody could mess with them, right. That's right. If the guy was somebody, he could protect them. Speaker 2: Okay let's get back--that's interesting that's a part of history we don't--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Nobody's writing about it and nobody's talking about it but it is a very complicated thing. Speaker 2: In fiction it is written, sappy kind of fiction that has these tragic--(simultaneous) (unclear) and the political nature of it is really not discussed. But thank you for that. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Story_ID: 89125 Speaker 1: When you were at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you were majoring in sociology? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Alright Speaker 2: And believe it or not when I went to graduate school at Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts], I had to take some undergraduate courses because they weren't offered at Southern, anthropology for instance; I never had taken that course. I had taken an undergraduate course which was a sophomore course. I think I took one or two economic courses in undergrad. But when I registered at Boston University, I never shall forget it; my advisor was looking at my transcript. I had excellent grades, I could get into Boston and everything but he said you know you have a psychology major; you don't have sociology major. I had to substitute psychology courses because they didn't offer them at Southern for sociology. I had to substitute psychology courses. That semester they didn't have enough students to teach the sociology course so they would let me substitute psychology. So when you think about all of the stuff that you had to overcome and you wonder, you just wonder. That's why I get so excited now when you start talking about diversify- I mean, not diversify but what is this blacks getting a free ride-it's not been a free ride. Speaker 1: Oh are you talking about affirmative action? Speaker 2: Affirmative action when I hear about that it's just--it really boils me. Story_ID: 89126 Speaker 1: Now did you find Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] to be harder or easier or what? Speaker 2: I had gone up the summer before to Newton [Massachusetts] a YWCA program and I had planned to go into social work--School of Social Work and this program would give you an idea about social work and all that kind of thing. I decided I didn't want to go to social work after that summer. I enjoyed it, it was eye opening and all that but I found I was too compassionate to be a social worker. Speaker 1: I'm sorry but what do you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well let me give you one good example. There was one black guy there from Mississippi, he had something like seven or eight children and the City of Boston [Massachusetts] had a program where they would come August the social workers would take all these youngsters to a big auditorium or warehouse or something like that and they had shoes, clothes and other things. So you would get the children two pair of shoes, two coats and enough clothes to last a semester, you would give them an outfit and my job at that time was to take them to that and visit the families and that kind of stuff. Just the beginning of what social workers were about, that's what they were trying to teach you-things you should be doing. So I had gotten all involved and this black man, his wife and about seven or eight children and I thought I was going to make a difference. So I would go, did more than you were supposed to do by visiting them and getting the kids. You would go there and they never had any breakfast or lunch or dinner. They were in this apartment that you could see the sky up in it, you know, and filthy, just filthy, one of these walkup apartments. And you-- The woman was drunk half the time and the man had these old raggedy cars and he would get and work on them all day, didn't work. Whatever you did you know was no good, didn't make a bit of difference. I didn't really stop to understand what was happening and all that, I just-what I was relating to then and it would just upset me because I thought I was doing something that was going to make a difference, didn't make any difference. So what finally got me and I said I'm not going to go through this, I took these kids and got these shoes and clothes for each one of them. I came back after trying to teach them how to keep them separated not to just wham and throw them--by the time we finished that this daddy had gotten this old Cadillac. He took, he said told me that we won't be here next week because we're going to Jackson, Mississippi for vacation. I could see this joker taking these children and his wife down there and making people think he was doing well and I said I just can't take this. So that's when I changed my major, I was going to social work school and I decided then to go into sociology. Story_ID: 89127 Speaker 1: Now who were some of your teachers at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I had two I remember very well. One was my major--my advisor. He was a Jewish man, he did more for me than let's see how I say this, he really enlightened a lot of things. I never will-- I'm telling you all of these awful stories. I had gotten--as I said I had been in Boston--Andover Newton that summer and I was sophisticated and on the move when I went to Boston. I went to the university and moved into the dormitory registering and I got to know this professor pretty well. Two things, the first thing was once I was talking to him after I had registered and everything and he was telling me Ms. Cole you need to get this, this and this course. You're doing alright here and everything but you need so and so and so. So me being Ms. Flip, I said oh come on don't Jew me down; I had no idea what the meaning of it, I really didn't. You know it must be after all these years and I still remember it. But he stopped, he looked at me and he said do you know what you just said? I couldn't understand it and he stopped me and explained to me what that meant and how I would feel if someone had said something about a nigger and really it hurt my heart. I wasn't even thinking in those terms and I wasn't thinking-see it wasn't that many Jews in Jonesboro [Louisiana] so I didn't know anything about any Jews but I had heard the term more than once. So I apologized and he said the only reason he stopped to explain it to me was that he knew I didn't know what I was saying. And that kind of thing, he really made me grow in this sense that it isn't just me being black who had to take this kind of stuff; he as a Jew had to do it too and that made a big difference in my thinking. The next thing he did that made a difference was you have to maintain a B average and I had to take courses that were undergrad courses. I took some graduate courses but I had to take some undergrad courses. One or two of them gave me a fit. So he called me and he said now look, if you want to stay here you are going to have to do better than this. I had been pretty bright in college and I had made excellent grades and all that kind of stuff. When he really sat me down to say I'm going to have to make this B average or I'm going to have to do so and so and so, I started thinking I can't go back home clocking out, I just can't do this. I started going to that library and that's the first time I really had been in a deep snow, if it snowed I'd stay in but I would get out there every morning at 8:30 going to the library and went to my classes and went back to the library. I studied from 8:30 to 8:00 every day and that was the only way I was able to do as well as I did. He made me see what you have to do. I did it before but I had not been challenged like I was at Boston. Speaker 1: Who is the other professor? Speaker 2: It was a woman, a black woman. She was one --I'm trying to think of her name too. She was one of the first black women to be, I think she was an associate professor but she was--Smite (splg.) I can't think of her first name. But she was sophisticated, very, very together. She just passed a few years ago. Speaker 1: So this is about 1953 or '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: When I was in graduate school? I was in graduate school 1952--I mean '53 [1953] yeah. I finished in '52 [1952] but I worked and then my graduation was in '53 [1953] but I was working down there at the time because as I said it took three years then I went to graduate school for that year '54 [1954] and I came back married. I should have stayed on up there and finished my degree (laugh) but I couldn't wait to marry. Story_ID: 89128 Speaker 1: Oh by the way, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, that's where I met him. I met Martin Luther--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: He was at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: He was at Boston University and Douglas Elaine Moore was at Boston University, Bishop Adams. Interestingly enough I wasn't that friendly with Martin Luther but Martin Luther used to have--King used to have what they called a wine sip every Sunday afternoon. He was one of the few who had money and his father had told him-he wanted to marry so he started looking over girls. I was in his apartment the day he met Coretta [Scott King]. But he was a--nobody thought of him as being into civil rights. Reverend Douglas Elaine Moore who was on the city council here was a civil rights person. Doug was a bright student in divinity school with King started the--he started to fight quotas at Boston. See they had quotas, so many blacks, so many Jews, so many whatever and he fought against that. In fact, when Doug would come around, you would, you know, you'd get quiet and move away because Doug was organizing everybody on a civil rights fight. King was not doing that there, he was just lucky to come here and get in to fight. He was certainly the person for it but Doug really, really at Boston University. This is a story about Doug by the way Doug's wife, first wife and I--she's an American Indian--Native American Indian we were classmates and we studied together. I didn't know Doug well, I just had seen him but I knew his first wife well. This was across Boston University campus. In divinity school you had to give a trial-not a trial sermon but a practice sermon and Doug got up for his and a lot of people in the college would go and listen to this, I didn't at this time but everybody talked about it. Doug got up there for his sermon and he started the typical Baptist (humming) homiletics (laugh). Speaker 2: Homiletics Speaker 1: And the teacher--the professor said, "man what is wrong with you stop, stop, what is this"? Doug turn to him and said now look this is the way my people relate in church, this is the way they preach and I've come here to learn to satisfy my people and get a message across and he insisted on doing that and he did. He did the whole--ordinarily Doug didn't do this but for that he did that and boy we were so embarrassed on that campus. At that time you were embarrassed by these things but not Doug. Doug did it and we had to accept it. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Everybody was trying to be--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: You know, you were told if you keep your teeth brushed, your hair combed, sit up straight you were going to make it, that's before these young people started which I'm happy about. Story_ID: 89129 Speaker 1: And talking about Doug [E. Moore], do you realize my husband--when I married, we went to North Carolina College--North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] and naturally a year later I had a child, my older boy. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let's not go pass--how did you two meet? Speaker 1: Well see when I was a sophomore in college, I met my husband [HistoryMaker Horace Dawson]. He was a teacher and when I met him I thought he was a student, I thought he had been in the war. Speaker 2: Now this is in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]? Speaker 1: I thought he was a veteran and we were going looking for a retreat site. The dean of women and the advisor to the YMCA, me as the president of YWCA and the president of the YMCA were going looking for retreat sites. Oh by the way, my husband was there and I thought he had joined to be an advisor to the YMCA but I thought he was a student and we sat in the back seat together and we started talking. It was three or four months later before I found out he was a teacher. And he would call me and we would see each other on campus but I didn't know he was a teacher at all, he never told me until one day I found out he was going with a teacher--girls told me he was going with a teacher and that he was a teacher (laugh). So I stopped seeing him for a while until he convinced me that we should see each other and by then I had--mid semester I had finished college. I finished my course work and everything and the president gave me a working job and I moved into a faculty dorm then we started dating. Then I went away to graduate school and I stayed away a year--a year and a summer and then I came back home and married that August. Speaker 2: Okay so you kept in touch with him. Speaker 1: He kept in touch with me. He used to write me every day, every day and a special on Sunday. I got all those letters up there (laugh). It saved us really--it saved our marriage because see the first five years I didn't think he would lie, he was just perfect and then I found out he was a man, he was human too. But I would go back and read those letters, he could write a letter. I would read those letters and it changed my mind, I decided to stay on with him. Story_ID: 89130 Speaker 1: Okay so you dropped out of graduate school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was supposed to go back to finish but I married that summer. Speaker 1: Okay, you married down in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Married at home, I had the first big wedding, I have to show you some of the pictures and that was one time. I was the first to have--one of the first--just to show you how backwards everything was, they had never taken a black girl's picture in the weekly--you know you had Jackson Parish Weekly. That was a newspaper that came one week, every week but they had never had a black girl's picture in there and I didn't think about it. I gave them my picture--I went there and gave them my picture and they didn't have a problem with it but it went over the town especially the black community that the very idea that I went there to give my picture. Now this was just blacks talking, this wasn't from the white community. It was the blacks talking and the fact about it at my wedding we had to rent an organ because the church didn't have one but we had to have a white woman who worked at the bank to play it because we didn't have any black person to play the organ. So she played and we're still friends. This woman, the woman had been friends of my parents but I didn't know her. The florist, this woman who worked in the bank and two or three other whites participated in my wedding--helped me to organize the wedding. I mean they were just, they were fine people and I've known them ever since then. So you've got all this kind of mixed stuff and my parents knew them but I didn't know them, I'd never had anything to do with white people in Jonesboro [Louisiana] I mean. Speaker 1: Okay so when you got married you all moved up to North Carolina. Speaker 2: We married and our first--my husband had been teaching at Southern [University] and he had accepted a job at North Carolina Central and we went there, our first home. What I started off telling you we'd been there a year or more and we were in this Mutual Heights Apartment complex and two apartments over was Douglas Elaine Moore and his wife. He was a preacher. He was the student, what do you call them, chaplain at the college and my husband didn't know him but I knew them and I went out and washed the baby's clothes and hung them out on the line and we went out there and she was out there washing her child's clothes hanging them and she looked at me and I looked at her, we just screamed, two doors from each other. Doug started the first--he had organized students at North Carolina College--A&T College, St. Augustine and Shaw [University] to do the first sit in. He was the one who organized it. One Sunday it was hot, the kids down at A&T College in Greensboro [North Carolina] got bored and went one week ahead of what Doug had organized for them to do. Story_ID: 87777 Speaker 1: We saw him [Doug E. Moore] there--he and the church and the city of Durham [North Carolina], now this came from Marshall. Marshall told me this himself, he said he came down to Durham when Doug first started the sit-ins and the Mutual Insurance Company, the bank president convinced him not to take up Doug's calls. The church moved him--he was at a Methodist church as a minister, the church moved him to Africa so they would keep the stuff down. It just, you know. He had everything going against him whereas [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther [King, Jr.], I said--now Martin Luther was very equipped for that but Doug was too but they had different personalities. Martin Luther just happened to be at the right place at the right time. Story_ID: 87778 Speaker 1: Tell me now--you go to Africa about, I mean around the same time, right or close to the same time? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: I mean well you all are--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh yes we were all there, we were there and I'm going to leave that alone but our first post was in Uganda and Doug [E. Moore] was in the Congo and he came over from Uganda--I mean from the Congo on a bus to Kenya. Did you know transportation on a bus in Africa--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: its rough I know. I've seen they have goats-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Goats and cattle, everything. Speaker 1: But before we get into that, how did you--how did Horace [her husband, HistoryMaker Horace Dawson] get into foreign services? Speaker 2: Where I worked in apartment security, one of those first jobs in North Carolina when blacks started getting those first jobs and I got one of those. So he was able to go to graduate school--somebody had to work and I wasn't working. He went to graduate school at our University for his doctorate and in two years he got his doctorate and he came back. The dissertation he had written on foreign students and that conception of the United States through public relations and all that. Edward R. Murrow saw this dissertation and he said he wanted this guy in USIA [United States Information Agency] and we went to North Carolina, my husband had come back and when he came back there he was put in charge of the media--public relations at North Carolina College. That was still working, Edward R. Murrow became interested. Speaker 1: Now this is Edward R. Murrow--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: The Edward R. Murrow. Speaker 1: The newscaster. Speaker 2: Newscaster but he at that time was head of USIA and that was just as Kennedy had come in--Kennedy the president. Speaker 1: 1960? Speaker 2: Right so he wanted to meet HG [Horace G. Dawson] and the only place we could meet in Durham, North Carolina was at the airport--only place we could have a meal with Edward R. Murrow was at the airport. I hope my husband can find the clippings. It hit the papers--press a big thing. So I'm pregnant with my older son, we go to the airport, Edward R. Murrow flies in there. He had been down in South Carolina fishing or hunting or something. Anyway the plane stopped there--regular airlines stopped there and they had set up--he had setup for us to have a dinner room in the airport. They mayor, two or three of the city council people and about five or six other people came to meet him and they were all having dinner with us. That man Edward R. Murrow will always--he made a big impression with my older son and he certainly made one with me. We were the only blacks there; me, my husband and my son. He came out--he came off the plane, came in there. The mayor and all those people and we were just standing on the side and he wanted to meet Horace and Horace, they brought us up and introduced us. We went in this room. He sat here, I sat there, he put me on this side of him, put Gregory on that side of him--I mean (unclear) on that side of him--my older son on that side of him. HG was on the other side of my son. Edward R. Murrow sat there and talked to my son who was six years old most of the night and the mayor was running around trying to talk to him and some of those other big to dos were trying to. He talked to my husband. He just told him that he read his dissertation and was he interested in coming to Foreign Service and we didn't know anything about Foreign Service. I had never seen a black ambassador; I had never seen an ambassador and I'm working, I mean this sounds terrible but this is the truth, I had never seen an ambassador, didn't know anything about it and foreign service, I'd read about foreign service, I'd read about an ambassador I'd read about but you know, but my husband had seen a couple of ambassadors but he didn't know anything about them. We didn't know a thing. Story_ID: 87779 Speaker 1: And when he [Edward R. Murrow] talked about Foreign Service, we didn't know anything about that. But he sat there and he told us how helpful we could be, and yeah, yeah, yeah. But the drama was to see these big to dos running around there. We had our dinner and he kept asking (unclear)[her son, Horace G. Dawson, III] questions and (unclear) would answer them and you had photographers running around, it was a mad house. Behind us that whole wall of glass and we could look out on the plane and people started getting on the plane and Edward R. Murrow sat there talking and they rolled up--they used to roll up the steps. After awhile the mayor came and said Mr. Murrow the plane is getting ready to leave and Murrow said okay but he kept talking. Another fifteen minutes passed and you look out there--I'm nervous by this time. They rolled away the stair and the mayor comes back and says Mr. Murrow we are ready to leave and Murrow turned around and he says I can assure you that plane will not leave without me (laugh). Oh I tell you that was something else. I thought that was big time and it didn't leave without him, he stayed there another thirty or forty minutes. He held that plane up about an hour talking to HG my husband and my son and he did very little talk to the bigwigs. When he got ready to go, he shook our hands and walked on out. They rolled the thing back up, he got in the plane and left. Speaker 2: Did the city--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Oh it hit the papers. I tell you the mayor then was just the best friend of ours (laugh). What happened was the mayor's son works for Edward R. Murrow that's I guess one reason he heard about it or whatever and so--I don't know why Edward R. Murrow stopped there other than he really was supposed to stop and see my husband. But after that the newspapers--they didn't put about him holding up the plane but they put about him there and they had a picture of shaking hands with my husband and shaking hands with the mayor, that's in the morning paper. So that was big time stuff. Story_ID: 87780 Speaker 1: So that resulted in an assignment? Speaker 2: Well, yes. He [Edward R. Murrow] became interested in us-in my husband coming into the Foreign Service but at the same time if you remember this is '60 [1960] that's when the schools--university--white schools became interested in black professors. So the University of Pennsylvania and three or four other schools tried to HG [her husband, Horace G. Dawson] to come to that. So we had a lot of opportunities, HG will probably tell you all about those. But we--both of us interested in Africa wanted to go into Foreign Service for a year not for a career, for a year to go to Africa. So he just finally decided to go into Foreign Service. He came to Washington [D.C.] a couple of times to be interviewed but then he came to look for a house, couldn't find a house. We couldn't find housing in a suitable place near a good school and they had just started--over on Fourth Street the housing thing over there--apartment buildings--Fourth Street housing. Anyway they had just got them and they only had one black couple in there and that was General--what was the black general, just died recently? Speaker 1: [General Benjamin O.] Davis? Speaker 2: Davis--ask my husband about that, I can't remember these names right now. But they were the only couple living there and we applied, they wouldn't let us move in. When HG was coming in the Foreign Service there was another white guy that he had become friendly with, they got in there. We wanted--I think it was Amidon School that we wanted--my older son was six just turning seven and we wanted him to go to Amidon because you had to stay in Washington a year for training and all that going into USIA [United States Information Agency]. So when we couldn't get in there, we decided we weren't coming up here because really there was no suitable housing near a school that we could get. The State Department started treating him like foreign diplomat and found housing for us so we go into this apartment complex, now that's '60 [1960]. There has been a slight change since that time. Can you believe that and you're talking about affirmative action? Yes sir. Speaker 1: So after years of keeping people out of things. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Story_ID: 87781 Speaker 1: Now how, how did you--you were assigned first to Uganda? Speaker 2: We has asked to go to the Congo but--(simultaneous (unclear). Speaker 1: 1960, '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: '61 [1961] Speaker 1: Yeah the Congo was--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: No it hadn't started, the uprisings hadn't started. Speaker 1: But they were getting ready to. Speaker 2: They were getting ready to uprise--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Patrice Lumumba. Speaker 2: Patrice that was the only name I knew. The only place in Africa I knew anything about or my husband knew anything about. Speaker 1: It was in the news all the time Joseph (unclear). Speaker 2: Well it just had started and we didn't ever think it was going to be as bad as it was. But that's where they said HG [HistoryMaker Horace G. Dawson] has to go and then they changed and said they wanted to send us to Uganda and we started not to come into the Foreign Service because of that. But this friend I was telling you about said man you're crazy, Uganda is little heaven, that's where you want to go, beautiful, peaceful everything. So HG changed his mind and we went on to Uganda which was a beautiful country, I still love. Speaker 1: And who was the head of state at that time? Speaker 2: [Apolo Milton] Obote, we got there the week of independence and at that time--Lord have mercy--at that time there was not a single black woman trained as a secretary. Speaker 1: In Uganda? Speaker 2: In Uganda. There was not a single--two black women who were trained as teachers from South Africa not a Uganda woman. Man, when I think about that time really just sounds farfetched to even discuss it now. The men were trained. A lot of them had been down to South Africa training, been to England for training but the women didn't know how to go in a western kitchen, they didn't know how to serve a meal, didn't know how to eat a meal. They, when they, after independence and the men started bringing their wives in, you had a problem with them making fires on the kitchen floor, they weren't used to western equipment. My first thing I did there was to teach the women how to set a table, how to use western equipment--stoves, sinks, bathroom, that sounds very elementary now but I did it and I had nothing but ministers wives who took that course with me. Do their hair, dress. The biggest thing I had was women to drink tea like this. The saucer holding it like this, now that sounds little but how were they you know to go to European tea or something drinking tea like that and a lot of them were embarrassed about the whole thing. I was so affected there until some of the ministers criticized me--Muslim ministers criticized me in the legislature that I was coming there trying to change their women. Speaker 1: Did you ever--did you wonder yourself about changing them to fit European--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: The ambass--the prime minister asked me to do it and the prime minister--HG will tell you about it--but the prime minister also asked HG to bring some black women over to be secretaries. He said the British government knew about things before he did because they had nothing but British secretaries. Speaker 1: So they were basically acting on some level as agents for the British government. Speaker 2: They did. They did, no question about that. Story_ID: 87782 Speaker 1: We used to--got very close with the ministers and the prime minister and the prime minister would come to our house any night at twelve or one o'clock when he gets out of his duties or send his car for us and we would go to one of his places so we could just sit down and talk about life. If he was--by the way [Apolo Milton] Obote is very bright. The way the western press portrayed him he wasn't but he was very bright. He was very bright and he would want our perspectives. We weren't talking about government stuff; we were just talking about being black in this world. We were able to--one thing I really respect about my husband, he was constantly letting them know that America wasn't the best, you had your problems but you had an opportunity and they were able to understand that. My biggest thing was that I used to wonder why was I over there when the four little girls in Birmingham [Alabama] were being killed, all those things. That's when we were in Uganda when they were killed. I made up my mind that my role in life was not to be Mrs. Ambassador but to do--to use some of the training that I had to help Africa and to help my country. I mean it was a dual thing. But it was an uphill fight, it was an uphill fight. My biggest fight over there was with white Americans. I had no problem with the people of the country. Usually they, if you were yourself, and I was and some of that stuff I wouldn't eat because I wasn't used to it. My husband tried to be diplomatic but I never tried to be diplomatic, I was just myself. People laughed about it all over, anywhere I went. I was like that in the Philippines, I was like that in Tokyo, I was like that anywhere. What I like, I liked and I would let you know it. I wasn't used to that so, but my husband couldn't afford it so it was just me, I think he'd want it--rode on my back sometimes. Story_ID: 87783 Speaker 1: But Africans, I mean Americans--let me tell you this story in Uganda--when those four little girls were killed, that hurt me. Speaker 2: That's in '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: That was '63 [1963]. That really got me and that's when I really went in to think what am I doing-what is my life going to be. We had an excellent ambassador and his wife was one of those rich gals and we were very best of friends, she was just marvelous and she didn't stay in the country much. So the ambassador was sensible enough to use me in a lot of the areas when she wasn't there because the Ugandans really did like me and respect me. So when this happened--the ambassador used to have for the wives, for the senior wives a meeting at least once a month so that meant about twenty women went to his office and he would sit and tell you what the policy of the government had been for that month, the kinds of things they had and then he would start with each of you to say what kind of problems that had you had and let's talk about them which was a good thing really. Of course, we were all spouses, we weren't working for the government but he brought us in like that. At that time, it was, you did that. This day about two or three weeks after the four little girls in Birmingham had been killed he went around and I happened to be near the end. So he asked each of us what had we faced, did we need help with it and all that kind of stuff. So when he got to me he said Lula I know you really have a story to tell, tell us what has happened. I told them about what had happened during this time. And what happened was the Ugandans acted as if these four little girls were my family, our family and in Africa, that part of Africa-in Uganda people would come to you and they'd sit around, they'd stay there three or four hours, they'd come and go. We had hundreds of people come and sit and we had put a book out there and they signed their names. But it's part of their culture which they wouldn't do for the whites but they did for us. In fact, it became such a burden until the ambassador heard about it and sent drinks and food and stuff you know for us to have around which is their tradition and he helped us with it. It was shocking to me because he had never faced anything like that before. But anyway we were very pleased and everything. So we got through that then near the end of the week we went to the British High Commissioner for a cocktail party. Going through a receiving line he, the High Commissioner stopped me and my husband right there with me, Oh Lula we are just so, so sad, we are just--those Americans are just awful killing those four little girls. Those Americans, you know, My husband became very upset, I became very upset, we are Americans. I knew what he meant but just the idea and how you are going to face this. So I told him and my husband was being more diplomatic than I did, he dealt with it better. But we both were very upset because that's insulting us and my country. But how can you, you know. He's trying to be kind. What can you do, how are you going to do with this? Story_ID: 87784 Speaker 1: So I was telling all these stories to this group of women. My dear there was this dear woman, German --American wife, she was married to an American who was an agriculture counselor and her biggest fame--she came from Germany and she would like to boast about not spending a year out of twenty five years of marriage, she had not spent a year in the United States. They had been, he had been in the Foreign Service all that time. When you went to her house, you didn't go to an American house; you went to a German house. She had all the food--everybody knew her as that. Nobody had criticized her but that's just the way it was. She was the first one to pipe up after I gave the story--she piped up and she said oh Lula don't be upset, don't be upset, we trust you or we wouldn't have brought you over here. I tell you I can be very fiery. I was so furious they had to hold me down. This German woman telling me she, they trusts me. Who are they and who is she to trust me? How many relatives or whatever died in any war for the United States, what is she talking about? And that's the kind of thing that you had to go through all the time. Speaker 2: Did it make you think about-well you said you thought about like what are you doing there? Speaker 1: I thought about it much. Speaker 2: And the relationship of the United States to black people. Speaker 1: Right but then it came to me-(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Who was an American? Speaker 1: Who was an American, right all that came. But the very idea and believe it or not out of the twenty five/twenty six women there, at least half of them agreed with her. They could not see what I became excited about. They had to hold me down, really. Two of my friends--white women had to hold me down. But some of those women still could not see what--they agreed with her. But they couldn't see that she--who was American there, who was going to trust whom you know. Anyway that became a real problem and that's when I decided that my--really one of my duties as a Foreign Service officer's wife is to try to educate Americans. They were over in Africa but they weren't looking at Africans as human beings, they weren't looking at black Americans as human beings, that we were part of it. What our society was like and what to really represent our society. So I really, the whole time, I really worked on that probably too much. By the way, the husbands-the families were evaluated with the husbands. When they wrote, every year they write a report about you and you had to mix what the family was evaluated. Up until 1975/'76 [1976] the family was evaluated. Speaker 2: Because the family represented a diplomatic mission too? Speaker 1: It was a part of the representation. When the husband got evaluated during the year his job also depended on how his family reacted to entertainment, to children and all that kind of stuff right or wrong. Boy I always got terrible ratings (laugh)--not terrible ratings because all the ambassadors used me but they said I was too outspoken and I was too forceful. Is he calling you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Interestingly enough, when we came back to the states [the United States of America], I would always work and I worked up until I got this aneurism at the State Department for evaluation so I would see a lot of my husband's evaluations and read about myself (laugh). By golly, he got some--my poor husband has suffered because of me. Story_ID: 89131 Speaker 1: After Uganda, I decided that my role was going to be to first leave something in each country where I was and secondly, to try to make things better for my country and to make a difference but in my own way, in my own small way. For instance, I never left a country--I worked mostly with the servants because I had day to day contact with them. I did a lot of organizing but my main thing was working with the servants. I'm supposed to be a pretty good cook and everything so I would get one or two people, teach them various cooking things and how to cook and how to be clean, and how, all those kinds of things. I was determined to leave that in Africa, in every place where I'd been. With the women, I organized in the old YWCA way and charities; I worked with the charities, orphanages and all that kind of thing. Each country, I organized something that still lives, I'm very pleased to say. In Uganda it was sort of self-help kind of thing where you learn how to dress and all that kind of thing and serve food, cook food, organize a menu, all that. They still do that at the YWCA. In Nigeria I started the first UN [United Nations] shop there which still goes on. They make tablecloths, napkins, pillow cases, some art work that they sell at the UN, we started that then and they still do that. Monrovia there of course, everything but I really did some good work in Monrovia but as you well know, everything went by the boards. Story_ID: 89132 Speaker 1: Yeah, but when you were in--were you in Uganda when [Apolo Milton] Obote--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Obote was there before Obote was deposed. Speaker 1: He was deposed around '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: '68 [1968], '69 [1969] yes, we were in Ugan--Liberia by that time. See we went to Uganda at independence and we stayed there just about three years then we went to Nigeria in the good old days and we stayed there about three or three and a half years. Speaker 1: Who was president in Nigeria, was it [Nnamdi] Azikiwe? Speaker 2: Azikiwe was the president when we first went there then they had a coup and I left the week the coup started, I came back to the states. Speaker 1: I think that coup eventually became--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Biafran War [Nigerian Civil War] and then I left from there--I came back here and then went back to--we were stationed in Liberia. Speaker 1: Now who was president of Liberia? Speaker 2: [William] Tubman was president. But I worked, Tubman's wife [Antoinette Tubman] didn't do much outside work. I worked and organized and did a lot of work with [William R.] Tolbert who was later president and killed, he was killed there in their first coup. Speaker 1: Yeah Samuel Doe--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Samuel Doe-now that's a, really things were so--I had such great hopes at that time for Nigeria and Liberia. Story_ID: 89133 Speaker 1: In Nigeria, they had money, they had trained people and they just had all the opportunities but what we forget the country was never a country, it was tribes. The English, the English made it a country. They went across all tribal lines and everything else and brought all these people together and said this is Nigeria. Speaker 2: Three major distinct ethnic groups--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: More than that yeah but three major ones but--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Igbos and Yorubas Speaker 1: Yorubas and they just--they had nothing in common; they really don't have anything in common. But they put them together and said you are going to be a country; they still have got to be a country. They were just distinct tribes and they lived like it. I have a lot of respect for each tribe for different reasons but the Igbos most of all. Igbos had something that when we went there--they had independence when we got there but you didn't have any trained Igbos. When [Nnamdi] Azikiwe was president, he was an Igbo but he, those people got organized and when I say the people got organized I mean the cooks and most men were cooks. At that time they didn't have any women cooks, they were nannies and the stewards they called Igbo state unions. They met once a week on Sundays and their motto was each Igbo state union had to train the best equipped child for four years; each union had to do that. Not necessarily that child but the child who was the best able for training they would send to England and to the [United] States--the Igbo union and I'm talking about people who made $25.00 a month and had families but they gave money for them, they did that. That's why Igbos now are so well trained, they are fantastic. Speaker 2: Yeah highly trained, Azikiwe ironically was called back in old age to try to be a president again. They ran him again because the country--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Well he had worked; he was one of the ones who worked to get their freedom, their independence. Story_ID: 89134 Speaker 1: And, of course, Ghana, same kind of thing but Liberia on the other hand--that's God little half acre (laugh). That was one awful little place. But as long as [William] Tubman was there and the western press criticized Tubman but he understood his country, he understood the people. So you had Americans who they called Americo Liberians--we'd come from the states, married brought in the natives who hadn't had any training and he from there without any help from anywhere else, really--he didn't have any American help. He and some others of course, helped make that a country and when America started interfering with him and the country trying to make it a democracy and change it, that's when you started having your problems. My husband disagrees with me but I firmly believe it and will believe it. Let me tell you this story. The western press used to always--if you remember seeing Tubman with the high hat and tails and all that stuff--that wasn't Tubman. It's true that a lot of the protocol they did better than the English did, in fact. But he would--had certain events during the year that the people looked forward to and one of them was--they had every year--the only had one political party and they would have a morning affair and it was in that big hall there. And one thing he would sit down at the head of the hall and you had breakfast tables with all the finer things, linen and all that kind of stuff. They would bring gifts to him and the diplomats had a--you know you went there. And do you know Cecil Dennis, the guy you saw on Time Magazine-front page on Time Magazine who was killed with those five or six men in Liberia? He was a tall guy, he was secretary of state. He lived across the street from us. For this affair, you had to have morning coats. My husband didn't have a morning coat so he didn't go so I went with Cecil. During this affair and these people walking down this long aisle, bringing the president's gifts, Cecil Dennis was a comedian, really and here come these two guys down the hall. One had on an old American uniform, a woolen top, short pants--khaki pants and a wooden gun and then they had another tall guy waling with him with a policeman uniform on. Then the third guy--they are walking together now--had on a mix matched kind of uniform and to see these three guys walk down this--this third guy had this huge stomach, short and this other guy with the short pants and this long military--police uniform. To see those three guys try to walk down this long alley I mean halland they couldn't get in step, it was the funniest sight you've ever seen. So I'm sitting here with Cecil Dennis and Cecil said that's our army, how do you like our army? I'm trying to keep a straight face and the president is looking right at me and I'm just shaking. Story_ID: 89135 Speaker 1: So after the, after this giving thing, gift giving and all that the president [William Tubman] sent for me. So here is the president sitting on this big chair and they've got two chairs on the side, I'm sitting in this chair and the president used to call me Louisiana girl, "Okay Louisiana girl I saw you laughing at my men." "No Mr. President, you know I would not"--(laughter). He went on and he found it you know sort of funny. So he got serious and he said, "Let me tell you something, your country is trying to convince me to take some of these young guys and come to the United States to be trained for a proper army." He said, "Now let me tell you something, I'm not going to do that at all until these boys have something to lose other than their lives." He was serious and it made sense and we talked about it. So he said, "You can go back and tell your husband that they can stop talking to me about sending some of our boys to the states, they are not ready, and this country isn't ready." I went home and I told my husband what he said and all that kind of stuff and we laughed about it then we came home in another year, he died. See, Tubman never killed anybody, he would put you in jail for life but you never went to the electric chair or hanging or anything under Tubman. Then the other guy was president, what is his name? Speaker 2: Tolbert. Speaker 1: Tolbert became president. The first order of business for Tolbert was to take some of those guys off of death row and electrocute them. The second act that Tolbert did was gather up a lot of boys including Doe and sends them to the states for training as an army. Need I say more? He did not understand his people. Speaker 2: He set the stage for--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: He set the stage for what's happening now. Speaker 2: That's something. Speaker 1: Yeah, see you don't read about that kind of stuff. All you read about is Tubman they say he is the father of his country having all these outside children. Sure that's true, he did have a lot of outside children. I have been in Tubman's company. When he, every Thursday he would have an open house and anybody in that country could go there and he had this big chair with his (unclear) with a footlocker with nothing but hundred dollar crisp new bills. A footlocker--I've seen this myself. You go there and when your time comes you go in and you give him your problem. If he agreed to that, he would tell them to give him a thousand dollars--American dollars--give him whatever. Want to go and say my child is in Birmingham, Alabama for schooling, we need money--give him x. My wife needs an operation--he'd listen to it. He heard all stories. I went there twice, one time with the vice president's wife. We were having what you would call a--I found ways to make money all the time. We had what we called a calendar tea and that was for your birthday--your birth month you gave you know whatever for that. So we had this calendar tea and raised about five thousand dollars which was a heck of a lot of money for them and bring to him and told him about what we were doing and what money we were building hostels for women, students--college students because there were a lot of girls who didn't have a place to stay for school and all that kind of stuff. So we built these places and he gave us a thousand dollars--two thousand dollars cash money, hundred dollar bills. You don't read about that kind of thing, he did a lot of good. Sure he was whatever but he did a lot of good, people respected him, people liked him and in his way he was dealing with the situation that they had. Tolbert changed all of that and you see what Liberia is today. Speaker 2: Yeah it's really a lawless--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Completely now I am hoping that eventually the right kind of people will go in there and bring it back together but it is awful now. All my friends--all Americo Liberians I knew over here--suffering. Story_ID: 89136 Speaker 1: Now you also served in Botswana, another African country. Speaker 2: Botswana Speaker 1: Another African country that has a unique history. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well we came back here and we stayed here and as I said, I worked all the time I was back here--I worked on various things. We stayed until--I've forgotten the year--we went from here to Manila in the Philippines and that was an experience. We were very, very well received there. I did the kind of things I wasn't able to do in a lot of places in Africa because all the women--not all but most of the women I dealt with in the Philippines were well trained. They were well trained. They were doctors and lawyers and Indian chiefs you know and they were able to--their problem was they had not had the exposure. So I organized something like the Kennedy Center. They had--Imelda had built this cultural center there and it was just there. Speaker 1: Imelda Marcos the wife of Ferdinand Marcos? Speaker 2: That's right a fine woman. Again you won't read this in the press--western press thought of her as being awful but she was a fine woman, I want to tell you. We got to be very, very good friends and it's true she had all those shoes because we were the same size and I used to go and try them on and she admired mine and I certainly admired hers. But she did the kind of things that you need, she knew her people. I am sure today if it was going to go to the poor people, she would be elected prime minister. But see you have a middle class and they are in tribal groups, they don't call them tribes but it's the same thing. They call it the district, the area and they support the people from their district whereas in Africa you support your tribe people. So not much difference and that's what happens there. But I worked with her on children, she had a feeding program that the UN [United Nations] has adopted and I worked with her on that. What I really did in Manila was they had this cultural center that's beautiful and it's on the model of the Kennedy Center. When I was here before--I mean when I was here before I went there, I would work with the Kennedy Center organization-the friends of the Kennedy Center. So when I got over there, I saw the need for that. I organized with Imelda's help the Friends of the Cultural Center and it's still going today. I still hear from them, it's doing a great thing; they are really doing a good thing. And I worked with the feeding program Story_ID: 89137 Speaker 1: Then HG [her husband, Horace G. Dawson] was made ambassador and we went from there to Botswana. Speaker 2: Yeah now that takes us to about 19-(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: '79 [1970] or '80 [1980] Speaker 2: Right Speaker 1: And that was an experience. When we got to Botswana they didn't have television. The president was a very fine person but his wife was British and how should I say this, well she just did not deal with the women--the Botswana women. She dealt with the men--the president's wife at that time. She dealt with the men but she didn't have much to do with the Botswana women. Speaker 2: Did they like her? Speaker 1: They respected her--not respected her--they liked her in the sense that Lady [Ruth Williams] Khama, she was Lady Khama. Speaker 2: Seretse Khama Speaker 1: Seretse Khama he was a president. See he was the leader of a tribe there--his family so they all kinds of respect for him and whoever his wife was, they were going to have that same thing for her. So they, they just stood back when she came in. She would have a dinner party; she wouldn't invite the Botswana women. I don't think there wer three women had been there. When I would go to a cocktail party, there wouldn't be any Botswana women there would be some of the men because the men were the ministers and working in the government and everything and a few, few women would be--would be, would come to the parties. But most of the British and Americans-the foreign community would be there. I got to be friends with Ruth Khama, she died a couple of years ago but we got in there and I'd decided this just isn't right; I'm going to know some of these women. It was a hard job, really. It was a real hard job because see it's so easy to go into a country and know nothing but foreign-other foreign services, other diplomats. To get to really know the people of the country you have to go out of your way and I did. Speaker 2: What about the female members of President Khama's family, did they participate at all in these events? Speaker 1: No but see he didn't have a mother she had died, I guess. He didn't have sisters, none of those. Two other ministers had South African wives; they participated small but as I'm telling you they did not go to the state house for affairs or anything. Lady Khama worked with the Red Cross and she knew a few of them there but not--no visiting, no friendly basis, the British were her friends. Her children were just growing up then, she had one daughter who had problems and well she had her sons. Ian Khama is doing very well now and he's vice president, that's her older son. But it was really something. Story_ID: 89138 Speaker 1: So I decided I was going to get to know the Botswana women and I did. The vice president, [Quett] Masire's wife [Gladys Molefi Olebile], I got to know. The foreign affairs wife--I guess we were just lucky. I had met him, liked him--he was a lot of fun and he told me when we got there that his first daughter was going to be married and would I help. She had never had her hair done, I did her hair. I helped to organize the wedding and then the women started--the Botswana women started to know that I was the kind to get along with them. You know, to say, some people think you sort of look down on them when they aren't trained like you and that kind of stuff. Well they knew I had no problems and they started coming around and I got very involved with the people--with a lot of the minister's wives but the people and in Botswana you would have a problem with water. So the women are very industrious, they work hard but to garden they don't know how to dry land garden. So I got books and things and started women to--got aid involved with this. I would bring equipment that kind of stuff and I got--we started a poetry thing-you know raising poetry, just involved in every way. Then on a personal basis I started my own Uganda thing teaching you how to cook and serve food and all that kind of stuff. Well they are very--like South Africans they are very proud of their cuisine which was interesting (laugh). Speaker 2: What do they eat mostly? Speaker 1: Beef, bounded beef and yams and a corn thing. I started trying to teach them how to present it where it wouldn't be offensive to me or you--western sense just that kind of stuff. And then Seretse died and there was what you call him, Masire taking over. I don't know if you want this part of history, I know she won't mind it but she had never been out of the country other than South Africa. Speaker 2: Who is that the wife of--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Masire, what was that, Masire had never been out of the country other than South Africa. She had no--they don't have African dress like they have in the states--I mean like they have in West Africa. They have--it's not organized like it is in West Africa and well, it was just a mess. Story_ID: 88123 Speaker 1: Two months later after he had died and the ceremony and everything over, they [Quett Masire and his wife Gladys Molefi Olebile], were going to Japan and this is her first time out of the country other than South Africa. A lovely person, she is a lovely person but-and she was trained as an elementary teacher which is not the same as college training. It's just sort of high school training when she was a teacher. A lovely person as I said, she was very shy but just had not--didn't know anything about the western world. She came to me crying, she didn't know what to do because she wanted to go with him but she had no nothing--she didn't have clothes. She was about my size but huge hips; she could wear my tops but not my bottoms. I dressed her up with what I could--my tops. In order to-you know, for the skirts and everything, she went and bought material she could sew to make the bottoms. A formal thing and I had a formal shirt, whatchacallit and other things. Any sweaters or tops, blouses she took with earrings and stuff to match. That's the way --She will tell you this. She went on her first trip to--we would sit down and practice how to drink tea, how to meet people, how to eat, all those things. She learned--you should see her now and I'm not breaking any confidence, she would tell you herself from whence she came. So when she got back, she was pleased with herself, we started getting jewelry, getting other things for her and if she would get it, she would come and want me to see it-to see what I thought about it and all that kind of stuff. We are still just best of friends and it was very difficult for the people to take her because they were used to Lady [Ruth Williams] Khama. What I was trying to do was to help her to make a--bring out her personality and try to do something like a first lady should do. Story_ID: 88124 Speaker 1: So the first thing we thought about was to organize something like the United Way. We started organizing that and the way we were going to do that was we were going to have a dinner and do you know the biggest problem I had with the president of saying that we were going to charge $50.00, $25.00 per person--American dollars per person and $50.00 per couple to charge to go to this dinner dance. He thought that was outrageous, that had never been done in Botswana and no man was going to spend that kind of money. He told me that himself that that was not going to happen, $25.00 he talked about it in Pula. That would have been the equivalent to $20.00. I thought that was little, oh no, no, no. So he finally agreed and said okay and I'm trying to organize the women-about twenty women, oh they were there but we were bringing food from-every embassy would provide food for so many people and we had organized the hotel to do roast beef and some other kinds of things, you know big stuff so that everybody would have something to eat. The British refused to participate. The high commissioner's wife told me that who did I think I was, these people are not equipped for this, it's like throwing pearls before swine, told me. American women were afraid to participate--some of them but they drug their feet and they helped to keep gossip going but thank God the Botswana women was excited about this. We had this big affair on the president's grounds and it had never been done before and the very idea of just getting to see the president's residence, to get there, some of them had never done that and a lot of people bought tickets so they could go there. We bought this big tent from South Africa with the lights and the Indian women--a lot of them there, they were very helpful. They became a part of the Botswana group and they can do beautiful things of art--using fruit to decorate. So we had this place really decorated--this big tent and we had more than a thousand people to show up. We raised--well you made most of your money with your program and of course, I sort of strong--armed some of those companies. I took Ms. Masire and we would go and he would be furious with us because I wouldn't tell him get what you can, I said you give $500.00 or you give a $1,000.00, you know that kind of stuff and they were furious with me. It was talked about that first year, it was really talked about but we raised $25,000 and the president told me I couldn't believe it, I just didn't believe it. The next year we raised about $150,000 and now they are raising $4--or $500,000. Story_ID: 88125 Speaker 1: So they're doing this every year? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, ten years later they brought me back I was--the country honored me and I will show you some of the papers and stuff. They honored me, I went back ten years later and I took twenty four Americans with me--twenty four of my friends. They gave a beautiful--oh it was beautiful, they were really organized. I was so pleased; I don't know what to do. They had--they met us at the airport. Each one of those women came with their drivers in their Mercedes and their drivers and we stayed in the hotel but they had hostess for every woman--every group. We had three couples and then individual women and each couple or person had a hostess and they had that so well organized, it was beautiful. Speaker 1: This event--would you consider that like sort of a highlight of your--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: No okay. Speaker 2: Every country I did something. That one is still going on, the one in the Philipines is still going on. Everywhere I've been but Liberia--Liberia is not but we built about three or four hospice there at that time in Liberia. But Nigeria, Uganda those things are still going on. So I feel my name sort of lives on even the people who I--don't know me--young people who don't know me they come and say oh you are that lady, you are Ms. Dawson and that makes you feel good, they tell about what's happening and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 88126 Speaker 1: Now back in the [United] States you have been a consultant? Speaker 2: Yeah I--at the State Department I worked on the evaluation team every year. In fact, I would make a pretty good living working on the boards at the State Department-USI, AR Aid. I worked in the public school system as a consultant doing various studies and I did things like that. When I would come back to the states my husband insisted I work so I could get Social Security which made a difference. I was furious then but it makes a difference because I now have pretty good Social Security coming in. The biggest thing I've done since I've been back in the states is at my church--AME Church--Metropolitan AME. It was Women's Day in '98 [1998]/'99 [1999] something like that, I've forgotten the year but I worked for one year as a Women's Day chairperson and raised $104,000 to get an elevator and they haven't had Women's Day since then and women say I broke the record (laugh). They refuse to do it again because they usually make about $10,000/$15,000 you think you've done pretty good. Speaker 1: Now being out of the country so much have you felt sometime that you were alienated from what was going on here? Speaker 2: Yes in a sense. It was a problem, I worried about my boys, to have two sons and they both have done pretty well. But being out of the country and moving so they didn't have that kind of relationship you have with your home and your friends. I still know people who were in high school and college with me, my husband the same thing. I didn't think they had that opportunity. They made friends but it's not the same thing and when you come back here the organizations where I would have been in just about everything if I had been here, I'm not in them and I want to be in them now. I could have been in them but you know after awhile you've gotten older and it doesn't make that much difference to you. So I'm invited to a lot of things but I don't--I only belong to a grandmama's group. We have a group called modern grannies and I enjoy that because I have two grandchildren that's the light of my life. If I had just known what they were like, I would have had them before I had children (laugh). But I enjoy life, I'm a bridge player--I play duplicate bridge and I read a lot of bridge, I play a lot of bridge and a church worker; that's my two most active things and I cook. Story_ID: 88127 Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Now that is a real thing. I am busy now at seventy-two-years-old. I can remember my parents criticizing the things that I thought was important or whatever. I don't want to fall--I don't want to be like that--I don't want to be like I viewed them to be that whatever young people did, oh my God. So I am busy really looking at TV at some of the stuff. I have not been able to understand rap yet but I do listen to it. I do look at a lot of things, I cannot understand all this whatever writing Speaker 1: Tattooing Speaker 2: Tattooing, this tongue piercing and nose piercing; I can't understand that. But I'm trying to understand, I don't want really to--all these things that they find so important there must be a reason and I'm trying to find the logical reason for it. This computer, I'm working on it very hard. My husband has fixed a computer room for me and all that. I still can't get the--I just think you have to be slow to learn it because my grandchildren are excellent at it. My younger son works with it but it still makes no sense to me, I try. I really want to not be the old fashioned old folk; I want to have an understanding and appreciation of what's happening now. To me the young people have a lot on the ball but they're also missing a lot. When I talk to my sons or my grandchildren, we happen to bring up things that happen they look at me as if I'm dumb or how could you take that. Where they don't understand the--where you come from, how things have evolved and I really wish we had--that's the reason that I'm so insistent that my husband let's do this--let's do this history making because it is important that the young people realize some of the things that has happened and where they come from. Story_ID: 88128 Speaker 1: Okay. What would you consider at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about that one (laugh), I have not thought about that. What would I consider my legacy? I think my boys, my grandchildren, and my family. I decided--I started off when we first married I thought I would have a career and I was doing very well. As I said, I got one of those first jobs in North Carolina and I was on my way up, I was moving into what was happening then. But then at that time you didn't have scholarships for people, black people didn't have a lot of scholarships and my husband went away to school and one of us had to work. You didn't get any big scholarships, you know, it came from the family and we decided that he was--I won't say that he is brighter but let's put the emphasis on him and that's what we did. The training and everything went in his training and all that; I was to take care of the family life, he was to move ahead in the career and the family and everything. So we have done that very well. I never, like some families this is mine, that is yours that has never been a problem with us, this is ours. Let's do this not I'm going to do this, it's not that it's less than this and we have lived--my husband has lived up to that and I have lived up to that. We tried to raise our boys and I think very successful with it and now we have some beautiful grandchildren that we work very hard to help. When I talk of help, I don't mean financial help I mean letting them know what family is, family is important and that kind of thing. My husband is a very fine man; he's a good provider, a lovely husband and a friend. He's my best friend. So I have been very lucky in that sense. Story_ID: 88129 Speaker 1: Now this is slightly different, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know I tease my husband which he won't talk to me about but since I've been so sick, you know, you sort of look death in the face and I told him I don't want the traditional kind of funeral, I want to have a big reception. First at my service I want to have Negro spiritual choirs--two or three choirs, nothing but Negro spirituals. I don't want no speaking and I don't want no casket or anybody looking down on me, I want to be cremated and then after this service, I want to have the biggest reception you ever saw because that's all I've done, entertain people, provided food for people and I want to go out doing that. He won't listen to me but--because he believes--I tell him all the time when I go I'm going to take you with me, he believes that (laugh). Speaker 1: Okay and thank you very much. Okay. Speaker 2: It's been a pleasure talking to you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 88130 Speaker 1: 'Kay, we're ready. Speaker 2: Okay this is in Manila. This is a bridge group of Filipino women who befriended me there; they took me all over the Philippines. They taught me the Philippines foods, we played bridge once a week and anything I was involved in they supported me. They were the ones who bought my cake for my 25th wedding anniversary and this is in my living room in the Philippines. Speaker 1: That's my grandson with one of his classmates and they came about the first of June to Washington DC for a class excursion and it's thirteen of them in the class and I made the cake for--they went to Howard University to visit my husband and he showed them Howard University and I made a cake for the class and we gave them sweatshirts and pencils and things from Howard University. Speaker 2: The bottom picture is my 25th wedding anniversary in the Philippines. I can't remember--the event took place in the Philippines at one of the outstanding embassy buildings, I think of the name of it. Speaker 1: This is my family. We had been in the Foreign Service about six years then and we were coming back to the states for education. My son went to Sidwell Friends because he was in high school and my younger son had just started elementary school. Speaker 2: This is my older son graduation from Harvard University. That was four years--he had been at Harvard for four years finishing with a BA. Speaker 1: This is one of my first projects that I had--I chaired in Nigeria. I did a fashion show of our young people there--children of our officers and they represented a certain time, year of fashions in America. Speaker 2: This was in Monrovia; I'm not sure what happened. Speaker 1: Okay you are greeting someone. Speaker 2: We are greeting--I think he is a minister of education there, I think that's what he is. Speaker 1: This is my father-in-law. We went to a packing place in Monrovia, his wife had just died about a month before and we had come back to the states for the ceremony and took him back with us to Monrovia and I was showing him the various companies and things in Monrovia. Speaker 2: What's his name? Speaker 1: Horace G. Dawson, Sr. Speaker 2: This is the ambassador in Monrovia and his wife--the first person is his wife, the second person is his daughter and daughter's friend and they were over visiting from the states. The next lady was the DCM's wife and the ambassador's daughter and myself. Speaker 1: Oh boy this is me doing the high life with a medical doctor in Nigeria in Lagos. I was doing the high life, I was a little thin there too, Mr. Odinde (splg.). Speaker 2: This is in Monrovia, the ambassador there, the first person is ambassador, the second one is Cecil Dennis' wife, she was a college teacher there, myself and Senator [Edward] Brooke; he was a senator at that time. Speaker 1: Again, this is in Nigeria--maybe that's in the Philippines I'm not sure but it was I think Vice President Muskge. Speaker 2: No that's Hubert Humphrey. Speaker 1: Hubert Humphrey that was--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: '68 [1968] at least Speaker 1: That was Nigeria or Liberia; I'm not sure where it was. Speaker 2: Between '64 [1964] and '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: He was vice president then. Speaker 2: Again we were in Monrovia at an event that we put on and had the Monrovian dancers and they were giving us the peace pipes, I guess you would call them. Speaker 1: Here we are in the Philippines and Imelda Marcos, I'm greeting her at some event, I don't know what it could be in the Philippines; Imelda Marcos and others. Speaker 2: This is in the late '60s [1960s] right? Speaker 1: The late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Late '70s yeah 70 something. Speaker 2: Again there she is another time when vice president Muskie [sic], Mrs. Muskie came to visit and here we are with the ambassador's wife, a Filipino person, myself and Imelda [Marcos]. Speaker 1: In 1953, August 30 my wedding. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: July 25th? Speaker 1: August 30. Speaker 2: A sophomore in college with my Spanish teacher next to me and one of my first boyfriends playing the piano and this was my Spanish class; I won't say what year that was. Speaker 1: My freshman year in college at Southern University. Speaker 2: My son--my older son, my sister Barbara Jean Espy (splg.) in 1980--the early '80s when he finished--he got a BA degree from Harvard University. Speaker 1: My family one Christmas. We take photographs every two or four years as a family and this is my two grandchildren, my two sons, and my older son's wife and me and my husband and I think my granddaughter was about four years old at that time. Speaker 2: Start on the top is--we were in California. My husband had special permission--commission to go to the Olympics--he was a Foreign Service advisor to the Olympics committee and he worked out there with the Olympics in California and we were at one event with who was the guy, the runner? Speaker 1: Jesse Owens Speaker 2: Jesse Owens and the bottom one is of us with me in my African dress at the first African activity we had at my church--the AME Church--Metropolitan. Speaker 1: This was in Botswana. They honored me--the country honored me at the tenth anniversary of the first lady's charity ball which I helped to found ten years before. This is Lady Masire and myself cutting our cake..