 Story_ID: 651883 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Keith Nelson. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Marie Dixon; M-A-R-I-E, last name Dixon, D-I-X-O-N. Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No, I do not. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August the 1st, 1937. Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Mississippi. Oxford, O-X-F-O-R-D, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, are you talking about now? Speaker 1: Well, or what--if you're retired from something, you know, what was it? Speaker 2: Well, I was basically a housewife. And in my early life, I just did jobs like retail work. Speaker 1: Now, you're one of the founders of the Blues Heaven Foundation [Chicago, Illinois]? Are you? Speaker 2: My late husband [Willie Dixon] is the founder, and I have carried it on with the children since he passed away, which was 1992. Speaker 1: And what was your title with Blues Heaven Foundation? Speaker 2: My title became president of Blues Heaven after my husband passed. Speaker 1: Okay. So are you still the president, or are you retired? Speaker 2: Yes, I am (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, the president. Speaker 2: --still the president. Speaker 1: Okay, there we go. Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: August the 25th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At The HistoryMaking [sic. The HistoryMakers] building, 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 651884 Speaker 1: Now, be- before we get into depth, there are like five lightweight questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Pause) No, I love soul food (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But nothing favorite. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Not even blue (laughter)? Speaker 2: Blue I have plenty of, but it's not one of the favorites of mines. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, fall, fall of the year and spring. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. I use this phrase: take what you got and make what you want out of it. Story_ID: 651885 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Frederick Booker] side, but separately; and then we're going to put them together. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Amelia, A-M-E-L-A--I-A, Booker, B-O-O-K-E-R [Amelia Wilson Booker]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was also born in Oxford, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Only to her--what I heard my mother talk about--I never met either one of her parents. They passed away before she-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her mother passed when she was sixteen. Her daddy [Robert Wilson] passed when she was approximately twenty years old. So, I didn't know nothing about her family. She had three sisters born to her mother and father. Speaker 1: Okay. There are no stories about the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Not really. My mother never really talked about a lot. Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up in Oxford, and what it was like? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a very quiet woman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did, what did your--did your mother live there very long, or did she-- Speaker 2: She lived there her entire life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Well, this is Oxford, Mississippi. Back in the day, that was one of the focal points of the Civil Rights Movement and a lot of other activities, and also the home of a lot of music as well. So, did your mother have any stories about life in Oxford at all? Speaker 2: No. I don't think my mother had no real stories to talk about in Oxford, she just lived there. She was born there and raised there, never having any difficulty. It was just--she lived there, minding her own business. She was a housewife, and then she also worked outside of the home. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, okay, so did your mother finish school in Oxford? Speaker 2: No, she did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they have--I know the schools were segregated then, but did she go to school just so far, or what? Speaker 2: She prob- she went approximately to the seventh or eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--d- do you remember the name of the school? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 651886 Speaker 1: So, she went to seventh or eighth. Was she a member of a church there in Oxford [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yes, she were. The na- the no- the name of the church was New Hope Baptist Church [New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] have any special talents or gifts? Speaker 2: No special ones, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she a good cook? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I thought so (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a, that's a pretty good talent (laughter). Okay. So, so, did you have a sense of what life was like for your mother's family in Oxford prior to your birth? Speaker 2: I just want to believe it was just a normal life for her, trying to stay--make a living. You know, nothing special reaches out to me from what I--I mean I never heard her say that something special happened. She was, she got married at an early age and she started to have childrens. And she was just a housewife, and sometime outside of the home to try to make ends meet in the home. Story_ID: 651887 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full, full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Fred, F-R-E-D, Booker, B-O-O-K-E-R [Frederick Booker]. Speaker 1: And was he born in Oxford [Mississippi], too? Speaker 2: Yes, he were. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: Early in his life he worked for--I think they called it a county, working on building roads, on highway roads. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you know much about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And I'm not just talking about your grandparents, but those who came before them. You know, is there a story about where they--were they always from around Oxford? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there are no stories about them coming from some other place to Oxford? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, he never talked about his family coming from any other far distance from Oxfords, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you have a lot of relatives in Oxford? Speaker 2: Basically, yes. My family lived in Oxfords; my mother's sisters, my daddy's sisters--brothers. My mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] had no brothers, just three sisters. Speaker 1: Three sisters, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What about your father? Did he have a bigger family? Speaker 2: (Whispers) He had three sisters and three brothers. It was seven, with my father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, seven siblings. Now, did your father have a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: No, my father had no opportunity to go to school. He had to work, and he never was, he never went to school. Speaker 1: All right. So, now, did your father have any special talents? Speaker 2: After working for the county, building highways through Mississippi and different places, he became a farming man, to raise his--you know, we was raised on a farm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did he own his own land, or was he sharecropping? Speaker 2: At one point he was a sharecropper. (Pause) And from that point he started to rent land, which was different than being just a sharecropper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And later in life, he bought land to build a home on. Speaker 1: Now, did your dad have any stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: Not anything that reaches out to me now. He talked about how life were as a kid, a black kid born in Mississippi, how difficult it were. He went from place to place, to just try to live and stay afloat in life. Speaker 1: Okay. He was aware that it was easier someplace else than maybe it was in Mississippi I guess? Speaker 2: He was aware of places probably being better, but never making a move from Oxford. He lived there, and he passed away there in Oxfords. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651888 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? (Pause) I know it's a small town [Oxford, Mississippi], (laughter) but how did they fall in love? They probably, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) couldn't help but meet (laughter). Speaker 2: I think they knew each--like you say, it's a small town. I think they just knew each parent and each place, you know, where each person lived, and started to date. And then my dad [Frederick Booker] asked my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] to marry him, and they ran away one day. She stayed home from the field after her parents returned to the field after dinner, and they eloped. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did it cause a lot of trouble in the families? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, except I heard my daddy say my grandmother--he'd taken my mother to his mother's house, and then he left and went back on the road to continue to try to earn some money to live. And he left my mother there with his mother, and then my grandmother said, "You better come get your wife, because she's not going to stay here." I don't think that was a big problem, but it was just that my grandmother couldn't afford to take care of my mother, and my father was probably making fifty cents a day-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in salary. Speaker 1: Now this was back in, maybe back in the teens [1910s], right, I guess? Speaker 2: This would have to be 19--I think he married my mother in 1929. Speaker 1: Twenty-nine [1929]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe it was 1929 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not totally sure. Speaker 1: Okay, married in 1929. Story_ID: 651889 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they walk, how they talk, what kind of sense of humor they had, what their temperament was--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father [Frederick Booker]. My father was well loved by most people that he met. He talked a lot. He joked a lot, you know, but he was well loved by peoples. I don't--I never met anyone who said they ever disliked my father. Story_ID: 651890 Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes, I dos. Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them from the oldest to--and, and put yourself in order? Speaker 2: The oldest one, Nancy [Nancy Booker], N-A-N-C-Y; Mary [Mary Booker]; Ruby [Ruby Booker]; Bertha [Bertha Booker]; Mamie [Mamie Booker]; myself, Marie [HistoryMaker Marie Dixon]; then my brother Paul [Paul Booker]; my brother Bob, Bobby, B-O-B-B-Y [Bobby Booker]; my brother James [James Booker]; my brother Fred [Frederick Booker]. You know, we had a large family, fourteen children (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Fred. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then my sister Della [Della Booker] came. My brother Wade [Wade Booker]; and my brother Harry [Harry Booker]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's it. And my brother Annie Ruth--my sister--I'm sorry, my sister Annie Ruth [Annie Booker]. Is that all of them? Speaker 1: Let's see if that's fourteen. (Pause) Yeah, that's fourteen, that's fourteen. That's a lot (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now, this is a big family. Story_ID: 651891 Speaker 1: Yes, we had a large family. And my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] and father [Frederick Booker] strived very hard to keep us clothesed and fed. And they did a great job as far as I'm concerned, with little education, little to work for, and segregation. But I think my parents did a great job in doing what they did. None of us got a good education, because we had to work, you know. And it was starting in the spring of the year, and you worked all the way through in the fields and picking cotton and chopping cotton and chopping corn, whatever. Anyway, we were farmers, okay. Speaker 2: All right, okay. So when you came along, was the family living in Oxford [Mississippi] itself? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My family never really left Oxfords. The siblings, my siblings, some of them left. My oldest sister, Nancy [Nancy Booker], left and went to Memphis. My second sister, Mary Katherine [Mary Booker], she left and went to Gary [Indiana] after marriage. My sister Ruby [Ruby Booker] stayed in Mississippi, but left Oxford and went to a town called Holly Springs, Mississippi. My sister Bert [Bertha Booker] went to Memphis to live. My sister Mamie [Mamie Booker] still lives in Memphis, Tennessee. And I left and came to Chicago [Illinois], because life was just too difficult for me to continue (laughter) to stay down there. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 651892 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: What's the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: (Whispers) The first thing I remember? I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a great childhood life, I should say, you know, playing with my sisters. And we entertained each other. And I remember my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] used to, on Easter, she'd buy us marbles. No, she'd buy us the ball and the jacks, and we'd sit down and play jacks. I do know that was quite early in my life. Again, like I said, there was little money, so we had very little to entertain ourselves with, but then we was happy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't have all the chaos that they have today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were safe, kept safe by my father [Frederick Booker]. Story_ID: 651893 Speaker 1: Oxford [Mississippi], I suppose--I don't know. Well, what was, how was Oxford laid out? Was there a black community in Oxford as such? Or did, or were black people living all over Oxford? Or-- Speaker 2: Black folks lived all over, but had a limit to where they could go-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and what they could do. Speaker 1: So they lived all over, but they--what they could do was limited? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like, my family--have you heard of the University of Mississippi? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That is in Oxfords. And my oldest, two of my older sisters worked there. As a matter of fact, that was one of the places that blacks could get jobs, working in the cafeteria there for the students. And they had a laundry, doing the laundry out there for the university. That's what the blacks did at the University of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. So would it be the same for men getting janitorial work, or working on the grounds and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Right, the same for the mens as well. And the mens worked there in the cafeteria, as well as mens worked in the laundry, doing laundry for the students. Speaker 1: Now, did your family live near the University of Mississippi? Speaker 2: Not real close; approximately five, maybe ten miles from the university. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a pretty good hike from the school, you know. So, if you were working there you'd have to--would your sisters--was there a bus that would go there? Or-- Speaker 2: No, you could walk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was no bus. Speaker 1: So this is-- Speaker 2: The only buses that were running during that time was like the Greyhound bus and the Continental bus. Speaker 1: So, there was no city bus service like in Montgomery [Alabama] or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --other places? Speaker 2: No city buses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any. Speaker 1: Yeah, Oxford is the capital, right? Is Oxford--no, Jackson is the capital (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackson, Mississippi is, yes. Speaker 1: Oxford is the home of the University of Mississippi? Speaker 2: Right, the university. Speaker 1: So, let's see. So, was there a name to the part of the city that you lived in? Speaker 2: No, they didn't na- it like they name it now--communities--no. That was just--usually south of the town, east of the town, west of the town; you lived out west, out east, south, or north. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there was no real name that I can remember that was given to those areas that you lived in. Story_ID: 651894 Speaker 1: Well, considering, you know, when you grew up and what was going on then and the kind of work you'd been doing, you know, preservation of the blues [at the Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells? Sights, my daddy used to--growing up, I do remember stuff my daddy used to do. He used to give like outdoor picnics to raise money to feed us and entertain peoples. And he would always get a guitar player, some guy that could play a guitar, and hire him for about five or six hours. And then people would come from all over, because my father would have this picnic going on, and he would sell food to make--to earn money. And then people could dance off the guitar playing guy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, the guitar player played-- Speaker 2: Just sitting in his chair, and just played acoustic guitar. And people would dance and have a good time. And he would play that for four or five hours a night. And my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] would barbeque. They would kill a pig and they would kill a goat, and those were the two meats that they served. And they sold pig sandwiches and goat sandwiches, and you had sodas. At that time it was just pretty much Nehi and RC drinks--like the coca cola [Royal Crown Company] and Nehi company [Nehi Bottling Company]. And my daddy would have that delivered to the picnic grounds. He'd get permission from the sheriff that he could do that, as long as he kept it quiet and nobody got killed and nobody got shot. And people enjoyed it. And he did this every year. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like once a year he would do this? Speaker 2: Once a year, he would do a picnic to increase his income so he could take care of his family. Speaker 1: Okay. It sounds like a good idea. Speaker 2: It were, it really were. And people respected him and he respected peoples, so it never was an incident. Never do I remember an incident ever taking place there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No disagreement with peoples. Speaker 1: Did, did other people do similar things? Speaker 2: There were other people who did it, yes. But my daddy was a yearly--he did it every year-- Speaker 1: Did he have a name-- Speaker 2: --for many years. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, did he have a name for the gathering? Was it in commemoration of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's just that Fred Booker [Frederick Booker] was going to have a picnic on a certain date. And he would pass this word around, and it would get around to different peoples. And we would always have a great crowd of peoples there to support the picnic. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, let's see. Any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: No, nothing but we went to church every Sunday. And that's about the long and the short of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Any sights and sounds or smells from church? Speaker 2: No, being young, we just liked to go to church. Speaker 1: All right. And your (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had to go to church, you know, the parents insisted on it. Speaker 1: And you gave us the name of it a little while ago. Speaker 2: New Hope. Speaker 1: New, New, New-- Speaker 2: New Ho- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New Hope Baptist. Speaker 2: --New Hope Baptist Church [New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 651895 Speaker 1: Tell us about the music in church. Did you have--you had a choir, right and--? Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have a choir. It would be the members that--and the minister. No organ, no piano; a capella. And people just sang, they sang the way they felt. And to me it was very enjoyable, because I love music, I've always loved music. And I used to love to hear the older people sing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was just saying this to my daughter-in-law last night. No music, no guitars, no drums. We couldn't afford a piano, so you'd just clap the hands and sing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the songs from church? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I remember some of the old hymns they used to do, 'I Couldn't Hear Nobody Pray.' I believe that's the name of the song. "I was way down yonder by myself, I couldn't hear nobody pray." And 'Before This Time Another Year, I May be Dead and Gone' ['Before This Time Another Year'], that was another old spiritual song. Oh, gosh, as well as I love those songs I can't remember them right now. But those are some of the songs I heard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've always enjoyed gospel as well as--you know, I'm a blues person--but as well as blues. Speaker 1: Now, was there a significance to the name New Hope Baptist Church [New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: No, it was just--to my knowledge it was just--they named the church New Hope. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And the only thing I could say from it would be a new chapter in your life in this Baptist church. So, I guess that would be the significance of it, that you had new hope as far life was concerned-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --joining hands with God. I believe that was the only significance that may have been with that. Speaker 1: Okay. I knew it was; yeah, that it was something. What about the minister? What was he like? Did you have the same one for a long time, or did they change? Speaker 2: As a matter of fact we did, Reverend Houston [ph.]. And as far as I know, they never changed. Because in '91 [1991], he delivered the eulogy for my father [Frederick Booker]. So, he was still there. Speaker 1: He's the same minister that was there when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Yes, the only minister I knew, yes. Now it might have been one before I was born, but the only minister I knew, yes. Story_ID: 651896 Speaker 1: When you were a little girl, what were, what were the race relations like in Oxford, Mississippi? Speaker 2: Race? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Race, how can I put it? Black was black, and that's where--blacks was on this side, and you was on that side as the other raced peoples. But they didn't really bother you, and you didn't bother them. You know, you knew there was a black toilet, a black fountain. So that's where you stayed, in that parameter. You didn't go over and drink from this white fountain. And the name was there (gesture), black, white. So, as long as you stayed in that area, no one was going to bother you. Racism, down there in Oxfords, the only time it got really ugly was when James Meredith went in to try and integrate that school, the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]. That's the only time I ever knew it to get--and I wasn't even there at that time. I had been long gone from there. But I saw it on TV that it was really in a chaos at that time. But white didn't bother you, you didn't bother white. Story_ID: 651897 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But this is what I loved. And to this very day, I still love music. I grew up listening to the go- quartet groups. Well, first let me say I left Oxfords [Mississippi] at the age of sixteen-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --looking for a better life, because it just wasn't happening with me in Oxford. And I came to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now we're going to get this on tape, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, I mean, I'll repeat that over again for you. Speaker 2: We are rolling? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I didn't realize it, so (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. You got that? Speaker 2: So we were rolling. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I don't know how long we've been rolling. Story_ID: 651898 Speaker 1: Now did you have any duties and responsibilities in the church as a youth? Speaker 2: No, I really didn't, no, just was a member. I did join New Hope Church [New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford, Mississippi] and was just a member there. And I'd go to Sunday school and go to the service, and I always enjoyed it. The reverend I told you that was there, he was kind of a slow talking man, and it was boring to sit there. You could go to sleep on his sermon (laughter), but that's not here nor there. But that was, he was very, very slow. You know, it would take him a second to get out one word, really, and that was very boring to us. But we enjoyed the church. You know, everybody knew everybody and was happy, and looking forward to Sunday and going to Sunday school. And they used to have a day they'd set aside, and I have to go back and search my memory again, called Children's Day. And all the parents would fix baskets of food, just all kinds of food and bring it to church, in my younger days, very young days. We were so happy because we knew we was going to have fried chicken and cake, coconut cakes, chocolate cakes, potato pie, and all the trimmings, you know, greens and stuff. This is what they would bring to feed the church and the members and the businesses. Every year we looked really forward to Children's Day. Easter, we looked forward to having an Easter outfit. That was one thing that my parents made sure we had. We had a little Easter outfit, in spite of having very little money. My father [Frederick Booker] worked very hard, and my mother [Amelia Booker] did too. And my mother did make some of our clothes, you know, with her hand. They made sure that we had decent clothes to go to church, and decent shoes to wear. Story_ID: 651899 Speaker 1: Fourteen children, that's--you really have to-- Speaker 2: Well, some moved on, you know, from the house, ever having fourteen children (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. So, at no one time were all--you know-- Speaker 2: Absolutely not. Speaker 1: That's over the holiday, I guess they all would come back maybe. But-- Speaker 2: If-- Speaker 1: But when you were growing up, there weren't like fourteen-- Speaker 2: It wasn't fourteen. Because my oldest sister Nancy [Nancy Dixon], which I gave you her name, she was born in 1930. She was married at the age of eighteen. So, there was quite a few children. I was my mother's sixth child, and it was quite a few children that came after that daughter left and was married at the age of eighteen. And then my sister, I think Ruby [Ruby Booker] got married before my second sister. She had left home and married. My sister Mary [Mary Booker] got married in between the fourth sister. But never was there fourteen children that my parents had to clothe and feed at any given time. Speaker 1: How big was the house? Speaker 2: It was two bedrooms, with five to six of us in the same room, and the rest of us in the room with my mother and father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And was there a front room or something, or a kitchen or something? Speaker 2: Well, yes, there was a kitchen. And the front room was what they called a living room, but it wasn't a living room because of where you lived. And they had a--you entertained in there as well, but that's where the children had to sleep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We never had a three-bedroom-- Speaker 1: It was like a three, three room house, like, was it like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a kitchen and two bedrooms; and that was difficult. We didn't have a bathroom in the house. Story_ID: 651900 Speaker 1: Tell me about your school. What was the name of your school, your first (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oxford Training School [Oxford, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And-- Speaker 2: But you know, let me say this here. Before I went to Oxford, we went to the church school called New Hope [at New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was that for like kindergarten or something, or preschool? Speaker 2: Preschool. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kindergarten, we went to kindergarten. I don't think they even called it preschool in them days. Speaker 1: Oh, so they called it--it was kindergarten then? Speaker 2: We didn't go to school until you were six years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right. So-- Speaker 2: So, I guess it would be kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Oxford Training School. And so, you're in the first grade there. Was it a--how big was it? Now, Oxford's, there're a lot of people living in Oxford [Mississippi]. So was the school a pretty good sized school, or what? Speaker 2: The Oxford Training School? Oh, yeah, the school in Oxford was very large. But, you see, lots of the communities--like you had a community--like South Salem [ph.] had a school. That was Oxfords, but it was a community called South Salem. You had a community called Taylor, Mississippi, they had a school. So, everybody didn't crowd into Oxfords. Those that lived near Oxfords went to Oxford Training School and to New Hope school. But they had these other communities that had their own schools, but they was in, the community was still Oxfords. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But if you went to Taylor, Mississippi, that's a little town they call--it's a little town, but it's just a community store. It wasn't really a whole lot there in Taylor, but that's where people lived. And when they wanted to come--on the weekend they would come to Oxfords more or less, to visit or to hang out or whatever they were doing. There in Oxfords, it was more of a--a bigger town than Taylor, Mississippi were. A town for the community called South Salem sch- community. They came to Oxford, but they lived in these little places. Story_ID: 651901 Speaker 1: Do you remember your first day at school? Speaker 2: I think so. Because I remember I cried, because I didn't want to go there. It was cold (laughter) and I didn't want to go to school. And I was afraid to go there, because I had never been away from my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker]. I was afraid to. My sisters were there, but--and it was a one room. It was about the size of this room here, a one room. That's how the school was built. Speaker 1: Okay, so all the grades were in one room? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I thought that Oxford [Mississippi] would have had a bigger school. But I guess not, huh? Speaker 2: Oxfords did. In the city part of Oxfords, it did. The rural areas where we lived, they had a one room school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like--yeah, was the university [University of Mississippi] in the City of Oxford [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the university is in the city. Oxford Training School [Oxford, Mississippi] was in the city, and it was a big school, like you see the schools today. Back when I grew up, early in my life, it was a one room school, and it taught up to eighth grade. Then you had to go to a larger school. Now, Taylor, Mississippi had a larger school. And you left--you know, from first grade to second grade to third grade, and you know, you had rooms. But in Oxfords we only had a one room school in the community we lived in, not in the city. This wasn't considered the city, but the town was Oxfords. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Does this make sense to you? Speaker 1: Yeah. You're saying that there's a--the community you lived in was called Oxfords, and they had the Oxford Training School. But there was another--I mean there was another school in the--for the City of Oxford. Speaker 2: Right, Oxford Training School was in the city. We was on the outside of the cities. We weren't living in Oxfords in the city part. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what-- Speaker 2: We were farmers. Speaker 1: Did they call your school the Oxford Training School, too? Or was it-- Speaker 2: Oxford Training School was the last school I went to. Speaker 1: Oh, the last one. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: The first one was New Hope school. Speaker 1: Oh, I see now, okay. Speaker 2: And that was the one room, the size of this room here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all the students was in the same room up to eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, was that held in the church [New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Oxford, Mississippi] itself? Or was it next to the church? Or did it just have the name? Speaker 2: I think it was in the church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can get a little more clearance on that. I really think it was in the church. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have a favorite interest in school in terms of subject matter, or did it make any difference? Speaker 2: It really didn't make a lot of difference, but I still loved math. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And maybe some history. I liked to know a lot of things. Speaker 1: All right. Now, was it--was there any music instruction in the school at all? Speaker 2: In Oxford Training School it were. Speaker 1: In--okay. Speaker 2: But not in New Hope. This one room classroom? No. Story_ID: 651902 Speaker 1: Do you, you remember any special teachers at New Hope? Speaker 2: Well, they had one teacher I remember, and her name was Miss Lou Lumpton [ph.]. Because there was only--there was no room for two teachers to be in the same one room classroom. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, what kind of little girl were you? What did you like to do, and what would people say your personality was like? Speaker 2: My personality I think was always pretty good. I got along with peoples, my peers. I even got along with my siblings most of the time, I had very little fights with them. I think I was my mother's favorite, because she always would allow me, as I grew up, to take care of my siblings that was born, the younger ones, and my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] would go off to work. And to this very day, they are still coming to me for assistance (laughter). They still think I'm supposed to look after them. But that's okay, too. Speaker 1: So, they treat you like a second mama, I guess? Speaker 2: Absolutely. And my mother, as we grew older, my mother looked at me as a second mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. All my brothers, if you notice, I named them after myself. They came after I was born. And most of them came to me and my husband [Willie Dixon] and lived in my home in Chicago [Illinois] from the age of sixteen, and maybe as young as fourteen. They finished growing up in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And my mother always felt very comfortable with them being with me and my husband. Now, my mother didn't care for blues music, but she felt very comfortable with those--my brothers being with us. She didn't hate blues music, but she didn't, she didn't favor it either. Story_ID: 651903 Speaker 1: Now was there--was there, I guess a dividing line in peo- people's minds about blues music versus church music or some other kind of music? Speaker 2: It was a dividing line, because they didn't understand the facts of blues music, and they thought it was the devil's music; so far from the truth. And it's not because I deal with blues, but it's because I've studied it long enough to know that it is the true facts of life. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it's not--the devil's not (laughter) inspiring it? Or-- Speaker 2: No, the devil has nothing to do with the blues. People do not kill because they hear blues. People kill because there are drugs out there in the streets, and you're on my turf, not because we're playing blues music. And people drink, they don't drink because of the blues, they drink because they like it, I assume. Or they got hooked on sampling alcohol and they got--they started becoming a habit of drinking. But blues is the true facts of life, and that was one of the things that my husband [Willie Dixon] always believed in. He knew the Bible from one end to the other one, because that's what his mother [Daisy McKenzie Dixon] taught him, and insisted that he do, was learn the Bible. And he always said to me that it's not--, "Why would it be called the devil's music?" And I don't know where back in the days people got that idea from, or where it came from. It has nothing to do with the devil. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there--now do you remember the first blues musician in Oxford [Mississippi] that you--whose name you knew and thought it was good? Speaker 2: I don't remember any blues artists. In Oxford, you're saying? No, but I'll tell you the first blues recording I ever heard was by the original Sonny Boy Williamson [Sonny Boy Williamson I]. His real name was John Lee William [John Lee Williamson], and my daddy [Frederick Booker] brought home--. Now, my daddy and mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] saw--didn't see eye to eye with music. My mother loved gospel, all about God. And daddy loved them both. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there a lot of people like your mother, that didn't like--? Speaker 2: Yes, there was a lot of people that was brain--and I must say brainwashed about blues music. Speaker 1: Now, when the fellow would come and play the guitar at your father's picnic, what--would his music on acoustic be considered blues? Speaker 2: Only blues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he couldn't play very much, but he had learned how to thread a guitar. And people didn't know if he was in tune or not (laughter). They just loved what they was listening to. But my daddy brought the first blues record to our home and the turntable that you play it on. And I believe that was in 1945. Speaker 1: Okay, 1945. So, you would have been about eight years old, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when my mother would leave home, my sister would play it, and we'd listen to it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was Sonny Boy singing about? Speaker 2: 'Baby, Please Don't Go' ['Please Don't Go']. Did you ever hear that one? Speaker 1: No, I've heard a lot of other artists say that, though (laughter). Speaker 2: But, okay, Muddy Waters-- Speaker 1: Muddy Waters. Speaker 2: Muddy Waters recorded it, and it went like (singing), "Baby, please don't go. Baby, please don't go back to New Orleans [Louisiana]. You know I love you so." Speaker 1: Oh, that's, yeah, I've heard that. Speaker 2: And it goes on to say (singing), "Turn your lamp down low. Turn your lamp down low. I'll be here all night long. Baby, please don't go," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the song that my daddy brought home. And he repeatedly--and as that record got scratched and damaged, he repeatedly bought that record over and over again. Speaker 1: Oh, he liked that song, huh? So-- Speaker 2: He loved the blues. And when he died, he was a blues lover. Story_ID: 651904 Speaker 1: Now that doesn't sound so bad, "Baby, please don't go." Speaker 2: Well, it's the facts of life. You beg your baby, "Don't leave me." You beg your baby, "Turn your lamp down low," (laughter). Turn the light down, you know, put the dimmer on. You know, I can demonstrate to you many songs that my husband [Willie Dixon] wrote. He wrote a song which I feel is very true, many of his songs. But one was 'Spoonful.' And you've heard people say that people will kill over a dime or a nickel. And he wrote the song (singing), "It could be a spoonful of coffee, it could be a spoonful of tea. Just a little spoonful of your precious love is good enough for me. Some people lie about spoonful. Some people die about that spoonful. Everybody fight about a spoonful," (laughter). These are the things that he wrote about. Why would that be the devil's music? People will lie about a penny. They will lie about a spoonful. And then he goes on to tell you, "A spoonful full of--filled with water will save you from the desert sand." And if you're in the desert and you don't have any water, just a spoonful of that may help you live, you know. But then he did say one thing that I wasn't sure about. He said, "A spoon filled with lead will save you from--a spoonful of lead from my forty-five," that's what he said, "will save you from another man." (Laughter) So, you know, but other than that he tells the story about what happens with a spoonful of nothing, really. People kill about nothing. And the true word about the song is killing people is about little things, small things, instead of looking at the big picture and not harming each other. Story_ID: 651905 Speaker 1: Was there a place in Oxford [Mississippi] where musicians play- played? I mean, I guess a club or something in Oxford where musicians would play-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No. Peoples had what they called juke houses, and they was out in the country. And people would go out and they would have a person that could play a guitar. That's basically all they had, or maybe blow a harmonica. But that's what they basically went out to, to what they called juke joints. They had a couple of cafes there in Oxfords in the town part that you could go there, and they had a jukebox there that you could sit and listen to. At that time you'd put a quarter in the jukebox and you would get five songs, they was a nickel each. And then you could order a snack, like a hamburger, a Coca-Cola, a root beer float, you know. And that's what they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They just sit there and listened to music in what they called a cafe. Speaker 1: Did you ever see any places like that when you were a little girl? Or did you have to be much older to-- Speaker 2: In the cafes? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm just getting some idea. Did you ever see any live--other than the fellow that your father [Frederick Booker] brought around to play? Did you see any live music growing up? Speaker 2: No, no, not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there wasn't any. Either they played in the juke joint or they played at a picnic. Speaker 1: So none of your fourteen siblings, none of them are musicians at all? Speaker 2: No. Some tried to learn some instruments, and then they went on off into other things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, my children, my oldest daughter, she can play piano. My late son, my oldest son, he's passed away, he worked with his dad for years. As a matter of fact, he was his dad's last piano player. He traveled all over the world. As far as Willie [Willie Dixon] went, he went with him all over in Europe and different places. The Canadian countries, he went there with his dad, and California and Mexico. Wherever we went, that's where he went with us, and he was the piano player. And some of my husband's other children--not my children, his first children, they plays instrument. Story_ID: 651906 Speaker 1: Tell us about high school. Now high school would be Oxford Training School, right, there in Oxford [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell, tell us about high school. Now, you had to travel about what, about seven or eight miles to get there or? Speaker 2: Well, when I went to high school I was living like about three miles out of the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What they called--well, they didn't call it--did they call it the city? They called it a town, I guess, a town. Because about three miles away from this town, or the city, you was out of Oxford town, but you were living in the county which was called Lafayette County [Mississippi]. And that's where Oxford is, in Lafayette County. Speaker 1: So this is about 19--what, '52 [1952] when you're in high school? You would be like four- thirteen or fourteen? Speaker 2: That's correct. Story_ID: 651907 Speaker 1: Did you have any aspirations in high school in terms of a career? Did you see--what did see yourself doing after high school in Oxford [Oxford Training School, Oxford, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: At that time, at that age, I really don't know what I really wanted to do at that time except leave Oxford. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say that with a twinkle in your eye. But what was--I mean why? Why would you want to leave Oxford [Mississippi]? I mean, I'm asking that. I know full well why, but (laughter) I'm asking for the benefit of whoever's listening to this. Speaker 2: I didn't see where--and I didn't do a lot after, let me put it that way, when I came to Chicago [Illinois], because I had to get a job to take care of myself. But I didn't see no future in Oxfords, you know. I watched people struggle, and there was nothing happening. Racism was so--you know, you couldn't get a job. Definitely was no career for you at that time. You had to leave Oxfords to do it, or leave Mississippi, period. And most people did leave. So, I migrated to Chicago and I still didn't get a career. I did go to nursing school for a while in 1963. So I learned-- Speaker 1: Well, I don't want to jump you to Chicago too fast. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I'm just, I'm talking about high school. Now, did you finish high school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: I left two years before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you went to high school for two years? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so in those two years--I mean I'm just trying to get you to tell us what--what options did women have, I mean, black women have in Oxford? What would their career choices be? Speaker 2: In Oxfords? There was no career choices. The only thing a black woman could do in Oxfords was either teach school, work in a laundry doing laundry, work in a cafeteria serving food. I don't want to put Oxfords down, but what else could they have done? There's nothing for them, to have a career. They had to go away from Oxfords to get a career. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: As far as my mind can go back, and it goes back pretty far, I don't know of anyone who got a career in Oxford, not during my early life, no. Speaker 1: Were any of the black colleges [HBCUs] close by, you know? Speaker 2: No, the only black college I think was Rust College in Holly Springs [Mississippi], which was about maybe eighteen miles from Oxfords. And then there was McComb College [ph.] in Mississippi, but it wasn't near Oxfords. Speaker 1: And Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] was-- Speaker 2: Jackson State was a hundred miles south of Oxford. And so, the kids had to go away to go to college. No blacks went to college in Oxfords [at the University of Mississippi] except my baby sister, but that was after James Meredith came in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, and you were out of there by then, right? Speaker 2: Oh, lord, yes. Story_ID: 651908 Speaker 1: Now, did you know people--when you were a teenager in high school [at Oxford Training School, Oxford, Mississippi], did you know people that had already come up to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: (Pause) Yes, some of the kids that was just a year or two years ahead of me in school had came to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Was that like--Chicago is, as we sit here-- I guess the black folks here are like, I would guess 70 percent are from Mississippi. So, was that like the destination of choice by most people, to come to Chicago? Speaker 2: I would think so. My choice was because my oldest sister [Nancy Booker] and my first husband had moved to Chicago, I thought I could make a better life for myself by leaving Mississippi. I didn't want to work in a laundry, I didn't need that. And there was no opportunity for me to do anything else in Oxfords [Oxford, Mississippi], not when I left there. Speaker 1: So when you, when you were in school, did you, were you involved in school activities? Or was it too far away from home to be involved in? Or did they have anything for you to be involved in? Speaker 2: Well, I did try to be on the cheerleading side with Oxfords [Oxford Training School, Oxford, Mississippi], but that was small and short lived. Because again there was--my classmates and my peers, they was just going to school; they wasn't doing anything. And if they finished high school they'd go off to McComb, Mississippi, Holly Springs [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi], Mississippi, or Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], maybe to Tennessee. Speaker 1: Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you did know some peo- people that were able to do that? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I had a first cousin go to Tennessee State for a moment. Story_ID: 651909 Speaker 1: This is nine- 1954 when you left Oxford [Mississippi]. Now and, how did that come about? Did you just figure it was time to go; or, or did--was there some incident or something that took place that made you know it was time to go? Speaker 2: Incident? Not really. I wasn't able to go to school in the beginning of the fall. And I was being kept so far behind my peers, my class [at Oxford Training School, Oxford, Mississippi]. See, I could only go to school starting in January of each year. I couldn't start in September, because we had to farm and gather the crops then. And at the age of, what was I, sixteen by this time, I didn't want to take orders anymore from my parents, and especially from my father [Frederick Booker]. And he-- Speaker 1: Why especially him (laughter)? Speaker 2: Especially (laughter)--my father was, he was a tough person to follow his lead, and I didn't want to take orders anymore. So, I felt that it was best to remain friends and respectable, and that it was time for me to go. And again, I was so far behind in school. I just couldn't--there was no way I could catch up with my peers. When I got in school in January, they had been going to school in September, October, November, and December. I was already four months behind, and I could never get a teacher to go back and bring me up to date. So it was humiliating, and I was disgusted with that. And I just felt like, you know, let me move out of here, just get out. Speaker 1: So, did you write your sister [Nancy Booker]? Speaker 2: I did. I wrote my sister and I told her I'm coming to Chicago [Illinois]. My intention was never to stay there--stay here. I thought I'd go to Chicago--come to Chicago and go to New York [New York] and make it big time (laughter). But that never happened (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, Chicago's pretty big. Did you have a sense of the size of Chicago until you got here? Speaker 2: I had been here before. Yes, I knew what Chicago was like. But it didn't really seem like the place I really wanted to stop at. I just wanted to stop over and move on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you came up--now how did you come up? Did you come up on a bus, or did somebody drive, or what? Train? Speaker 2: Greyhound bus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my sister met me at the bus station. Story_ID: 651910 Speaker 1: Now, where--where did your sister [Nancy Booker] live here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Where did she live? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was, at that time she was living over east, and the address was 1028 East 46th Street. And we lived there, and then we started living everywhere. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were moving about. Speaker 1: Now what, so what did you do--what did you do for a living? I mean, I know you had to try to find a job soon. Speaker 2: I found a job on 47th and Ellis [Avenue] at Neisner's. I think it was called Neisner's five and ten cents store [Neisner Brothers, Inc.]. It was just a five and ten cents store. They had a name to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that was on 47th and Ellis, and we lived around the corner. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, what was your social life like in Chicago? Did you have any social life, or did you have to work too much? Speaker 2: No, I had time to go out to nightclubs--and meet Willie Dixon (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. So, did you meet him early on when you got here? Speaker 2: No, no, I met him in, I think it was '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's just two years later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's--okay, so you were sixteen when you got here? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you try to get back in school or anything? Speaker 2: I did, and then--I did, and then I stopped. Because I went--what's that school over on Greenwood [Avenue]? Gosh, Shakespeare [Shakespeare School, Chicago, Illinois]? I can't even think of the name. I didn't go there very long. But then I became interested in becoming a nurse, because I really wanted to know what peoples--how people worked with peoples who's sick or hurt or something. And I started to go to school with the Red Cross [American Red Cross]. I went to the Red Cross school and got my training, as far as learning how to do CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation], learning how to feed a person that was--couldn't sit up and hold their head up. You know, I learned all that part in school. And I still have some training about things they taught me with the Red Cross, but I never pursued it as a career. Story_ID: 651911 Speaker 1: This is like 1954 through '56 [1956]. Now, well, tell us how you met Willie Dixon. Speaker 2: At a nightclub. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there a lot of clubs here in Chicago [Illinois] for, I mean playing blues and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I know a lot of people say there was plenty of jazz up and down 63rd Street and 47th [Street]. Blues too? Speaker 2: Blues was pretty much played as far as jazz clubs. And when you say 63rd, they did--on 63rd Street and 55th Street, Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] was a jazz place. And the Pink Poodle, that was over in the 63rd Street area [Chicago, Illinois]. But the blues was the 708 Club on East 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: It was the seventh or eighth club? Speaker 2: It was the 708; that was the address. Speaker 1: Oh, 708. Speaker 2: Seven, zero, eight. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: 708-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --East 47th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of it? Do you know? Speaker 2: That was the name of the club. Speaker 1: Oh, 708 East 47th Street, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But they called it the 708 Club. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I thought you were giving me the address, around 708. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called the 708 Club. As a matter of fact, I just heard they're going to try to make it a historical building. It's still there, it still exists. And then there was clubs everywhere for blues. There was a club on the West Side called Silvio club, along Lake Street [Silvio's, Chicago, Illinois]. The Zanzibar [Club Zanzibar, Chicago, Illinois] I believe was on Warren Boulevard or Ashland Boulevard--Ashland Avenue. There was the one that Muddy [Muddy Waters] got famous in at 35th [Street] and Giles [Avenue]. And there was--and most of them was blues, so that's why I went. I didn't go to too many jazz--I liked jazz, but I didn't go to a lot of them. Speaker 1: So, did you feel more familiar with the blues? Speaker 2: Yes, because the first thing I heard in music was the blues and gospel. And that was because my daddy [Frederick Booker] brought that record ['Baby, Please Don't Go'] home in '45 [1945]. But we already knew about spiritual music, and then we heard the blues when he came home with Sonny Boy Williamson [Sonny Boy Williamson I]. And from then on, I think it was in '49 [1949], my parents bought a radio, and you could get music from Memphis, West Memphis, Arkansas, from WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] with [HistoryMaker] B. B. King. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, B. B. King was on the air, right. Speaker 2: And Ford Nelson, Nat D. Williamson [sic. Nat D. Williams], Rufus Thomas, they all came over WDIA radio station. So, me being the babysitter and the housekeeper for my parents, I listened to all that while they would be working. And of course I had to turn the radio off before they got home, because you weren't allowed to listen to all of that. But I did, and I enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the jazz clubs, yes, I knew about the jazz clubs there too, and I definitely knew about the Pink Poodle, Club DeLisa and places like that. And the Strand Ballroom [ph.], I think it was at 64th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] that was also jazz. And then I used to go to the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] here where is that Al Benson did a lot of shows in there. They had a lot of shows there. Speaker 1: Did they have any blues shows there in those days? Speaker 2: Well, not--yeah, I guess they did have blues artists there, you know. But at that time, I was still listening to Jackie Wilson. And people like Jackie Wilson was there, and we would go there to hear him. Speaker 1: Okay, when it came to rhythm and blues. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. But I remember going there one time and they had Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland] there, but it was kind of late in the years. But in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], they had--as a matter of fact, they had Willie there, Willie in 1955. I'm sure it were--Willie and Big Joe William and Big Maybelle. Story_ID: 651912 Speaker 1: Tell us how you met--I mean about meeting Willie Dixon. Speaker 2: Accidentally, I met him. (Pause) My thing was I loved music, and it didn't make a difference who played it. But how I met him is your question. Well, I was out with a lady friend of mine and her boyfriend, and we stopped in this, in this particular club called the 708 Club [Chicago, Illinois]. And there was very few peoples there. And we was going--because the advertisement was saying that Howlin' Wolf was there, was going to be there, and we was going to stop in and see Howlin' Wolf. Unfortunately, Wolf did not perform there that night. Willie and the Big Three performed there. Speaker 1: So, were you disappointed that Howlin' Wolf wasn't there? Speaker 2: Not really. It really didn't make a difference, because I was just hanging out with her and her boyfriend until my boyfriend got off from work. Because he worked nights, and we were just hanging out until Chris [ph.] got off from work. And when we went into the club, it was maybe fifteen or twenty people there. I think it was on a Wednesday night, and it was like, okay, two is a couple, three is a crowd. So, I'm going to go sit over here on the bar and flirt with the guys. That normally was not me; I never flirted with musicians or anything like that. But that particular night, I guess it was my night. I did, and I didn't even know who Willie Dixon were. I had heard about the Big Three Trio, but I really didn't know who they were, and that was the Big Three Trio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the group that was on the stage. Speaker 1: Who was in the trio besides Willie? Speaker 2: It was Willie, Ollie Crawford, and Leonard Caston, who they called Baby Doo, who was the piano player. And I think I heard Willie say--and I know I read this--Ellis--Alec Hunter [sic. Ellis Hunter]. And I don't ask me what he played. I believe he might have been a guitar player. But Ollie Crawford was the guitar player for many, many years. And Willie was the bass. Leonard was the piano. Also, I believe he played the guitar as well. And they went from the Big Three to Four Jumps for Jive [sic. Four Jumps of Jive], and then it became four people. And then the Five Breezes, but some of the same people, you know, like Willie, Ollie, and Leonard which we--he was always called Baby Doo, Leonard Caston. They was always--the beginning of that second group, the Four Jumps to Jive or the Five Breezes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So, I really didn't know who I was talking to when I was just flirting with the guys on the bandstand. Speaker 1: Okay. What happened? Speaker 2: Do I have to tell (laughter)? Okay, I said--I sat on the bar, and I said, "Which one of you guys are single?" And it really didn't mean anything to me. And they said, all three of them said, "We're single, we're all single." I said, "Oh," and I thought nothing else about that. Because I was waiting on my boyfriend Chris to get off from the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and we was going to hang out, because I was off of work that particular night. I was working nights at this point as a clerk at 47th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue] at a drugstore called the Star Drugstore [ph.]. And I was off, so I was enjoying my night off from work, because I used to work from six o'clock in the afternoon until two in the morning. And I thought nothing about this, but Willie Dixon did, and he found me at the drugstore. And I'm looking at this giant and saying, "Unh-uh," but he was kind, he was gentle. So, it was easy to let Chris go. Speaker 1: Yeah, poor Chris was too late that night, I guess. Speaker 2: It was time to let Chris go. Chris had his thing, and I had mine. But however, that's how I met him, not knowing who this person were when I flirted with them. And I say I did the flirting. I said, "Which one of you guys are single?" And the three answered: "We all are." Story_ID: 651913 Speaker 1: Because he was the founder of Blues Heaven Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] and he got you really involved in blues in--on that level, tell us about his personality and what was his playing style? And you know, what was--what was Willie Dixon like? Speaker 2: Willie Dixon--and I would say this had I not married him--he was to me one of the most kindest and gentle persons you ever wanted to meet; a beautiful personality, always full of fun. He could be very serious about his b- his music and about the business, but he was a very gentle person. And today I don't know of anyone that would say different from that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where was Mr. Dixon from? Was he-- Speaker 2: Vicksburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long had he been in Chicago [Illinois] when you met him? Or when did he come to Chicago? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, because he came--he said he left home like at fourteen and then he went back home. And I think he was there until he was nineteen or twenty years old or something like that, and then he went back to Chicago. I'm not sure, I can look that up for you and give you a better answer. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, probably anybody can look it up. But I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it should be in his biography. Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: I should have brought you a biography. Speaker 1: That's all right. So, had he been here long before you came? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Because I know they came, his family went to Chicago in the '40s [1940s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And well, was he much older than you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. How about how much, do you think? Speaker 2: Twenty years (laughter). Speaker 1: Twenty years older, okay. Now that is a lot, I guess. But it didn't, it didn't hurt the relationship? Speaker 2: It didn't affect a thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, it made me a different person. Because my peers--I was more serious about a lot of things than my peers were. And young men just--I wouldn't have traded Chris [ph.] for him if Chris had of been what I was looking for in life. Chris was a nice guy, but I was a little more serious than Chris about life. And I just wasn't looking for something play with in my life; I wanted to be serious. Because there was a time when Willie and I had disputes about me being too serious with him. Speaker 1: Over what? Speaker 2: Most anything. I mean if he wanted to joke around, there was times I didn't care to just joke around. I'd be serious about something I would say to him, and he'd make a joke of it. And it was like, unh-uh. With my own peers, they wanted to hang out lots of times in dangerous spots. And I didn't care for that, because I was taught by my father [Frederick Booker] that it was easy to get killed. He said, he used to tell us, "If you stay out the graveyard--I can keep you out of jail. But if you mess around and get yourself in the graveyard--." And when I came to Chicago, Chicago was pretty rough, cutting and shooting and killing every day, like they are today. But it wasn't young people. It was in clubs where they did this stuff at. You know, they'd get drunk and they'd start cutting people and shooting people, and stuff like that. So, I didn't care a lot of times to hang out. And then they did a lot of house parties, and I didn't never care about house parties. You know, they'd go there and play cards. I didn't learn how to play anything but pitty pat, and that was not--I was not playing that kind of game at a party, you know (laughter). So it was like--theaters, I loved. I used to love going to the movies. We used to go to the Tivoli Theater [Chicago, Illinois] all the time to see a good movie. I remember seeing, I just saw him on TV yesterday, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, you know. I loved movies. I used to love and go sit--and at that time, women dressed up to go to the movies. You know, they didn't go in jeans and sneakers. You put on your heels and you went to the movies. None of that. And it was time that even my siblings have said, "You're too serious about things." I don't know why I was like that. Maybe that may have came from my mother's side, because my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] wasn't a woman that talked a lot. And I do know my father could not play--you know, tease with my mother a lot. She would always get angry if he continued to mess with her. Maybe for a moment she was okay, and then it was like--she didn't play that. And maybe that's what might have rubbed off on me in that field. Story_ID: 651914 Speaker 1: Willie Dixon was, made a name for himself as a music educator in addition to an entertainer. But maybe I should talk about the entertainment first. But he--what are some of his, you know, signature songs and records? Speaker 2: His signature song was--do you want to go with the blues part or the quartet, when they were quartet people? Speaker 1: Well, I just thought I'd--some of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, the songs that he wrote? Speaker 1: Yeah, the hits, like 'Wang Dang Doodle,' and-- Speaker 2: Okay, one of his hits was 'Hoochie Coochie Man.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That Muddy--and it's still today the signature song. If you mention it, most people that ever listened to blues know that Muddy Waters did that song. 'Wang Dang Doodle' was originally written by Willie, and it was first recorded by the late Howlin' Wolf. And then it didn't get popular until Koko Taylor did it I believe in 1965. And then from 'Hoochie Coochie Man' to 'Back Door Man,' 'I'm Ready,' 'My Babe,' by Little Walter. 'Back Door Man' was by the late Howlin' Wolf. 'I'm Ready' was recorded by Muddy. These were the guys that put Willie Dixon's music on the chart. And 'My Babe' was Little Walter Jacob. 'Spoonful' was put on the chart by Howlin' Wolf. That's how the rock groups got it. Speaker 1: Was that one of Mr. Dixon's original songs, 'Spoonful'? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All the songs I just named off to you, he just wrote those songs. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So, but then they were covered by an artist? Speaker 2: By other artists; yes, various artists. And what Willie did, he worked with those artists to get them prepared to go into the studio, which was Chess studios on the Chess label [Chess Records] to record them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And he helped arrange the music. He also was there with the engineer making sure of what he wanted that music to sound like. And that's what he did. Speaker 1: Now, a few years ago they had a movie called 'Cadillac Records.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what did you think of it? Now was there, was there somebody in there playing the role of Willie Dixon? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Cedric The Entertainer. Speaker 1: Right, he sure did, he was sure was. I tried to remember, but I thought he was. Speaker 2: Yes, I went over to meet him when he were performing over at the Horseshoe [Horseshoe Hammond, Hammond, Indiana], really just to thank him for taking that part. And he's, he's a giant too, he's a great guy to know. Story_ID: 651915 Speaker 1: Now, what, what did you think? I know it's a movie and it's not real life. But how did you--did it come close in any way to depicting what was going on in those days (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, it did not. But what I--I worked with one of the producers, which was Sofia [Sofia Sondervan]. She called me on various things, and there were things that I had to have her take out of that script. Because Willie [Willie Dixon] didn't use profane language, and she had that. What was the woman's name, Darnell Martin, who wrote the story? And I had to talk to her and Darnell Martin. I said, "You know what? Don't use that, because he's not here." And then they said, you know, they did their research and they found that he did not use that type of language. Willie didn't even drink or smoke, okay. He was very, very serious about the music part. But the movies, to go back to the movie, the only thing I could appreciate was it brought awareness that the blues isn't dead, okay. But no--and I want to say this to you guys; it's nothing. Little Walter were accused--and I say accused, I didn't see this. He was accused of driving that car through that plate glass. I did not see this. Little Walter was a pretty tough character to deal with. But I must say, at the end of his life he came to us about three weeks before he passed, and he was a different man. I remember saying to Willie, "He's changed so." He was a real rowdy guy in the beginning. Speaker 1: Do you think he was capable of shooting somebody for betraying him, on the road like that? Speaker 2: That would be Little Walter. Yes, he would have did that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Especially if he was drinking, yes. He would have did that. But did that happen? I don't think so. I really don't think so. Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of bothered me. Speaker 2: But Little Walter was the type of character, if you did something to him, yes, he would--he would have did that. And I'll go to my grave saying that, because I know that's the kind of character he was. He would--if you did something to Little Walter, you could bet he would retaliate. So like I said, I don't know where that girl got that, where Darnell got that script for the movie. Who gave her that, I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know the relationship between Chess [Leonard Chess] and--I can't think of her name now. But I can see her-- Speaker 2: Etta James? Speaker 1: Etta James yeah. That wasn't--I know that was fictitious. So, yeah, it has a lot of fiction. And there's hardly a historical movie that's accurate. So, I just-- Speaker 2: But that one was so poorly put together. But you know, like, again, I heard people talk about 'Cadillac Records.' So I mean, there was some awareness brought to the scene with the movie. But truth, and being a real movie, just wasn't there. And I think they could have--I spoke to one of the producers like Sofia. And she said, "We don't have a budget, a big budget, you know." So, they used less money as they could, just to do this here. And I think this was done by Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment], and I know they're one of the biggest companies out there. They could have put more money behind it. But what do I know? They didn't do it. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So, I was just happy that they brought some awareness to people like him. I remember some of their friends say they went to see it. I've had many people say they saw 'Cadillac Records.' We offer the tapes down there at the gift shop [of the Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], and they go pretty good. Isn't that right, Lucky [Dixon's grandson, Keith Nelson]? Speaker 1: (KEITH NELSON): Um-hm. Speaker 2: They goes pretty good down there. People still are aware, they still want to see it. But true? (Shakes head) Nah. Story_ID: 651916 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the, 'Cadillac Records.' And so, the betrayal of Mr. Dixon [Willie Dixon] in 'Cadillac Records' was, they had a comedian play him. And I guess that speaks somewhat to his reputation as being humorous, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because I, I do remember the couple of times I met Mr. Dixon he was a humorous person. Speaker 2: He were. Speaker 1: So do you have any stories about his humor, you know? Speaker 2: Not off the top of my head, no. Speaker 1: I think he [Thomas Jefferson] does. But I (laughter) anyway, we have to ask you. So, if you think of something. I mean because he was, he, he, he was ironically humorous. So-- Speaker 2: He were. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That he were, just let me think of something that would be-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I was thinking too, that he was a lot taller than Cedric [HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer] I think. Well, what was he? Speaker 2: He was 6'2". Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought. A big man, too. Speaker 2: Cedric said he was really happy that they got him, you know, that they asked him if he would do it. And I'm trying to think. Well, like you said, having Cedric as--we were--Willie would always have--he could have people laughing about different things, you know. And he could tell jokes, not very many, but he could tell some. I'm just trying to think of something decent he would say. Because some of the things Willie would say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think too, from what I remember, he had a critique of the powers that be, too, in his music, which was a little different, sometimes a little different from what most blues musicians were doing--his educational aspect too, Willie Dixon. Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, with his music, he--I was very seldom around him when he did that. He wrote a lot at home, but he went in the studio, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and went practicing. Story_ID: 651917 Speaker 1: In terms of Chess Records, wha- his relationship with Leonard Chess and his brother, was it--I mean did--I know I heard once on public radio [National Public Radio] that if any artist sues a record company without even knowing that they owe them some money, they'd probably get some money, because they do (laughter). You can't be wrong, you know, if you sue a record company. Speaker 2: They really didn't sue the record company. What they were suing was the publishing company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's because they--because Willie learned that the Chess was part owner of that publishing company that he had been sent to, and Willie had read somewhere about a publishing company, and he looked it up. And most artists didn't have that understanding about it, and some of them still doesn't have that understanding about what a publishing company is. And he filed a suit, but he never sued them. He never went to court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, it was never in court. What happened, rather than to put it through court, they decided to come to an agreement with him to release all his music from their publishing, and give Willie, give them back to Willie and let him start his own publishing company. See, publishing companies and sharecropping is the same thing. But I'll explain to you why. How. I have a publishing company and you have a record label, and you bring the artist with their songs, and you and I are partners in the publishing. We're going to take 50 percent of your song money, your income from that song for the publishing company. And if we keep--you put it in my publishing company, it will stay there the lifetime, because the publishing company is what house the music. The Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] only registers the music. So, sharecropping farmland and sharecropping music was the same identical thing. They gave the artists--and most people will not say that. But I don't care, I will say this. They gave the artists a 50/50 chance--a contract, I'm sorry--a 50/50 contract. "We will record you, and here's a 50/50 contract." And that's what artists boasted about, "Oh, I got a 50/50 contract," the same thing with sharecropping and farming someone's land. You gave 50 percent to the farmer, to the owner of that land, and you kept 50. Speaker 1: But isn't the key who's doing the counting, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely, but that's what sharecropping was about, right (laughter). Now, you didn't say you got the money, but that's what--it was the same pattern. And when Willie happened to get lucky enough to see what a publishing company stood for, he said, "Wait a minute. My songs is at Arc Music [Arc Music Group]," but he never knew at that moment that Chess was 25 percent ownership of that publishing company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he started to dig deeper, and then he found out that the Chess brothers, Leonard and Phil [Phil Chess], was 25 percent, twelve and a half percent ownership as brothers with Arc Music, which was Gene Goodman and Harry Goodman; they was in New York [New York]. They started that publishing company because of their brother, Benny Goodman--big band. That was their brother, and that's how they started the publishing company. So, Willie came home and he told me about it, but he wanted to keep it quiet until he could do more research on it. Because had he opened his mouth in 1956 they would have blackballed him, and you would never have heard too many more songs written by Willie Dixon, because they would have stopped the record company from recording him, his music, and they'd definitely made sure that none of the artists would have recorded his music. Um-hm. So, he had to wait. Speaker 1: To try to figure out the best approach to--? Speaker 2: He had to wait until-- Story_ID: 651918 Speaker 1: They realized that we was- we wasn't going to wait. The bottom line, you know. The artists were still here, people are going to still fight for their rights. Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had give us a legacy to go on, and he stayed. Willie [Willie Dixon] said when the time is right--they could buy a lawyer; Willie didn't have any monies. Willie would get a lawyer and they'd tell Willie, "You don't have a case." So, Willie had to make sure that when he went after that publishing company, and with the proper counting of that 50 percent contract, he was going to win. And what they didn't want--because Willie had one of the--they had--Willie's catalog was one of the largest catalogs with Arc Music [Arc Music Group] in the blues field. So, if Willie and Muddy [Muddy Waters]--which the two of them went together to do it--joined forces in suing Arc Music, they knew the news was going to eat it up. So, they said, "Well, you know, why don't we squash this and give you all back your music as it comes up for renewal." Willie was being very--he was getting sicker. He's an older man, he was getting sicker. Muddy had already passed away, but Muddy lived long enough to get his copyright, his songs out of Arc publishing. And then Willie had decided, before Muddy passed away, to start this foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. This is what we are supposed to tell people today, "Don't give me your music. Don't say you don't care about a publishing company." And I hear this a lot from people, "We just want to record. We don't care who publishing when we put it in." (Pause) You know, I've heard publishing companies and record labels say if artists try to come after them, they don't have enough money to sue them, so they would never get the songs out of their publishing company. Speaker 2: So, the same power relationship as you said--as you have as a sharecropper. Speaker 1: Sharecropping, 50/50, you know. Story_ID: 651919 Speaker 1: You know, I talk to Buddy every so often. Willie [Willie Dixon] was the person that produced Buddy's first recording. Speaker 2: Buddy Guy? Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was in the studio when Buddy came in the studio. He was twenty-one years old, and I talked to Buddy. And I'm not still sure what he's doing, whether he has his own publishing now or not, you know. But I try to let him know that if you don't have it--he came from New Orleans [Louisiana] as a sharecropper--and if he still got his music in somebody else's publishing, then he's still sharecropping the music, you know. And most people, they just want to get the music recorded. They don't care who's in charge of it, and whether or not their family, when they pass on, will be able to gain their music back; the heirs may not--. Fortunately, Willie got all that done for me and the kids and the grandchildren and the future grandchildren. Until Willie's catalog runs out, I have my own publishing. The kids and I, we have it. We hire an administrative company which is--they're all over now, but the one I work with is in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and New York [New York]. We, I'm on a three year contract with them. If I don't like what you're doing in three years, I pick up my catalog and I leave; no argument, no lawsuit. And this is what I'm trying to tell everybody that comes by 2120 South Michigan [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. Some people say, "I don't know how to do a publishing company." It's nothing to do. When you write a song and you send it to the copyright office to be registered, you send a name that you want to go in that publishing company. Say your song is 'Blue Jumped the Rabbit and Ran 'em a Country Mile,' that's one of Willie's sayings (laughter). Actually that just came to me. So, you say, "My publishing company is named 'Blue Jumped the Rabbit.' My song is named, 'Let Me Love You Baby.' Words and music, 'Let Me Love You Baby.'" Your publishing is Blue. All that goes with the copyright office. So, now you don't have a label to record on. So you go to Alligator Records, that's a label companies. You go to Alligator--and just off the top of my head I know who they are--and you say, "You know, would you record me on your label?" And he'll say, "Yes." And you say, "Well, I have my own publishing." He'll say, "No." Speaker 2: (Laughter) Because the money is in the publishing company. Speaker 1: And the controlling of that song. And so that's why I use the term sharecropping. And I doubt if most people can disagree with that, if they ever sharecropped. Speaker 2: I think you're right. Story_ID: 651920 Speaker 1: That's part of what I meant too about Mr. Dixon [Willie Dixon] as an educator. I mean he was--I heard him speak somewhere about this. It might have been at the Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois]. You know, one of the people that I saw in the late '70s [1970s] when I came to Chicago [Illinois] a lot was Billy Branch. He was a young man who was mentored by Mr. Dixon, right? Speaker 2: Yes. We taken Billy on at the age of twenty-five. And the first festival Billy ever went to, Willie was the one that headed it up, August 31, 19--'69 [1969] at the old bandshell right here on Michigan Avenue. Speaker 1: The Petrillo bandshell [James C. Petrillo Music Shell], yeah. Speaker 2: Was it called Petrillo at that time? I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: In Grant Park? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was the first one, and then they did the--what is it? Speaker 1: Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 2: Millennium Park, okay. Yeah, Willie did that through the '60s [1960s]. And Mayor Daley, Sr. [Richard J. Daley] and George Dunne's son, Murphy Dunne, that was the first festival of Chicago. Speaker 1: The first blues festival [Chicago Blues Festival]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1969, August 31st [sic. August 30, 1969]. So, and that's the first time Billy ever heard, really heard the blues, really. Because he laughs about it now. He says, "Thank God for Willie coming along." And, because he was going down there at the university, the Chicago university on Halsted [Street]. Speaker 1: The University of Illinois on Halsted, yeah. Speaker 2: Is it on Halsted? Speaker 1: Yeah, the University of Illinois at Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was called the Chicago Circle campus [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle] in those days. Speaker 2: Circle campus, right. Okay, that's where he was going to school at. Speaker 1: At UIC, they call it sometimes. Speaker 2: Right, well, that's where Billy were. And Willie taken Billy under his wing and took him on the road with another harmonica player, until Billy learned Willie's technique and what he wanted done. And then the other harmonica player, Willie let go. Story_ID: 651921 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the idea of--you talked about how people would always say that blues is the music of the devil. Did ha- did that have something to do with Mr. Dixon [Willie Dixon] calling the foundation the Blues Heaven Foundation [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: It may have influenced him to some degree, because this is what he said. He said that he would, he wanted to start a foundation. Well, the foundation was to educate musicians, that's what it was for. Then he wanted something large enough to have an entertainment garden for musicians that wasn't working on the road, you know, like a little park area. And we was blessed that the City of Chicago [Illinois] donated the lot next to, south of the building, and we developed it into an entertaining park. And each Thursday from June of each year we put on shows every Thursday night for one hour, and we hire any musician that's not out on the road to come there and entertain the neighborhood. And it's free of charge to the neighborhood, and we just pay, we just pay the musicians to come and perform one hour of the blues show. Speaker 1: Now, who's been there so far? I mean, since the beginning? Now, who are some of the artists that have performed there? Speaker 2: Can you remember? But back in the day before Koko Taylor passed, Zora Young had been there. Michael Coleman, that's just to name a few. Billy Branch has been there. We really don't care who, who is the artist, but we try to give artists a break to come there to perform. We've had Chuck Berry there, but on the inside. He didn't perform outside, because I think it rained that day. Rain or shine, on that Thursday we would either have the show on the inside of the building or out there in the lot entertaining, which is Blues Heaven. And people just love it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They love it. They come there--I mean we got people ninety years old that you would not believe. They come there and they just really enjoy that one hour show. The artists are very appreciative to this, because in paying them, I think they make more money from us in one hour than they do for a ninety minute show in a club. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is what Willie wanted. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Blues Heaven Foundation, Willie Dixon founded this in 1982, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he wanted to, as you said, educate the artists out there on their rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About the business. Speaker 1: --and about the business. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And another program you just cited was the concert series, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 651922 Speaker 1: So you got a concert series; and you do other things too, right? You, what are some of the other activities? Speaker 2: Well, we have a guy that does harmonica workshops there. You can bring a tour of people there, set up a date. We set up a date, they go upstairs and we have harmonica workshop, and he teaches you how to play. When you leave there, you'll be able to play one song on a harmonica. He's great. He's one of the late Muddy Waters' guitar players. He calls himself Dr. Root. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But his original name was Roy Hightower. And so-- Speaker 1: Now, Roy Hightower played Muddy Waters in [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor's play. Speaker 2: That's the same man I'm talking about. Speaker 1: 'The Muddy Waters Story.' Speaker 2: Absolutely. And that's who I'm talking about. He usually opens the garden show every year for us, just a day before the Chicago Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival]. And we've had Bo Diddley there, the late Bo Diddley. So, we've had many names that--we got as many people as we could get. And we're open to any artist that would like to come down and perform or come over to perform at 2120 South Michigan Avenue [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you have a scholarship that you-- Speaker 2: We does. We're doing two. Last year, my daughter taken ill and I was out of the state for about eight months on the West Coast with my daughter. So, we're going to be doing scholarships, either the end of this month, or no later than the first of next month. Because we've already contacted--I didn't give the scholarship out last year. So, we give out two. One's going to be in the name of Willie Dixon, and one has always been Muddy Waters. And we're going to be giving out 2012 and 2013 scholarships. Speaker 1: Okay. And the scholarships are awarded (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand dollars. Speaker 1: Two thousand dollars, okay? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they're awarded at the blues festival, right? Speaker 2: Basically, they are. But then things got such a--politician things. You know, I do it at the building, and just have the students bring their families and friends if they want to see me present the scholarship to them, the check to them for the scholarship. Speaker 1: So, initially it was at the blues festival? Speaker 2: Yes, it were. During--you know, they would rush me to do it, and I just felt that it needed to have a little more time. You know, sometimes they ready to take that student off the stage before they can say, "Thank you." So I said, "You know, life is too short for that." So I stopped doing it at the Millennium [Millennium Park, Chicago, Illinois], the Petrillo bandshell [James C. Petrillo Music Shell]. They didn't stop me, I stopped myself. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Because Willie always said to me, "Blues don't get the opportunity it needs to project itself. They quit playing, and they gone." They just didn't--I just felt like they didn't have the respect for what I was trying to offer these students. Plus, I expanded it farther than where Willie had it. Willie had the scholarship only in Chicago [Illinois]. But I said, "No, you know, I'm going to do it Illinois. Now, I won't go out of the state of Illinois, but Illinois, you can come from any part." I've given a scholarship away to a sixty-two year old woman that went to Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. She went back as a writer. Speaker 1: Okay. So there's no age limit on it. Speaker 2: No, it's not. Speaker 1: Is it for anybody in the arts as long as they're dealing with the blues (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can be in the arts, and sometimes we give it to people that apply for it because of their financial status, you know. If there's a mother who has two children and she went back to school and she needs assistance to stay in school, we've did it that way as well. We prefer you be a journalist, in TV, film, or whatever, or in the art field. But if you're not, and you just went back to school--music or something--we try to help the person with that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a committee that kind of decides who gets-- Speaker 2: Yes, I don't make the decision. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just usually present it. Speaker 1: How many people participate on the committee? Speaker 2: If they get above--they've got some--and look at the Internet, there'd be more. But it's pretty good, pretty consistent, and it's not that, it's not real low. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I got, excuse me, but I have--Dominican University [River Forest, Illinois] now is also running it for us from that point. Story_ID: 651923 Speaker 1: You also provide--or, or one of the fe- features is healthcare for blues musicians, too, right? Speaker 2: We assist blues musician. And I'm not totally sure if it's just strictly for blues musicians. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But say, a musician is down, they can come to us as well as go to Memphis Blues Society [Memphis, Tennessee] for assistance. And we do assist in that field as well. X amount of dollars for medical, and we pay direct to the pharmaceutical. We do not pay to the artists, we give it direct. We also assist artists if they're, if they don't have any have any real income, with a month's rent if they gets behind and can't pay their rent. We also assist them in utility bills. We also assist families in burials. That, we've done numerous times with different ones that have passed away. We go directly to the funeral home and pay. Not that I'm not saying nobody's dishonest, but it's just the fact that this was taken care of for the family, because your family member was a musician. So, and if an artist calls us and says that, "You know, I can't get my medicine, I don't have enough money." What is it? Medicare won't pay for it, we will contact the pharmacy that does your prescription and we will give them X amount of dollars to fill that prescription for that artist. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: We also contact the landlord, say we--we may pay up to two months' rent, I'm not totally sure. I know we do pay--we'll put you up. If you're homeless--is it two months? We pays for two months. And if you're homeless, we'll put you in a hotel. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the full mission involves (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It won't be the Hilton, but we'll put you in one (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651924 Speaker 1: There have to be at least, I'm thinking over a hundred blues musicians who have records in Chicago [Illinois]. I mean I'm just, I'm just thinking. You probably--I don't know if you have--if you know a more accurate figure. But Chicago has got to be the hometown of most of the active blues musicians in the country. Speaker 2: Yes, it is, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It is. As my husband said, and I say the same thing, the capital of the blues. Because this is where lots of your southern mens came to, and womens, and got their starts. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Here in Chicago. Small scale, some of them are, but they're in Chicago and they got their--got more recognition. And then I don't know if you know, but my husband and the late Memphis Slim started the Chicago American Folk Festival in Europe [American Folk Blues Festival]. And they did that December 31, 1969. They went over and I think Slim knew someone in Paris [France] there, but Willie knew nothing. He went there blind, and he's over there and he didn't know where he was going and what he was going there--he knew what he was going there for, because he had spoken to me and said that he was not getting the recognition that he felt he deserved here in the United States. And he said to me, "I'm going to take my music across the pond and see." That's what he called going overseas. He said, "I'm going to go overseas and see if I can get more recognition than I'm getting here in the United States." Speaker 1: Now, this is one of the--this raises the question of--this is one of the most interesting dynamics in the history of black music, the blues in particular. When the British invasion occurred in 1963, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], British musicians started coming over here with The Beatles and the Rolling Stones and all that. Their bi- bios say that that were listening to Lightnin' Hopkins and Son House and all them blues musicians over here to get some of their licks and songs, and that sort of thing. So, I mean, and blues music in Britain and the rest of Europe is--was really popular to the point where they knew the names of the musicians, I mean, the side men and everybody on the record, you know. So, I mean so what Willie Dixon is confronting is a situation where this indigenous black music is more popular with white people than it is with black people in a certain way. Speaker 2: More--yeah. Yes, because in the United States, the clubs closed down and went out of business for black clubs. They couldn't get airplay, and so musicians here in the United States just wasn't, no one was hearing them. You know, they just wasn't working, and the clubs was closing down. Like, the club that Muddy [Muddy Waters] got famous from down on 35th [Street] and Giles [Avenue], that club--Smitty's Corner [Chicago, Illinois] was the name of it; that went out of business. The 708 Club [Chicago, Illinois] went out of business. The Zanzibar [Club Zanzibar, Chicago, Illinois] went out of business. The one on Lake Street, Silvio club [Silvio's, Chicago, Illinois]. There was no club for musician to work, and especially here in Chicago. All those clubs just went flat. Story_ID: 651925 Speaker 1: All right. So th- this whole dichotomy of, you know, the blues being more popular in Europe and amongst--and gradually it grew to become more popular amongst white people in the United States, you know, than black people; or maybe a standoff, I don't know. But most of the blues clubs in Chicago [Illinois] are on the North Side, at least half the patrons are white, if not more, right? Speaker 2: I don't think there's any blues clubs on the South Side of Chicago. If it is, there's one on-- Speaker 1: There's one on-- Speaker 2: There's one on 87th Street, east on 87th Street. And-- Speaker 1: I know the Unleaded Blues [Lee's Unleaded Blues] on South Chicago [Avenue] at 73rd [sic. 74th Street], I think they were doing blues. That's the only one I knew. But there's one on 87th Street too, you say? Speaker 2: Near Stony [Stony Island Avenue], it's one over there. Because that's where Billy Branch worked for many years, but he's not working there now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He worked over there I think on Monday night. And then you're right, the clubs went to the North Side over on Halsted [Street], on Lincoln [Avenue], over on Belmont [Avenue], and they weren't hiring a lot of musicians. Because a lot of your white kids are also playing blues. So, the black musicians still had nowhere to go. But I do know Willie [Willie Dixon] and Slim started--Slim never returned back to the United States; Willie did. Speaker 1: Okay, so Memphis Slim is still-- Speaker 2: Well, he lived there until he passed, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He never came back, not to live in Chicago. And he was to receive--Willie started with a company called Lippmann and Rau over there. It was a concert bureau company, and it was more jazz. And then Willie got familiar with them and told them that they would feed--he could come back to the United States and start sending blues artists over there. And that's how they started going over there, with Lippmann and Rau. Story_ID: 651926 Speaker 1: Now jazz artists in Chicago [Illinois]--I know in Chicago at least--are in a similar situation where they spend a lot of their time in Europe playing, and not so much here. When they are here, they're not on the South Side or-- Speaker 2: No, they're downtown at the Apollo [Apollo Theater Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or wherever. Apollo I think is over on the North Side. What is it, the Apollo? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's-- Speaker 2: It's north, I know that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, you know, there's still a lot of artists still not going overseas. And if they're going over there, they're not making any money. You know, I remember back since Willie [Willie Dixon] passed--Eric Clapton, and he was with the Creams [sic. Cream] at one time? Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: He decided to give back, because he said he learned from the blues. And then this guy from Indiana, he said he cut his teeth on the blues, white boy. What is that boy's name? I have to give you the name later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But see, they listened to the blues, not so much projecting blues during their early life, because they weren't allowed to project it. But they listened to it, and the moment they got the opportunity where they could sing it and play it, that's when they came out with it. I was in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1975, and it was a young white kid there. His parents did not allow him--he was a young man at this point--to listen to blues, because it was black people's music. But his friend's parents didn't mind his friends listening to any type of music. So, he went to his friend's house; he would go over there in the evening time and they would listen to Jimmy Reed. It was no way you would have known if Jimmy Reed wasn't in that room behind a door. That kid had captured everything the late Jimmy Reed had recorded. He even had the brace that you mounted the harmonica on, and the guitar. And I know Jimmy Reed, and I still know his family well, his children. That kid had mastered everything Jimmy Reed had ever done. And his story--this is where I got the story from. He told us he got it from the basement of his friend because his parents said, "You can't listen to black people's music." Speaker 1: Now, I know there's a similar story with a Russian trumpet player that plays like Clifford Brown, who used to tour with Art Blakey. But he played every--he could play every note that Clifford Brown ever played. (Laughter) But with that being said, I mean, was part of the goal of the Blues Heaven Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] to try to bring the blues to youth, to black youth? Speaker 2: To bring blues to awareness, where people have allowed it to die a lot; just die off, black as well. But, not necessarily was Willie just trying to work with the blacks. He just wanted the blues to stay afloat as well as any other music, and have the same recognition. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he would prefer, naturally, that his grandkids or some of his grandchildren and peers to go out and do, project the blues. But it's not just to make the black--because the black childrens now--and I'm sure they're going to let go after a while with it, because it's only going to go so far and it's going to stop. But blues is here to stay. The rap music--you know. And your white childrens today is still trying to play blues, and some of your Spanish kids are. But blacks is definitely geared into rap, you know. And sure, we try to pull them in, but it's going to be difficult to do it. Maybe in my lifetime anyway, I don't know if I'll be able to pull as many in as I would love to see come in and do it. And as I was naming to you the things we do at Blues Heaven, we also do harmonica workshops in schools, in elementary schools, with fifth and sixth grade kids. And again, Roy Hightower is the instructor. And in doing that, he goes, we go to various schools and do that as well, trying to help the children-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --learn more. And most of them, most of the children there say to us, "Oh, my grandmother got that song. My gr- I heard that music at my grandma--," (laughter). Now, they didn't hear it from their mother and father; they hear it from their grandparent. Story_ID: 651927 Speaker 1: I know when I came to Chicago [Illinois] in the '70s [1970s], and you probably heard more of this when you came here. People you would hear--I know the--Sunnyland Slim, they would play in Ro- in Roseland [Chicago, Illinois] on the porch. They'd practice right there on the porch. Everybody would hear it all over the neighborhood. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: And you could go to Maxwell Street and the blues musicians would-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, over in Jew Town? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they used to call it, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Jew Town. It was owned by Jewish--and that's why it was called Jew Town. And they'd sit on the street over there on Maxwell Street and thumb the blues all evening on the weekend. And they had a few clubs over there. I mean most people were afraid to go down there in Jew Town, especially at night. But we had Sunnyland Slim, he also traveled with my husband. He traveled with my husband overseas. Willie [Willie Dixon] went overseas taking Sunnyland over with him. And then he taken my son and Billy Branch and them in the '70s [1970s]. Was it '77 [1977], '78 [1978]? He may have taken the young generation. They had asked Willie to take the young generation, bring the young generation over. And that's when he had taken Billy Branch and my son--his son, one of my husband's sons. I think Jim Tillman, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Jimmy Tillman, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, ex-husband I gue- I don't know Jimmy Tillman. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's, he's her former husband, Jimmy Tillman, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I think he taken Jimmy Tillman, John Watkins, Freddie Dixon--he's my husband's son--my son Butch [Arthur "Butch" Dixon], and Billy Branch over there. Story_ID: 651928 Speaker 1: I know Billy Branch performs with a group called the Sons of the Blues [sic. Sons of Blues]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the name of his band. Speaker 1: Yeah, the SOBs and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: That's Billy (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah and, they're accompanied by a fellow called the Lone Ranger, or used to be. I don't know if he's still alive, but the Lone Ranger would set up the equipment, dressed as the Lone Ranger. Do you have any knowledge of him, or who he, who his identity is? Or-- Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, because I only worked with Billy--and Billy and I are very good friends to this very day, I want to say that. I can call on him anytime, and if he doesn't hear from me, he wants to know how I'm doing. But, I didn't see the Lone Ranger. (Laughter) He, Billy would do things at the foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. And then he used to do the Front Porch, because you know, he taught harmonica on Maxwell Street school. Do you remember that, with Kate Jones [ph.]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I know he did, he did teach harmonica. Speaker 2: Yeah, with Kate Jones. Speaker 1: In the public schools and for Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois], too, I know. In the city, he would do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know he did this over on, I think it was Maxwell School. Because when my husband [Willie Dixon] passed he brought some of his students to the wake, and he had those kids well trained with the harmonica. He has taught some kids well how to play the harmonica. And I'm going to ask him about some of his students. He was great in teaching those kids how to--when they was young kids--how to play harmonica, and I know it was Maxwell school. And one of the teachers over there was Kate Jones-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --worked with him. Story_ID: 651929 Speaker 1: You had a story about Willie Dixon on the, on the funny side. It was about a turkey that-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I don't want to forget about it. Well, can you tell that story for us? Speaker 2: Oh, he say he went to visit his brother and his brother's wife one Thanksgiving, and they asked him if he wanted some dinner. And he said he didn't mind, he'd have a bite to eat. So they said, "Well, just go on in the kitchen and help yourself. The food is all on the stove ready to be ate. Just help yourself to the dinner." So, Willie went in and he said it was about a eight pound turkey, and it was about six when it shrinked, after you cooked it. And he started to eat the turkey and the trimmings and all that, and the turkey got better and better as he ate it. And when he looked around, he had ate the entire turkey up (laughter). So, when his brother--they went back--he went back in the room with his brother and his brother's wife. And then finally his brother said, "W.J." That's what they called him for short because his name was Willie James. They said, "W.J., I think Billy [ph.] and I," which was his wife, "will have a bite to eat." And Willie looked at him--Willie said he looked at him and said, "Did you have two turkeys?" (Laughter) And he said, "No." He said, "Well, if that's the only one you had, I ate that one up," (laughter). So, we laughed. I mean Willie would always just, he would just crack up when he would tell this story. Because he said he thought that they had more than one turkey, once it shrinked, bigger than that for someone to eat. So, he said he taken his brother and his wife out to dinner because he had ate all that turkey up-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for Thanksgiving. And they always laugh about it, because they say, "Granddaddy ate a whole turkey." I said, "But it was a eight pound turkey shranken to a six pounds when you get all the water out of it, and all that stuff." And Willie could eat eight pounds of meat. Speaker 1: So, was he trying to minimize the crime by (laughter) the size of the turkey (simultaneous). Story_ID: 651930 Speaker 1: Mr. Dixon [Willie Dixon], thi- the Blues Heaven Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] was his idea, and he came up with it. But really he, he passed away shortly after he came up with the idea of founding it, right; it wasn't (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, he lived--he started it in '82 [1982] and he passed away in '92 [1992]. So, he lived about ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But never--you know, we took it to California. And he had a manager that never really wanted Willie to explore the music. You know, he thought he could just be Willie's whatever. He really--Willie had his manager working with him, but he really wasn't doing a lot with it. And even after Willie passed, we ran the foundation somewhat out of my garage out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and in '93 [1993]--I knew Willie always went after 2120 [2120 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] from, not from Chess [Chess Records], but from Gerald Sims, which they had sold the building to him. And Willie and Gerald could never come to an agreement on the building. So, when Willie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were trying to acquire it for a headquarters for the foundation, right? Speaker 2: Right, because he thought that he had enough hit songs that came out of, off of the Chess label, that it would be no more than fitting to do the Muddy Waters Scholarship for where Muddy [Muddy Waters] got known, from the Chess family. No more than fitting, than to do the right thing by giving honor back to Chess to whatever degree that he felt that he should for the label, and for the recording that they allowed his music to be--the label that his music was recorded on. So, he wanted to go back to that. And in '93 [1993], or before '93 [1993]--in '92 [1992], he had asked if I--he was in the hospital--if I would try and continue the foundation, me and the children. And I told him I'd do the best I could with it. So, in '93 [1993], I came to Chicago [Illinois] in the dead winter months. And I thought I was losing my mind, but I came anyway. Because I had been out there long enough that I didn't want to hit this snow and ice here. (Laughter) But anyway, I came on. And while I was here, Phil Chess, Leonard Chess' brother, used to call me at different times just to say hello. And he had called my house and the kids told me. They called me in the hotel and said that he was calling, he wanted to know where were I? And I said, "Just give him my hotel number." So he called me and said that the building was available for sale, you know, the building was available for taxes. The bottom line is there was no sale on the building. The taxes had taken over. And out of guilt he felt that he should have offered it to Willie when he had the building, Phil Chess. Because those were the words he said to me. But he said, "Go after it." He said, "Because the taxes have it." In other words, the city had the building. And I went to take a look, and it was almost like you have to be out of your mind to even look at this building and think this is what you want to do with it. But I did attack it. So, we got it to where it is at today. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you got it in a tax auction sale? Speaker 2: No, Gerald had about, give or take, about ten days before they would auction it off. Speaker 1: So, you just dealt with him directly? Speaker 2: I dealt with Gerald. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I could have been mean spirited and hang around here in Chicago until it was time, and just got it from the auction. But I'm that kind of person. So, I called Gerald and we got together and we went to this lawyer's office and closed the deal up. I paid the taxes and I gave Gerald what he asked for, which was nothing really. I mean you know, he asked for a small--but he knew that he was going to lose it ten days later. And that's one thing my mother [Amelia Wilson Booker] always told me and my sisters and brothers--both of my parent, "If you can help someone, please do." And that's exactly what I did with Gerald, but I didn't have to give him anything. Story_ID: 651931 Speaker 1: The building and the programs of the foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], now those have been largely things that you've developed, right? Speaker 2: Well, no, these are things that Willie [Willie Dixon] in his, in his--what am I trying to say? In his law- bylaws and things, this is what he really wanted. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we just carried on what he really wanted. We have not changed out anything except Chicago [Illinois], for just the schools, okay, you know, for the scholarship. And these are the things that Willie had. These are his criteria that he wanted done for the blues community and for the people that was interested in the blues. Speaker 1: And now is this a fulltime endeavor? Do you work at this full time? Speaker 2: Not really, because after I came down with diabetes, no. You know, because it's difficult for me to get up and do things. And talking about blood sugar, sometimes it's all whacked out somewhere. But I'm as much involved as I can, and always available on the telephone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You can always get me on the phone. And if I need to meet with someone, I do my utmost best to get with them. I never stand anyone up. Speaker 1: And most of the day to day functions are handled by Mr. Nelson [Dixon's grandson, Keith Nelson] here? Speaker 2: Yes, the touring part of it. But if it's a business deal then he'll call me, and then I do it over the telephone. Story_ID: 651932 Speaker 1: What do you--when you look back at the development of this, and the--what do you--do you think that there's a--more of an appreciation for the blues since the foundation's [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] been active? Speaker 2: Well, if it's not more, but I think it's a great deal appreciated. You know, it's appreciated. It shows a lot of interest, that people really appreciate the blues now, yeah. Now, I don't know if it enhanced it or that it was already there and just didn't have any way of showing the appreciation. Speaker 1: Okay. So it kind of was able to kind of channel that appreciation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in some ways that it hadn't been before. Speaker 2: Because we get a lot of requests. And we're getting people now that wish to help us go forward in restoring the building to a studio again. And I got three people out right now, and I don't know how to choose one from the other one. I mean, these are not small companies that's coming after us saying, "You know what? We need to put a recording studio in there so we can get back to recording in Chicago [Illinois]." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the building is like a, it's a storefront that used to house Chess Records. It's been rehabbed. I know its beautiful wrought iron work out front of it. And-- Speaker 2: Well, we put that there. That's the part that was donated. That lot was donated to us. That wasn't--that didn't belong to Chess. They only owned the building, 2120 [2120 South Michigan Avenue]. And so we put the fence, and we built the stage there. Speaker 1: Okay. And you hold your harmonica classes there, right? Speaker 2: On the inside. Speaker 1: On the inside. And you've got a gift shop? Speaker 2: Yes, on the inside. Speaker 1: Is there plans for a museum or something, or kind of an exhibit? Or do you have an exhibit? Speaker 2: We have exhibits--different. Bernard [ph.], tell them what all you have. Speaker 1: We can't hear him over there, that's one thing. He doesn't have a mic. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --if you could tell us something about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, we have different me- mem- why's my tongue stuck--memorabilias of peoples. We have pictures of various artists. We have a case of Koko Taylor's achievements, lots of her awards. We have Willie's Grammys [Grammy Award] there that people come to see. Koko Taylor's awards, I think I have her Grammy as well. We have a Chuck Berry case. We have Bo Diddley's memorabilia there. We have something that belongs to Buddy Guy there. We have signed guitars that people just go crazy about, that the Rolling Stones did for us. We have signatures of various one. And the people are just blown away. The tourists, the tourist people come there and they just want to see the floor where Muddy Waters recorded, where Willie Dixon stood, where Howlin' Wolf were, you know. But, and then we have a gift shop, and that just to make sure that we have--you know, we get some donations. We don't get the donations we really need in the building, but I vowed and promised my husband that over and above what it doesn't take for me to live, I'll run the foundation in his name until my day. Story_ID: 651933 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: I would hope that they can come together and we can recapture the love and the respect that we had fifty-nine years ago, I can go back that far. That--I know that what the black community needs to do is come together. And we need to get out here with our students, these young black kids. They're killing each other too much. It's just too much happening. And I would love to work with any organization that would be willing to bring these kids and let them learn music. I've just donated two years ago a piano, practically brand new. It was one of my neighbors' from out in California. His wife lived here in the city, and I think she passed away. Anyway, he donated this piano. It's almost brand new, an upright piano. He donated it to the foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. We need a piano player in there to teach these kids how to come and play piano. I got a doctor that is willing to teach drums. His daddy also played drums, he was a drummer for my late husband. And Dr. Payne [ph.] is just biting at the bit to come in and set up a drum session to teach these kids. I would hope to get that in there and try to pull these kids in, to come together, versus shooting. At four o'clock in the morning I heard, you know, some eleven year old kid was shot last--this morning at four o'clock in the back, you know. This is what we love to do. And when we go out to the schools, the kids, the fifth graders--it's always elementary school. And when Willie [Willie Dixon] lived we did it in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] as well. We did Locke High School [Alain LeRoy Locke High School; Alain LeRoy Locke College Preparatory Academy] over in Watts, California [Watts, Los Angeles, California]. We did South L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Well, at that time they called it South Central L.A. [South Central, Los Angeles, California], but now they say don't use that word. So, I have to call it South L.A, but. It was, we went to quite a few places. He did it at my kids' school out there in Glendale [California], where my home is out there in Glendale right now. He did a workshop there. But we were just, I would love to continue what he tried to do; and I hope in my lifetime that we'll be able to pull more of these young peoples together. Story_ID: 651934 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could change it? Speaker 2: No, because I think everything we've done up to this point could be and should be beneficial to the community and to the black and to the young generation. I don't think I would change anything. Speaker 1: Now, are you supported at all by the Chicago Office of Fine Arts or the State of Illinois, or the--? How do you get your support? Or do musicians contribute to it? Speaker 2: To the foundation? Speaker 1: The foundation, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, not really. I get support--and I do get support from musicians, but they're not black. They, they donate. They pledge twenty-five thousand dollars for five years, or five thousand dollars a year. My publishing company--I think I forgot, but I haven't. They pledge ten thousand dollars a year. And my--I said publishing--but my administrating company, this is their pledge. I have a rock group that still gives the five thousand dollars each year to it, the Paul Rodgers, Bad Company. They just got back together; I went to his concert. He's getting ready to make a pledge and donate. So, you know, but black musicians, no. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you get support from the city and the state at all, or any major foundations here? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No. And maybe I haven't reached out that far to--which we're going to start doing more, reach out. See, his mother had moved here, and I was still on the West Coast and she was running it. But ten years ago my daughter [Shirli Dixon-Nelson] passed. So, that slowed down lots of my getting things done that she would have done. Because these kids were still in school. And I've only lived in my house out in California seven and a half months in the last ten years, and that was just last year, because my other daughter took very ill. So I had to stay out there with her, because she had cancer. And I had to stay with her to take her to and from, for her treatment. But yeah, I need to reach out. This girl, who was that? Southern--it wasn't Southern Blues Society [Southern California Blues Society, Los Angeles, California]. The one that Bonnie Raitt is involved in. Speaker 1: Bonnie Raitt? Speaker 2: Yeah, Bonnie Raitt, that society [Rhythm and Blues Foundation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They have given donations to Blues Heaven [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] to help, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, naturally, I make my own donations to the program. Like the scholarships, I support that. The workshops, I support that. Speaker 1: This is ongoing work, and seems like there are generations being trained to work-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) Right. Speaker 1: --with--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we hope that Blues Heaven will remain long after I'm gone. Story_ID: 651935 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything I should ask you that I haven't asked you, or that, or something you think that we ought to mention before I ask my last question? Oh, I didn't ask you about your family. Tell us about your--do you have children and? Speaker 2: I had five children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have three deceased. My baby boy was drowned in 1987. And my daughter [Shirli Dixon-Nelson], his mother, had a blood clot and she passed away in 2003. My son [Arthur "Butch" Dixon] was traveling from New York with Twister [Twista], a rock--a rap guy; the fatal accident they had-- Speaker 1: Twister, the rapper from Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Right, Twister. Speaker 1: --that could speak, he could rap real fast? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I remember that. Speaker 2: Right, that particular guy. My son was killed. So I have three deceased children and two living children, and ten grandchildren and possibly two great-grandchildren. I know one great-grandchild by my grandson. And I think one of my other grandsons has a baby, but they haven't claimed it yet. (Laughter) But I think they're waiting on a DNA test coming up. But it's possible we have two great-grandchildren and ten grandchildren. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about now that we need to say before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. But, you know, after I walk out of here I'll say, "Well, I should have told him this." Please forgive me. When you get seventy-five and older and counting, and I'm passed seventy-five. (Laughter) I'll remember when I get out the door. Call me (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651936 Speaker 1: Last question is similar to--in fact it is like legacy, and how would you like--both of those questions I need to ask. What do you see today as your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would love to be remembered in my last days, and after my demise, I'd love to be remembered as trying to keep the facts of life, which is the blues, alive. And, because, nothing wrong with the blues. It's not harmful. It's no different than any other music. It tells a lot of stories. And I want my--I want to be remembered by my grandchildren and the world. Listen to it carefully, and you'll see that what I say is true. You know, you hear as many blues artists singing, and they calls on the Lord, as they do with gospel music. Now, you may have not paid that much attention, but it's true. And I listen to it all the time. The late Bobby Bland, he always sung, (sings) "Lord, have mercy, Lord have mercy on me" ['Stormy Monday Blues']. He was a bluesman. He wasn't a gospel man, okay. (Laughter) And, but I hear a lot in blues that is not harmful. It's only tha-whatever you make it to be. And that can be with jazz; that can be with pop music. But I want the blues to always stay alive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now and even when I'm gone. And I plan to be here another seventy-six years. So, that's a pretty good time. Who was that who lived nine hundred years (laughter)? Speaker 1: I think it was Methuselah. Speaker 2: Methuselah, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: I thank you, and I hope I have been of some help to you. And if not, we can do this anytime. Because this is getting me stirred up, and I can talk a long time. Speaker 1: 'Cause you all are just a block away, right? Speaker 2: Far as the foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] is concerned. No, I live out in old Olympia Fields [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm just thirty minutes from down here but, you know, once you get on 57 [Interstate 57]..