 Story_ID: 663615 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, will you, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Sidmel, S-I-D-M-E-L, Karen, K-A-R-E-N, Estes, E-S-T-E-S [HistoryMaker Sidmel Estes]. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your first name? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. There's a combination of my mother's and my father's name. My father was named Sidney [Sidney Estes], and we called him Sid. And my mother had an old fashioned black name, Emellen [Emellen Mitchell Estes]. You don't even hear that anymore. But they would call her Mel. And it's in the Bible, Emellen is in the Bible. And so, they, I was their first born. They got strange, and they put together Sidmel (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-seven, fifty-four [November 27, 1954]. And I was born for a hot minute in Marysville, California. Because my father was in the [U.S.] Army and about to get discharged, okay, I decided to show up a little bit early. So, as soon as I was born, everything was cool with him. We drove to Atlanta [Georgia]. And I really do consider myself a native Atlantan, because I have been here all my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except when I was working and in school [at the Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: All right. Now, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, right now, I am CEO and founder of BreakThrough Incorporated media [BreakThrough Inc.]. I'm a media consultant. I tell people all the time there's a big difference between me and a public relations person or a publicist, because I'm a journalist down to the core, and will die a journalist down to the core. So, when I do my media consulting, I do it as a journalist. And some of my clients don't like that, because they like everything pretty. And I say sometimes things aren't pretty. So, I've, I've been doing that now for seven years. Prior to that, for twenty-seven years, I worked at WAGA-TV [Atlanta, Georgia], which used to be the CBS affiliate here. It was bought by FOX about ten years ago, and became a FOX affiliate. And I worked my way up from the assignment desk which was my very first job, to a writer, to an associate producer. I've produced every newscast that this station has ever had, and then created the morning show, 'Good Day Atlanta' which became the number one morning show in this demographic. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 15th, no 17th, Presidents' Day. Speaker 1: This is February the? Speaker 2: Seven- February 17, 2014, Presidents' Day. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are at the present time? And you don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: In Fayetteville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 663616 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? I would guess that my favorite food would be honey baked ham. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I only eat that like once or twice a year, because I'm generally a chicken lady. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, that's what I stick with a lot, is chicken and fish. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. My high school colors were purple and white, Northwestern's [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] colors were purple and white. My room is purple. The whole--purple is my color here. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring, and I, because I--especially this spring, I'm looking forward to--because it's the rebirth of the earth that has been asleep during the wintertime. So, spring is my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't do a lot of vacations, especially now as an entrepreneur, because of the fact that it--you know, it's a 24/7 deal now. I have to deal with me. But if I had a choice, I like New Orleans [Louisiana], I like Miami [Florida]. But, and sometimes on the coast of South Carolina where, near Beaufort, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Everybody needs a breakthrough. That's the motto of my company [BreakThrough Inc.]. And it is self-serving in many ways, but everybody needs a breakthrough. Story_ID: 663617 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Sidney Estes] side, but separately, then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, first of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Emellen, E-M-E-L-L-E-N, Aquilla, which is also in the Bible, A-Q-U-I-L-L-A, Mitchell Estes [Emellen Mitchell Estes]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 18, 1921 in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Now, what can what you tell us about your mother's side of the family, the Mitchell side? How--how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: I can trace only, unfortunately, just to my grandparents. My mother's mother [Luella Mitchell] died when she was four. So, I never knew her. My grandfather was Dean Edward Caesar Mitchell [Edward Mitchell]. He was dean of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] for over twenty years, and was even an acting president of Morris Brown. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Dean Morris Cecil-- Speaker 2: No, it was Edward Caesar-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Mitchell. Speaker 1: Edward Caesar, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I got behind here, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dean Mitchell. And he would teach courses like Latin, German, as well as religion. And this is in an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], which is unheard of nowadays. But he was dean at Morris Brown when Morris Brown was in its heyday. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that, those would be courses that are appropriate for a seminary, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then she had three older brothers, all of which made their transition long before her. So, I never did know them either. Speaker 1: Were they educators as well? Speaker 2: No. One was a postal worker, another one was a coach, and I'm not sure what the youngest one ever did, because they all died prior to me being born. Story_ID: 663618 Speaker 1: I remember a story people would tell about my grandfather [Edward Mitchell], because he was always such a proper gentleman. He always dressed immaculately. And my godparents told the story about how it was icy one time on campus. And my granddaddy hit a patch of ice and fell. And while most of us would like be cussing or have said, (makes sound), he said, "Oh, I lost my footing." (Laughter) And people are like, "What?" But that's the way he was. He was always, he never lost his composure. He was always the proper, consummate gentleman. My, his, my uncle, who again I did not know, I do have some of his awards where he was an all-star football player from Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], Joseph Mitchell. And I hear that he was quite a ladies' man because of him being a highly--celebrity athlete while in school. So, my mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes] was always called the teacher's teacher, because she opened up a--M. Agnes Jones Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia]. She was the first principal for M. Agnes Jones Elementary School here. She had been a principal of several other schools before that. Speaker 2: Now, I'm just gonna--I want to stop you before you get too far into that, and just ask you do you know where your grandfather went to school himself, where he got his Ph.D. and where he--? Speaker 1: The Ph.D. was from Candler. Speaker 2: Candler, okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Candler School of Theology here in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And, right. And in fact, it was almost ordained. I did not know this until later. But he also studied religion at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I didn't even know that he had gone to Northwe- he was one of the few blacks who ever studied religion up at Northwestern. I don't know where he got his undergraduate from, unfortunately. Speaker 2: Was he born and raised in Atlanta here? Speaker 1: Mostly in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Birmingham, okay. Speaker 1: Right. And he moved--came here when he went to school. Speaker 2: Oh that's right, you said he was born in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 663619 Speaker 1: In terms of your mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --your mother, did she have any stories about growing up in--did she grow up in Birmingham [Alabama] or Atlanta [Georgia]? She grew up in Atlanta (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so she, like I said, she was, we bought--I remember them, my father [Sidney Estes] and mother buying a house, what was then considered the woods in Atlanta. It was nothing but a suburb on the Westside of Atlanta. But that was a burgeoning middle class group of teachers, doctors, lawyers, funeral directors, who all had very, very similar taste in terms of what they wanted for their homes. And one reason why a lot of the homes in our--in Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] have full finished basements, is because I was told we could not go to the hotels downtown for entertainment. So, all of this community would entertain in--in the basement of their houses. And in fact, one that I just referred to was [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell's house, who was probably one of the wealthiest men in Atlanta, who has a sixth grade education. But he was also the first person I ever knew that had an indoor swimming pool built in his house. And he, to this day, he and his family are still very well off in construction. But he was part of that group. So, it was sort of a coalescing of folks who says we're going to support each other as a community. And that's what I remember very distinctly about--my house, where my parents built, was built by a black architect-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and designed by a black architect. And that kind of stuff hadn't gone on before. Story_ID: 663620 Speaker 1: I was trying to get your mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes] to adolescence, where she's in school, where she finally meets your father [Sidney Estes] at some point. Then we can carry on from there. But--so she, where did she go to school? Speaker 2: She was Miss Morris Brown (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1942, I want to say. In 1942, she was Miss Morris Brown. I, she went to English Avenue Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], and I believe Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School], here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so she, she went to school for education? She wanted to be a teacher? Speaker 2: Yes. And she ended up getting her master's from what was then Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, she was, was she at Atlanta U when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was there? Speaker 2: No, it was probably right after that, right after that. But, you know, if you wanted to be an educator, you went to Atlanta University. That was the place to go. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in '21 [1921], so she was there just ahead of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about Atlanta U in those days? Speaker 2: No, not really. She didn't talk about a lot. You know, and like I said, the only picture I have of her right now was when she was some--I don't have, don't know where it is now--on a podium when she was Miss Morris Brown. But-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She didn't talk a lot about her AUC experience [at the Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: All of those campuses are right together. And I mentioned Dr. King, but he was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, there were others at Atlanta U and--so, we're going to pause right here again to check on this. Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's just go to the end of this clip and then we'll proceed just normally. Go ahead, Larry [Larry Crowe]. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, so your mother was at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She got her master's from-- Speaker 2: Atlanta University. Speaker 1: --Atlanta University in education? Speaker 2: Right, in education, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, had she met your father by this point, at this time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: So, this is before the w- is this--okay, so this would be, let's see. She would have gotten her master's degree, what, in the mid-'40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Mid-'40s [1940s]. I would say she probably met my father, they weren't like me, had to wait forever to have (laughter). I would say '50 [1950], early--you know, '51 [1951], '52 [1952], you know, 'cause I was born (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: -- in '54 [1954]. Story_ID: 663621 Speaker 1: We're just going to freeze her right there at this point, and we're going to--did, did, now she, did she have any stories herself about growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] that she talked about, or any things that she witnessed as a youth that she shared with you that would make a good story? Speaker 2: Well, we had--there's a story that I have never forgotten. Because, unfortunately, even though--like I told you, Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] was this big community of middle class upwardly mobile people-- Speaker 1: Can you spell that, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Collier Heights, C-O-L-L-I-E-R. Speaker 1: Oh, Collier, okay. Speaker 2: Right--Heights. Speaker 1: I don't know why I want to make it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's an area, this black area of town, and it's now very gentrified because the young people like me didn't go back there. But Collier Heights was, like I said, an up and coming area. But we had, didn't have a decent grocery store or a decent drugstore. So, I remember there was one grocery store located on Bankhead Highway that was owned by white folks. And that, we could--that was the only place you could go that was close, to shop. So, I was with my mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes], and maybe I was six years old. And I told her I had to use the restroom. So, she showed me the sign that says restroom. I could read, and all that, and says you just go back, it's in the back of the store, of course. You know, go in there and use the restroom. Well, I went in there, and they had two doors, colored and white. Well, I went, I looked at myself. I had on a colored dress, you know (laughter) because that's all I knew about color at that point, you know. And I had on a colored dress, and I said, "Oh, I'll go into this one." So, I went in there, and it was filthy, filthy. I said, "Oh no," even as a six, seven year old girl. So, I went into the white bathroom and, you know, came out. And standing was this big, burly white dude, covered--a butcher. So, he had on this white apron covered with blood, and all that other stuff. And he grabbed me by the back of my collar. He said, "Come here, girl. Your parents here?" I said, "Yes, my mama's out shopping." He says, "Come on." So, he literally kind of dragged me out to the aisle and said, "This girl, you know, went and, and used the white restroom. You know she's not supposed to use the white restroom." My mother didn't say a word. She just left her grocery cart full of groceries right there in the middle of the hall, of the aisle, and said, "Let's go, baby." And we drove home, and she didn't say one word to me. And that was my experience, my first experience with hard core racism. And she never shopped in that grocery store again. But I remember that from a small child. And I'm not a hundred years old, so this was just yesterday when this kind of activity was going on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. This had to be in the '60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s], you know, it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, '60 [1960], '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about growing up, now. We--I don't want to jump too far away, but. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, right. Speaker 1: But I want to freeze your mother there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and go to your father's [Sidney Estes] side. Story_ID: 663622 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. It was Sidney Harrison, H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N, Estes [Sidney Estes]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 18, 1932. He was younger than my mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes]. Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is by nine years. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, nine or ten years. And, but I told folks, I said my mother had the ultimate payback to him, because they eventually divorced when I was fifteen. She died on his birthday (laughter). And so, it was like she was one month away from turning sixty. And it was almost like he would never have a good birthday again because of the fact that she died on his birthday. And he was there in the hospital with me and my brother [Edward Estes] and the assistant principal when she finally made her transition. You know, but I stood up and said, talked to her, and said, "Mama, you know that wasn't right," (laughter). But that was her big payback (laughter). Speaker 1: Gee whiz. Now, how long had they been divorced when that happened? Speaker 2: She died in '81 [1981]. And okay, I was fifteen then, in 1969. So, I would say probably twelve years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I was fifteen--well, yeah, we were fifteen, I was fifteen when they finally divorced. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's an interesting story. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you think she did it deliberately (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh, I know (laughter). Speaker 1: But, so, okay. Now, your dad. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now tell me, where is, where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born here in Atlanta [Georgia] in his house. He was with a midwife, with my grandmamma. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about his side? How far back can you trace his side of the family? Speaker 2: Again, it's my grandparents, my grandfather, who was William Harrison Estes [William Estes], who was a Pullman porter. So, he was not in the city a lot. He was on trains, serving on trains. And my grandmother was a stay at home mom in her day. And even though my daddy was her only child, he had her stay at home. And so, she did stuff around the church and around the community, but basically did not work. Speaker 1: Well, what was her name? Speaker 2: Fannie-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Estes, Fannie Webster Estes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was half white, because she was the product of a white sharecropper raping her mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she kept the baby, you know, but she was half white. Speaker 1: Did they talk about what happened? I mean what, is there a story attached to it, or it was just kind of like? Speaker 2: I--as a, just a child, I would sit there and I would hear things--you know he would--she would talk about, with my father, and all that. But her mother did not live very long, either. So, I never met my grandmother's mother. But I do remember my father eventually telling me, by the time I was a teenager about my, my grandmother's background, because she was from Gaffney, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, all kinds of stuff was going on up there in Gaffney during that time, because she lived to be ninety-six. Speaker 1: So, your father was raised in, in Atlanta in the--in, was he raised in the traditional black community in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was over on Parsons Street near the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and that's where my grandmother lived until she couldn't live there by herself anymore. But she was there for over fifty years on Parsons Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, wh- what did your--I know your father eventually went into the [U.S.] Army. But what was he thinking about as a career when he was growing up? Did he-- Speaker 2: The same thing, education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, both--and he got his master's in education from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and then got his Ph.D. It took him seven years to do it, but finally got a Ph.D. from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, had, did he come from a family that, where others had Ph.D.'s? Speaker 2: No, he was the only child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think my grandmother ever went to school. Speaker 1: Okay, so then, you know, he's first generation. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was first generation. Speaker 1: And your mother was second generation-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I guess. Story_ID: 663623 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Emellen Mitchell Estes and Sidney Estes] met? Speaker 2: Not that they ever said to me. I--I was told just through some friends that it was one of those--go to a little cocktail party and I'm going to introduce the two of you all. And they got together at that point. But they never, they never discussed that with me. Speaker 1: Okay. But they did, they met around 1950, you said, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, they got married. Are, are you the o- the first born? Speaker 2: I was the first born, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you were born in '54 [1954], right? Speaker 2: Right. And I have a brother who is two years younger [Edward Estes]. He lives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] now. Then after my parents divorced when I was fifteen, he married my stepmother [Barbara Estes], who's still alive, and she's a teacher, too. And both of her--and she--so, I have a stepbrother [Christopher Estes] and sister [Cheryl Estes Hollis]. And my stepbrother is a principal (laughter). So, I mean it's all in my DNA, my father's teaching and stuff. But I was like Miss Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. I said, "Oh, no, you, you teachers don't make enough money. You know, I am going to go into television." And so, that's what I did. But I kind of like broke the mold. But before that, those two generations--teachers, teachers, teachers. That's all, and teaching administrators, school administrators. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 663624 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, their dispositions, how they walked, how they talked, you know, what they were interested in, what their talents were--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Everybody has told me, "You Sidney's child." Because one thing--and I have calmed down in my veteran stages here. But my daddy [Sidney Estes] used to cuss a lot, even in board meetings. And he would tell the truth. And I picked that up from him. And so, in the newsrooms that I was in, you know, cussing used to be just part of our vernacular. Every other word was a cuss word, you know. But now everything is so (air quotes) politically correct that that doesn't happen too much anymore. But everybody tells me I'm Sidney's child. Story_ID: 663625 Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings. How, how, how many do you have, and can, can you list them in the order that--you're first, right? And then-- Speaker 2: I'm first, then my brother Edward who is named after my [maternal] grandfather [Edward Mitchell]. He's Edward Mitchell Estes [Edward Estes]. He is fifty-six or seven. Then the next one is Cheryl Estes [Cheryl Estes Hollis]. Cheryl just turned forty-one. And Christopher Estes, and he is thirty-nine, about to turn forty. Story_ID: 663626 Speaker 1: Now, what did your, your brothers and sisters do, end up doing? I--I don't think you told us what ev- what everybody did. Speaker 2: My oldest brother [Edward Estes] is a city planner in--for Washington, D.C. So, he did break the mold. He went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and got his degree there. My youngest, my stepbrother [Christopher Estes], is a principal in an elementary school now. And my sister [Cheryl Estes Hollis] used to work for the county government [of Fulton County, Georgia], but she now is an entrepreneur and has her own--she rents out chairs. And they, they make a lot of money, you know, with these different kind of chairs that you see at all the receptions. So she's, she's trying to build up her own business [Sweet Seats, Atlanta, Georgia] now. Story_ID: 663627 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory--the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: (Pause) I would think it was--I would take, my mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes] would send food to a lady that she would call Cousin Hattie [ph.]. Now, I don't think she was a cousin, but she lived up the street from the school [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. But because my mother somehow had found out that this lady does not get anything hot to eat generally, on most days, she would send me up to this lady's house on Fair Street. And I would walk up the street to the school, taking her soup or whatever was fed. And I remember sitting there with Cousin Hattie, and it kind of got me into--I would visit a lot of people that I grew up with, or who mentored me. Unfortunately, the majority of them have passed. But she would keep that house a hundred and fifty degrees, regardless of what it was outside. And I remember just sitting there listening to her stories, and I was about to pass out (laughter). Because it was just that--. And I was probably seven or eight years old at the time. So, that was one of them, in addition to the grocery store incident. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I will never forget. Story_ID: 663628 Speaker 1: You started school at, what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Where I started school? Speaker 1: Yeah, where you started school. Speaker 2: It--Frank L. Stanton Elementary School, which is over Mozley Park [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: So, is that where your parents were living at the time? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were kind of close. We were on the west--again, they were building a house over there on the Westside of Atlanta [Georgia]. And this was sort of more in town. But, so, we started there because my mother's school had not been built. And so, I was there for two years while they were finishing up the school. And then when they opened up M. Agnes Jones Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], mama [Emellen Mitchell Estes] was made the first principal. And she made that school a center of excellence, to the point that there used to be a way that teachers and principals could get their children enrolled in my mother's school. So, regardless of whether they lived in town, they would always want to go to M. Agnes Jones Elementary. Speaker 1: And what's the name of the school again, slowly? It's-- Speaker 2: It's M as in Mary, M period, Agnes Jones (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Agnes Jones, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And she was the first principal, black principal, of kindergarten in the Atlanta public school system [Atlanta Public Schools]. Story_ID: 663629 Speaker 1: Now, you had an incident when y- when you were in, I guess the third grade [at M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], when you were eight? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You took ballet-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with Yoki King [Yolanda King], you were telling us. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There's an historic moment that you experienced here. Tell us what happened. Speaker 2: Well, like I said, Yoki and I were both sort of the little chunky girls in ballet, because they like you to be (gesture) this thin, being a ballerina. But to Atlanta Ballet's credit, they were trying to reach out to the community. So, they would send their top teachers. And I will never forget, a woman named Madame Hildegarde [Hildegarde Bennett Tornow] would always come to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] to teach. And so, we were taking ballet. Like I said, we did 'The Nutcracker' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] every Christmas. But these little skinny girls decided to make fun of me, and they pulled a chair out from up under me. And fortunately, we were practicing in the gym, so it was a wooden floor, not a concrete floor. So, I wasn't seriously hurt, but my feelings were hurt more. So, Yoki and I after class were outside waiting on our ride. And here drives up Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in a, I will never forget it, a black, big black car. And when he--I sat in the back seat, and I was just crying, crying. He said, "Child, what's wrong with you?" And I told him what had happened. And to this day, I will never forget. He said, "Child, if that's the worst thing that's going to ever happen to you, you are a blessed child." And I never forgot that. And I had--my tears went away then, because I just sat there and I would think about it: that wasn't really that bad, especially some of the things that I have faced later on in life. But he was being prophetic to me then, at eight years old, that I was going to go through stuff in life, and I had to get used to it. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. So, what kind of car did he have? Do you remember? Speaker 2: It was a Buick. I remember the big, black Buick. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1962, I guess, right, when you were eight? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like '61 [1961], '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Did he have a new car, or it was an old, older car? Speaker 2: It was sort of used, it wasn't brand new. It wasn't fancy. It wasn't huge. You know, it was a regular old car. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And do you remember the color? I'm just, I'm just thinking-- Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Black, okay. I'm thinking it was black in my head, but I don't-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Yeah, black on black. I will never forget that (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, that's something. So, that's, that is--now he's picking her up himself from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was the only time I ever remember him picking her up. And very rarely did he make our recitals. Because we're now talking, you know, the height of the Civil Rights Movement. So, he was never there. Speaker 1: Yeah, things really got-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '62 [1962], '63 [1963] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) involved. Yeah, '63 [1963], Birmingham [Alabama], '64 [1964] was, you know, leading into Selma [Selma to Montgomery March] and all that. Speaker 2: He was never home, never home. Speaker 1: Yeah, the March on Washington was the next year. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, he was very busy. And, did your parents [Emellen Mitchell Estes and Sidney Estes] know him, I mean, know Dr. King? Speaker 2: They knew him cursorily, they were not close to him. But they trusted him enough to pick up their daughter and get me home. And then we did, you know, vice versa. So, I guess it's a mutual trust society going on there. Story_ID: 663630 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Collier Heights, that's right, you told me. And, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Collier Heights? Speaker 2: Well, all of us in terms--one thing was we were bussed from Collier Heights in 1970. Our parents started not being happy with what was going on. We were getting secondhand books and training, and all of that. So, our parents pooled their money to rent an old rickety church bus--I will never forget this bus--to and it would pick us up in this church parking lot and drive us to Northside High School, which is now North Atlanta High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: This is when you're fourteen, when you start high school, right? Speaker 2: No, thi- this was seventh grade, because we went from elementary to high (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so, you could go to the high school in seventh grade? Speaker 2: In eighth grade, basically. Speaker 1: Eighth grade. So, they had an eighth grade? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no middle school back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so we went straight from elementary to high school. So, and that--and we were pretty much in the same age range. And so, we could go together on this little rickety bus, and we did that for at least a couple of years. And the bus broke down a few times and, you know, our parents had to come get us, and all of that, until finally the courts ordered the Atlanta Public Schools to be desegregated, and that they provide buses for us. So, we started getting a city bus to take--pick us up in that area, and bus us to Northside High School. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they, the black community provided its own busing for Northside High School (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Nobody really blocked our way, but we could tell we were not welcome there. Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers at Northside High School then? Speaker 2: Not that I remember. Speaker 1: So, it was all, a white school with white teachers and-- Speaker 2: Here come the little black children. Speaker 1: So, I mean, why do you think the parents were so aggressive about getting their, their children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the number one high school in Atlanta [Georgia], and they knew that. Because they were, again, teachers, and they were talking among each other. They knew they had the best facilities, the best books and all of that. And they were willing to sacrifice themselves so that we could get the best education possible. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And did things work out? I mean, did the teachers, you know, treat you like st- regular students, or were they--? Speaker 2: Well, it was up and down. I put up--for example, I was on the student government association. I was, I've been aggressive all my life. So, I ran for student government association. And I put up the first black history exhibit in a showcase that they had at the very front of the school, a glass showcase. Well, I--all I did was I borrowed pictures and borrowed books from my mother's school [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] because, of course, she had them in the school. And we just made a little exhibit, just to say this is Black History Week [Black History Month]. It wasn't even month then. And the principal at that time did not like it, but he went along with it, because they knew--he knew that a lot of these parents would come up there and raise hell if he started messing with us. But what he really got upset about is that I brought in an African dancer. And so, she had on traditional garb, which included no bra. You know, so when she was dancing sometimes, you know, her breasts were going up and down, and she was shaking and-- Speaker 1: But she was covered, though, right? Speaker 2: Right, she was, she was totally covered, you know. But it was just that she was in this African garb. And he was so offended by that. He made us take her off the stage, you know. So, it was that kind of thing. But on the other end, I applied to go to be on the high school newspaper [The Northerner] staff in my junior year there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this is--now we've jumped to--so we're in nineteen seventy--? Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], '71 [1971], okay. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 663631 Speaker 1: I applied to the newspaper [The Northerner] staff. I wrote an article, you had to--my English teacher was the head of the newspaper staff. I wrote an article about the Black Panther Party. Because in my work with my mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes] and the community and all of that, I had gotten to know these brothers. And I knew that they were not the shoot the pigs, you know, off to every cop type guys running around with machine guns. They were offering after school programs, they were offering hot breakfasts. And I wrote the story about the other side of the Black Panther Party. Speaker 2: This is the Atlanta [Georgia] chapter? Speaker 1: Right, the Atlanta chapter, because I was very much involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the time. And so, we kind of commingled on a lot of activities. And when I wrote the article, I was literally blackballed that year from the high school newspaper staff. So, I wasn't going to give up. I applied for my senior year. I made the staff, because they had no excuse on why they would not allow me to be on the newspaper staff. I became the first black band president. And I also became, won first flute chair in the school band, beating out white girls who were taking private lessons from the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra's chief flautist [Warren Little]. You know, so they're paying all this money. I couldn't afford a--a tutor or anything like that. But I just played with my heart, and I won first chair and held first chair that entire year over these, these other girls. But I had the journalism bug by then, really badly. Speaker 2: Now, did you, what inspired you? Were you, did you have black anchors on TV in Atlanta by then? Speaker 1: No, no. What inspired me--well, I was really in the sixth grade [at M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I started printing out those little mimeographed school newspapers in the sixth grade. I started writing about what was going on, you know, trying to help my mother, you know, with all her various events. So, my journalism career started back in the sixth grade. But what really made me want to do journalism was because of what you just said. I was looking at the news and seeing nothing but all white, male, primarily. The only white women were generally the weather ladies. And they were reporting on the Civil Rights Movement, and what was going on. And I said, "Wait a minute." Because I had seen the other part of the story in the community, because I was good friends with the Abernathys, good friends with the Kings, good friends with, you know, all these folks who were heavily involved in the Civil Rights Movement. I said, "There's a part of this story nobody's telling." And so, that really inspired me to go ahead and pursue journalism, which is what I did in high school [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Then I said, I'm going to the number one journalism school in the country, arguably, the Medill School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois]. And then I went through there and got my bachelor's [degree] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, we aren't going to get you through there yet. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: We've got to go back. Story_ID: 663632 Speaker 1: Did you read the Atlanta World [Atlanta Daily World]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We used to have the World. 'Cause I was born at Big Bethel A.M.E. Church [Atlanta, Georgia] right there on Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I was running, I was up and down Auburn Avenue all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that--so that was that the family church? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Big Bethel, okay. Speaker 2: That was our family church. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, I would see the World, and pick up the World all the time. So, yes, I read it. Speaker 1: And that was part of the question. I was hoping you'd talk about that when I asked the question about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: The Royal Peacock [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: B.B. Beaman's [B.B. Beaman Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia], Yates and Milton Drugstores [Atlanta, Georgia]. Those are my stomping grounds, because it was a different kind of Atlanta then, where an eight, nine, ten year old girl could just run around and do whatever she wanted to. Speaker 1: Now, these are black businesses-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) pretty much, about 90 percent or maybe more, up and down Auburn Avenue-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --being a, that was the main drag. Speaker 2: That was the mecca. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was the mecca, you know, especially with Big, the rock, as we called it. That's Big Bethel, was right there as the centerpiece. And then right around the corner, you had Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. William Holmes Borders and-- Speaker 2: Borders, the World. You had a photographer--why am I drawing a blank right now? His studio, a long time photographer. Oh, it'll come back to me. But you know, if you were somebody or wanted to do anything, you did it on Auburn Avenue. The Shriners [Shriners International] were there, the Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star]. So, it--it was a mecca at that point. Speaker 1: Right, leading all the way down- to downtown. Speaker 2: Right, right to Five Points [Atlanta, Georgia], right (simultaneous). Story_ID: 663633 Speaker 1: Also, I did not ask you--now, you met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But what was, do you remember the effect on the commu- I mean we can all imagine what it was like, but--we saw some of it on TV--but when Dr. King was assassinated in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: I don't know if I really comprehended what had happened. Because Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.], who was the mayor here, and several other prominent black businessmen, went down to Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia], Vine City [Atlanta, Georgia], and stood up on cars and says, "Let's not burn our city down." And so, that's why we didn't have riots here in Atlanta [Georgia]. You know, because there was this joint group working together to, "Let's just keep the peace." It wasn't until they had the actual burial--because they had the funeral at Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], and then they had a horse drawn carriage. And they had the horse drawn carriage go all the way from Ebenezer to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], since he's a Morehouse man. And they had another celebration of life there. And I was a child, and I walked behind that carriage from Ebenezer all the way to Morehouse. And they didn't have enough chairs, and particularly with children. So were--they had like blankets, or sitting on the grass, you know. But I will never forget that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did, were there theories in the community about what happened? I terms--I mean, above and beyond what was on the news? Speaker 2: No, they, I mean, in terms of whether or not the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was involved. There were conspiracies involved. They knew that they were being watched by the FBI. They knew that there was racist cops that were out to get him. They knew that there was still a Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] out there. So, it was part of their life. It was something they dealt with every day. So, they knew it was going to come sooner or later, that somebody was going to try to shut up Dr. King, and any of our other leaders that were there. Speaker 1: Now, you were twelve, I guess, in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, about twelve years old. You were still in a black school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At that point, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. And my mother's school [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] was on the route to Morehouse, that they used. So, that's why I also felt very safe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's thousands of people lining the street, joining the caravan going to Morehouse. Speaker 1: 'Cause--I would guess, and I don't know--tell me how you feel about this. But I would guess that being in Atlanta at that moment, you know, you would have a sense of being on the world stage, I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We were on our Ps and Qs. And we knew the whole world was watching, and that we were going to give Dr. King the proper burial and respect that he so much deserved. Speaker 1: Okay. And so this is--this story of Dr. King and the legend of Dr. King keeps growing after--and even after he passes away--in the community. So, I just wanted to raise that, and I don't know how it affects the rest of the story, but. Story_ID: 663634 Speaker 1: So you did achieve, like, some leadership positions in high school, as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and as you matriculated in school at, at North- Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did, did they bring in black teachers and administrators? Speaker 2: Eventually they did when I was, by the time I was graduating. But all my senior level teachers were all white during the time. So, I didn't have any black teachers. But my brother [Edward Estes] who came behind me eventually did. Speaker 1: Okay. And did they give you any counseling about college at Northside? Speaker 2: Yes, because I applied to nine different schools. I got admitted to every one. The University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]--don't hate--you know, was my backup. In case I couldn't get in anywhere else, I knew I could get into the University of Georgia, even though I didn't want to go there. I was admitted by Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], but it was the first year that they were admitting women. And I felt like I couldn't deal with the woman thing, and the black thing, and Princeton at the same time. So, I turned down Princeton. And it became a bidding war between Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. But Yale even sent a representative down here to meet with me and talk about what they had to offer. Number one, they weren't giving up that much money for Yale. And number two, they didn't have a journalism program. I would have had to major in English and take things like Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer] and Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. I said, "Nope." (Laughter) So, I (unclear) to Northwestern, and Northwestern gave me a really nice financial aid package. And plus, it was, like I said, it was the world's leading journalism school [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So, you did your homework about it. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You, now, did anybody advise you about journalism schools, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --you had to do all this research yourself? Speaker 2: I had to do it all by myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I think now with my own sons [Joshua Sumpter and Sidney Sumpter], how they did have career counseling when they were in school. And I didn't have any of that in school. Story_ID: 663635 Speaker 1: So, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], there was the Medill School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you started, I guess in 1972 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two [1972], yes. Speaker 1: The fall of '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So, what, who were some of your teachers and mentors at Northwestern? Speaker 2: Jan Carew, Cyrus Colter-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that--the great black novelist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Jan Carew was from the Caribbean, I know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He was in charge of black studies. Speaker 2: African American. Speaker 1: African American. Speaker 2: We formed the African American studies department when I was there, my first year there. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about it. What happened? Speaker 2: Well, it was the--we had a group called FMO, which stood for For Members Only. It was just a little social group that all the black students, the few of us who were there, we would get together and share together. So, we started, we were very much on our game. We met with the trustees, we met with the president [Robert H. Strotz]. And we said, "We want an African American studies department here." And at that time in the '70s [1970s], I guess because everybody was into free love--everybody--let's be all together as one, you know, nation--they gave us a black history department and African American studies student affairs department, which then they brought in some counselors. Milton Wiggins, who I just spoke with a couple of weeks ago, was one of the people that I--was there. But I had Jan Carew, Cyrus Colter, Bobby Hill [Robert A. Hill], who was also from the Caribbean-- Speaker 1: He was a Garvey [Marcus Garvey] scholar, yeah. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cyrus Colter, the novelist. Speaker 2: Yes. Johnson [Douglas Johnson]--he called, he changed his name to Sincere Thunder [Sincere Thunder Namefree]. Speaker 1: Sincere Thunder? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Did somebody, now is he still alive? Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, he passed several years ago. Speaker 1: Sincere Thunder was there, huh, and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. But he was one of the best actors I have ever known. And so, he was there for a long, long, long time--and a poet, too. And these are the people that, you know, were there for me. Speaker 1: Like Sterling Stuckey was here--there. Speaker 2: Sterling Stuckey was there, right, right. So, I had the creme de la creme when it came to, you know, brothers who were on their game. Speaker 1: It was a very bright group. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson there at this time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The artist, okay? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, they didn't come there until--okay, all right. All right, but this is--and there's--okay, so campus life was exciting, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean we were a very strong group. Even though it was small in numbers, we were very strong in terms of being unified. We held a demonstration, for example, in front of the administration building of Northwestern. Because we found out that Northwestern owned stock in South Africa, through Gulf Oil. And you know, that's when everybody was protesting Gulf Oil. And so, we set up and--set up a little information booth to give people the facts about how much of an investment that Northwestern had through Gulf Oil in South Africa. Even--and it was still under apartheid back then. Speaker 1: And Gulf was also heavily involved in Angola. Speaker 2: Angola, too, right. Speaker 1: Which was a real (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, and we just saw this super mega oil company just taking advantage of these areas, even though they had all these injustices still going on. So, we were very, very vocal about that. And the group before me, in fact, took over the bursar's office as part of the protest, and was there for several days, when they refused to leave, until--they said, "Northwestern, we've got--we've got to get out of South Africa. We've got to stop investing in South Africa." But that was the group before me. Speaker 1: Now, this is, I'm thinking--I know I visited Chicago [Illinois] in the early '70s [1970s] when the African Studies Association met downtown. And you know, I was astonished to find out that the centers for African studies in the United States was Northwestern, University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], you know. I was astonished, I didn't know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Northwestern has the Herskovits center [Melville J. Herskovits Library of African Studies, Evanston, Illinois], that's a big-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --African studies department populated by white people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --basically studying African-- Speaker 2: The same thing now--I get upset. Even though I taught there for several years at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia]--Emory's archive is chock full of historic black papers, newspapers--for an instance, Ernest Gaines' [HistoryMaker Ernest J. Gaines] photography. I think [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron has already donated a portion of all the hate mail that he received. You know, and I said, "Why Emory?" You know, why can't it be, you know, somewhere where black students can really have access to it? But it is what it is. Story_ID: 663636 Speaker 1: We're at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], was just a, a cauldron of activity when you there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of things were going on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And Chicago [Illinois] was a hotbed, you know, for this, for all kinds of movements there, much more so than even today. Speaker 1: So, did you become familiar with some of the black journalists in Chicago when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I (laughter)--I asked for--again, my strong willed self--I went to--we had a course our sophomore year where you had to work at a newspaper somewhere else, you know, not the school newspaper [The Daily Northwestern]. So, most kids would go out to Kansas, Nebraska. I told my instructor, "I want to work at the Chicago Daily Defender [Chicago Defender]." And he was foolish enough to say, "Why not?" You know (laughter). You know, I guess he figured this child is going to take the "L" [elevated train] down there in the Black P. Stone Nation territory, and we'll see what happens, you know. And because of that, that's why I had the privilege and the honor of meeting Ethel Payne. I met John Sengstacke [John H. Sengstacke], I met that whole group. So, that's what the recent, the recent troubles at the Defender has had--has really been very, very sensitive to me. Because that's basically where I made my first real job. And because of the fact that I was a Northwestern person, I would get the top story of the day. Like, I broke the story about Al Green getting scalded by the hot grits, in the Defender. It was the front page, I broke that. I was a sophomore in college. Because most of the people who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how did you--now, how did you find out about it? Speaker 2: Somebody called and told somebody, and I just started making calls. You know, because the girl who allegedly did it was from Chicago, you know. So, I just started making--using my reporting and journalism instincts, you know. Because most people who worked at the Defender, unfortunately, were your church bulletin writers. And they just thought with me being in J school, especially at Northwestern [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], I was like the cat's meow to them, you know (laughter). So, every major story, I would end up writing. Story_ID: 663637 Speaker 1: Now, did you know [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know she had a big story about that Al Green--I mean she had a big story on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, when she was with Ebony. Speaker 1: --when she was going out there-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and covered, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah, Lynn and I are good friends. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, you know, Earl Caldwell-- Speaker 2: I know, yeah, Earl. Speaker 1: --was the entertainment writer. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He uses a lot of words (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But we interviewed him, Earl Caldwell [sic.]. Did you know--[HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett would have still been there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Vernon loved me. You know, Vernon used to--he was, he was the nicest player, I would put on there. You know, he would come to every NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention, you know. And he would, he would hold court in the lobby bar. And then he would talk all kinds of trash to women, even though he was married and had, you know, all the family and all that. But he wasn't nothing but a trash talker. He wasn't, he was a pussycat, you know. And so, Vernon would come up and he would always like hold me and squeeze me as tight as he could, and so on. And then he would kiss me on the lips. You know, this is like in public. And I'd say, "Come on, Vernon." You know, but he--then I saw him doing it to other women. I said, "Okay, we see what your game is." But Vernon was, he can't be replaced. Speaker 1: Yeah. I me- I meant [HistoryMaker] Earl Calloway instead of--I think I said Caldwell--but Earl Calloway. Speaker 2: Earl Calloway, right, right. Speaker 1: The writer for the Defender [Chicago Defender]. Speaker 2: Earl Caldwell, in fact, was a photo journalist-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --here in Atlanta [Georgia]. He died this past week, and it-- Speaker 1: Okay, was he the one you were trying to think of before? Speaker 2: No, no, I can't, I'm still trying to think of what his name is. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Perry [Harmon Perry]. Speaker 1: Perry? Speaker 2: Perry. I'm trying to see whether it's his first or his last name. But it's Perry. He used to take pictures of every black event happening in Atlanta. And so, that's--and also the photographs at the Ebony and Jet. I'm very concerned about them right now, because my friend [HistoryMaker] Bryan Monroe, who was then the managing editor for both publications, tried to get all that done on disk, you know, and had, in fact (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All digital. Speaker 2: Right, all digitized. And so he, he had a fight I guess with--the daughter. Speaker 1: Yeah, Rice. Speaker 2: Yeah, Rice, Linda Rice. Speaker 1: Linda Rice Johnson [sic. HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice]. Speaker 2: And they fell out. But he had already cut the deal. So, I don't know what's happened to those photographs now. And they're invaluable. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's the one of Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] at the funeral that won the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Feature Photography]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: By Moneta Sleet, Jr. Speaker 2: Right. But what's happened to all those--'cause Bryan showed me. There was, I mean, these two rooms would be filled with files of photographs that are just there. And nobody's doing anything about it. Story_ID: 663638 Speaker 1: Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] black journalists--I mean the Dai- the Defender [Chicago Defender] I think was the only black daily in the country at that point. Speaker 2: Right, right. And then the Louisville Courier [sic. Louisville Defender] came up. And then there's another small paper [Florida Sentinel Bulletin] in Tampa [Florida], I remember that came up. But in terms of the premier black newspaper, it was the Defender and the Michigan Chronicle. They were owned, both of them were owned by the Sengstacke family. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I'm sure the Defender was the only daily one, you know. I mean, the rest were on a weekly basis. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You know, so, so you cracked the Al Green story. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And what else happened that-- Speaker 2: Bud Billiken Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic]; that was a consistent thing for me. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm (unclear), yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would try to stay away from the gang stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah, Miss Joyner was still alive then, right, Marjorie Stewart Joyner (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: The founder of the Bud Billiken Parade. Speaker 2: Right, right. And Evans was his last name. I can't think of what his first name--I think it was Roger Evans [ph.]--was sort of the boss down there, you know. But I was the youngest thing happening over there (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were there for a summer, or--? Speaker 2: It was really a year and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I did a whole school year, because you had to do this, you know, learn on the job type thing at newspapers. So, I did that all year, and I stayed on after that during the summer. And then I made my transition to the Chicago Daily News. And I worked for them for my senior year [at the Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], my--half of my junior and my senior year, before I decided to really go and focus on television. Story_ID: 663639 Speaker 1: Chicago Daily News. Now, you would have been there-- Speaker 2: That would have been nineteen seventy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976], right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I met John White [John H. White] and Bob--no, Bob White [ph.], I believe, and John-- Speaker 1: The photographer? Speaker 2: Yeah, the photographers there in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's John White, John, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's why I--and they looked out for me, because I also--well, the Daily News was there with the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. And Mike Royko was the biggest asshole, excuse my French, in--in the entire newsroom. And he would, you know, go, "Hey boy, hey girl," you know, "go get me a paper." You know, or he would throw newspapers at interns, and things like that. So, he wasn't a very nice man. Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting, because he went off and bashed, you know, so called assholes in his column. Speaker 2: Right, right, he would treat-- Speaker 1: And he always seemed like he was on the money, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the people he was bashing, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure, but-- Speaker 1: --but he actually was a--? Speaker 2: He was really a bad person in person, especially to college students. If it wasn't for those two re- black reporters taking me under their wing, I don't know what I would have done. Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet the Daily News' first black employee, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: I know he wasn't there anymore when you got there, but-- Speaker 2: No, but I did get a chance to meet him. Because we did have several events, of course, when we were there at Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], at the museum and different places like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were there, you were at the Daily News--you were there when--when Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] passed. I guess that would be the spring of '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: The spring of '76 [1976]? Speaker 1: Or '77 [1977]. It was either the spring of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I-- Speaker 1: Maybe it was the spring of '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: I don't remember covering that. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it must have been '77 [sic. 1976]. Speaker 1: Yeah, probably, you're probably-- Speaker 2: Because I was focusing on my, my master's [degree] and, and this TV gig. Story_ID: 663640 Speaker 1: So, at Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], who were some of your outstanding teachers, or were there any outstanding teachers that, you know (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, another one who saved my life was named [HistoryMaker] Jay Harris, who was just inducted into NABJ's Hall of Fame. But Jay was a professor, the only African American professor there who came during my, you know, senior year. And he and his then wife, Christine Harris, who is a reporter for WTTG [sic. WTTW-TV] there in Chicago [Illinois], an anchor, they took a couple of us, a few of us. And just like you were talking about how some parents would let people come there for Christmas or Thanksgiving because they couldn't afford to get home--they took us under their wing and they nurtured us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Jay was just inducted into the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? I mean, did you--some people say--who are journalists say--they've learned more through an internship than they do in school. Did you feel like that, or did you feel like the school really--? Speaker 2: I feel like the school gave me the foundation I needed in terms of good journalism judgment, I think ethics, on good writing techniques. But I didn't cut my teeth until I got out there and started doing it myself. That's where I really, really learned the craft. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, so did you develop like a journalistic philosophy as you finished your master's degree? Speaker 2: Yeah. I believed in telling the whole story. And that goes back to again when I was in the sixth grade, and I knew the whole story wasn't going to be told. You know this--these cliches that people are throwing out, fair and balanced, and all of that, you know, is just a cliche. But I believed that I was going to get to the root of the story. And I always knew there was more than two angles to every story. And that is--and until I was able to root those angles out, my job wasn't done. And that's what I did, that's how I practiced my craft. Story_ID: 663641 Speaker 1: Now, after you earned your master's degree at Northwestern [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], what did you do next? You'd been there this time--by this time, like, what, six years? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was five. Speaker 1: Five. Speaker 2: Well, I got my master's in nine months. If you went undergraduate, you could go and get it. I went to Guam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And the reason I went to Guam is I had an adjunct professor in the master's program named Bob Lorenzin [ph.]. And he was a producer for NBC. And Bob, I was in his class and I was trying to decide. I had four or five job offers, all of them were print. Except that year, the cable association, cable TV association [National Cable Television Association; NCTA - The Internet and Television Association], was meeting at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois]. And so, you know, with Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] being what it is, we would have all these job notices always posted on the bulletin boards there. And so, I would go down and, you know, contact these folks and set up interviews, et cetera. And I saw the convention. Well, lo and behold, the president of the cable television company came to that convention and interviewed me right in the middle of the exhibit hall there in Chicago [Illinois]. Because I knew I wanted to do TV, I really didn't want to do print. I had offers from The Wall Street Journal, San Mateo, California [San Mateo County Times]. My daddy was about to have a fit that I was turning down (laughter)--turning down these big newspapers, because I wanted to be on TV. And so he interviewed me, and in about two weeks after we interview, he offered me the job. I was still in school, now. This was probably April. And Northwestern didn't end until June. And so, I took a chance and said, "I really want to do this," and talked to my parents [Emellen Mitchell Estes and Sidney Estes]. And even though they didn't, you know, tell me until years later (background noise)--my daddy told me-- Story_ID: 663642 Speaker 1: So, Mike Royko was (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Ooh, I couldn't stand him-- Speaker 1: I used to love his column. He had, he had a funny column, he was a funny writer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know he was great, but I couldn't stand, I couldn't-- Speaker 1: --a great writer. Speaker 2: He--couldn't stand that man. Speaker 1: Boy, oh, boy, I did not-- Speaker 2: He treated me like a dog when I was there [Chicago Daily News]. Speaker 1: Did he? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's terrible. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Mike Royko, another hero. Well-- Speaker 2: What was I talking about? Speaker 1: He wasn't like a big hero, but he-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. What were we talking about? I forgot. Speaker 1: Going to Guam. Speaker 2: Oh, going to Guam. My father [Sidney Estes] didn't tell me until I had come back from Guam-- Speaker 1: Oh he--I think he has to restart this thing. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Are we still--still rolling? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, I left if rolling. Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. That he looked--the old--we had the old Hartsfield Airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport], it wasn't Hartsfield-Jackson [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] then. And he says he remembered watching me as I went down the tarmac there to get to the plane. And he said--because he was very mister you know, strong daddy by then. He says, "I could not believe my child was going to the other side of the world by herself." There was no taking a bus home. You know, it was no borrowing money to get home. Once I was gone, I was going to be gone. And so, I went there. My biggest challenge in Guam, believe it or not, was learning how to drive a stick shift car. Because it was, it was very--it was very hilly. So, everybody drove a stick-- Speaker 1: Now, now what were you there to do? Speaker 2: An anchor and reporter. Speaker 1: Anchor and reporter, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And for what--? Speaker 2: It was Guam Cable TV [KUAM-TV, Hagatna, Guam]. Speaker 1: Guam Cable TV. Speaker 2: Which was a CBS affiliate. Speaker 1: Okay. Guam's one of the islands that was a notable [U.S.] Air Force, I mean naval base (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah they had seven bases there. Speaker 1: --in World War II [WWII], yeah. Speaker 2: See, and that's why I was a star. Because I was on the air, on TV every night, anchoring. I was a civilian and, you know, there was a hundred--there were a hundred thousand U.S. servicemen based on the island, and 50 percent of them were brothers (laughter). You know, so I was like Miss Pop- and plus I looked like the indigenous Chamorro population there. They were all olive skin, dark hair, chunky, you know. So, they just took me in like I was one of their little sisters. So, I did that for two and a half years in Guam. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm glad you men- because that's not on, it's not our radar here. So, Guam. Speaker 2: Guam, that's right. Speaker 1: So, what was the memorable thing about the Guam experience that-- Speaker 2: I ate a bat. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: On purpose? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Because it wasn't a bloody--I mean that was, they knew how to cook bat at these village festivals. And like I said, I was in there with a--you know, they took me in as part of the indigenous family there. And so, they, they cook it in milk. And they didn't tell me what it was until I had eaten it. One thing I did not like is that, these festivals, they would have a pig. And so, in the morning you would see the little pig running around, or a hog. By that night, he was barbequed (laughter). And I couldn't bring myself to do that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, so, what did you do af- after the Guam--when you came back from Guam? Speaker 2: Well, I came back from Guam because, number one, I was threatened by the U.S. military and through a drug cartel because I had done some stories, a story, a series of stories called drugs in the military. Because I met a lot of guys--because of the fact that I was, you know, Miss Popularity--I, I had met a lot of guys who were shooting up 90 percent pure heroin. Because once you can get in Guam, you don't have to go through customs anymore. And so, I was seeing guys who were working on submarine tenders, all kinds of weapons, and they were high as the sky on 90 percent pure heroin. So, I interviewed them, and sometimes in silhouette. And I also iden- identified some of the places where they were getting this material--got the statistics about how many of them were being shipped out to San Diego [California] drug rehab program. And, so I did a whole series of stories about it. And the U.S. military started harassing me. Being that I was a civilian, they couldn't come into my apartment. But they would sit their U.S. military car out in front of my house, and, oh, and see who was coming in and out. So, I had started getting word from some of my guys in the military. They say, "So Sidmel [HistoryMaker Sidmel Estes], you may want to consider going back home, because this drug cartel isn't too happy with what you wrote." And there were a lot of people who were ending up dead in the Pacific Ocean. So, after two and a half years I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] jobless and worked as a biology teacher--believe it or not, substitute biology teacher--just to keep some money in my pocket for six months. Story_ID: 663643 Speaker 1: Then I finally went over to Channel 5 [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], and I interviewed with Paul Raymon who was the general manager at Channel 5, and literally talked myself into a job. Speaker 2: Well, explain. Speaker 1: There was a guy there--and one of his pictures is in the album that I'll show you--who had worked for eighty straight days. And I had heard that he had worked for eighty--so, they needed an assignment editor. Even though they had not posted it, they needed a weekend and night assignment editor. And so, I went in and had my interview with Mr. Raymon, and says, "I can do this job." And he hired me that week. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, so you were writing the script for the news? Speaker 1: Yeah. I came right at the Atlanta missing and murdered children crisis [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders]. Speaker 2: Okay, this is-- Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 2: Yeah, towards the end of '79 [1979], you come in. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And so, I worked the assignment desk for a year. I wrote and did all the research for the news department on the unfortunately named M and M program there, missing and murdered children. And I had, I still have that book that has all their pictures, background, interviews, whatever was released from the police. So, I was sort of the curator of information there. And because of the job that I did with that, I was able to get a job as an associate producer, wri- quote unquote writer on the shows. Did not, that didn't take me long until I started producing weekend shows--the noon show, five [o'clock], six and eleven--because that's all we had. And did this for years until we said to CBS, "Look, your morning program sucks. So, we're going to take it over." (Laughter) We told CBS this. We contacted them and said, "Your ratings are terrible." Speaker 2: So, WAGA was associated with-- Speaker 1: CBS (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) CBS in the beginning, okay. Speaker 1: When I joined it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it was CBS. In fact that's how I got to meet Dan Rather. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Was through CBS, our affiliation with CBS (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wa- was Walter Cronkite still on the air when you, when you--? Speaker 1: No, he had retired by then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: Now, another--well, the Atlanta child murders are going on. And also CNN-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) is, is launched around the time that you get there, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 663644 Speaker 1: In terms of the Atlanta Child Murders [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases], are they a significant story? Now, if you--you were archiving all of that material. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you think of the final, you know, arrest of Wayne Williams as the--do you think he was the (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think Wayne may have been involved with the murders he was actually convicted of. But I have some real problems with lumping together all of those cases on him. In fact, because of the, I guess a two year period, I had gotten to know the investigating detectives fairly well. And they were leaking information to me. Speaker 1: Who are those detectives, can you tell us? Speaker 2: I'd rather not, because one is still on the force. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One, I hear, has passed. Speaker 1: Well, it would be easy for somebody to figure out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--and also, Sidney Dorsey, who was gunned down, you know [sic.]. Speaker 1: What happened to him? What-- Speaker 2: They shot him to death in his parking lot, in his driveway in front of his house. Speaker 1: Now, he was associated with the--? Speaker 2: He was a homicide detective with Atlanta [Atlanta Police Department] during that time. Speaker 1: But he was investigating the case? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And he was gunned down in his driveway? Speaker 2: Right, right. So, I'd gotten to know a lot of those guys really well. And I knew for a fact that many of those cases were not linked to Wayne. 'Cause they were investigating, each of them had their own case. They were investigating it--especially some of the girls--were not related to Wayne. So, for us to sweep away twenty-two people's lives off one guy, I just don't think that was--justice was done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there are still some murderers still maybe running out here now. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the chief of police--well, the director-- Speaker 2: Lee Brown? Speaker 1: --the dire- yeah, director of public safety, I guess they called him then. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Oh, I remember a funny story was that we had a program at Big Bethel [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia] featuring James Baldwin. Because Baldwin had been sent down here to write a lengthy story, believe it or not, for Playboy. You know-- Speaker 1: About the Atlanta Child Murders? Speaker 2: About the Atlanta Child Murders. And so, he was talking to people and investigating some people, and meeting with some of the families. And the time he came to Big Bethel, Lee Brown was there. And he says, "Come on, let's go--let's talk." And I said, "Okay." He says, "Because Jimmy Baldwin has invited us up to his suite." And I said, "Oh, really?" (Laughter) And so, I went with Lee P. Brown up to Jimmy Baldwin's suite at the Westin Hotel. I will never forget, it was a Westin. And we were up all night talking, all night. And it was one of the greatest moments in my life. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So, what was, can you share some of the discussion with us? Speaker 2: Some of the discussion had to deal with the cases. But a lot of the discussion was me being inquisitive about James Baldwin. I mean how often do you get to be with a James Baldwin? So, I was asking him a lot about his books. And also, the fact that he had an open bar there and he hit on quite a bit, after a while it became funny. Because he had for some reason a big old pink boa. And he would jump up on the bed and, you know, was like really just partying and stuff. And I just thought it was hilarious. I had never seen anything like this in my life, you know. So, we just had fun. I think it was more of a release, because we had been under this intense tragic story for so long. We just needed to let--you know, have a good time together. Speaker 1: Did Baldwin have any, have a theory about it at that point? Speaker 2: No, he didn't. He just wanted to get to know, who were these children? That really was, was what he worked on for Playboy--who were these children? Not who the killer is, but who are these children? 'Cause he, he came down while it was still going on. Wayne had not been arrested yet (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 663645 Speaker 1: Anything else about the all-nighter with James Baldwin and [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not that I would tell (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, Lee P. Brown, he's the, he's one of the leading advocates for community policing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --policing--a real good guy-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and everybody--I just can't think that two people whose public personas are--. Well, they're both, like, justice people, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I haven't, I haven't kept up with him very much. You know, after Houston [Texas] and all of that, you know. But he's a really nice guy. Speaker 1: Yeah. I just, I just don't, I mean, yeah, he was the mayor of Houston. Lee P.--we interviewed Lee P. Brown and, well, I guess his personality and James Baldwin's seems like they would be completely different. Speaker 2: I know, but after a few Crown Royals, or whatever it was that he was drinking, they were pretty much on the same page (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, I guess he wrote an article for Playboy about the Atlanta Child Murders [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I don't have it, because I think you had to subscribe to Playboy. I don't think you could buy it off the newsstand. So, I don't have it. But yeah, he wrote, I understand like almost a twenty page story for Playboy. Speaker 1: What about--[HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory had a theory about interferon. Did you remember that, his interferon theory? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: What did you think of that at the time? Speaker 2: You know, Dick, love him to death. But sometimes people get into some stuff that they don't know nothing about, you know. Yeah, I, and think it's maybe a holdover from the Tuskegee experiments [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male] and other things that have been done to black folks through the years, you know. But come on, dude, you know, check it out first. You know, find out are you for--do you know what you're talking about or not? Not just your feelings. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, the resolution of that case, that case was resolved-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --while you were, you were still, you know, writing the news, and--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 663646 Speaker 1: Now in '81 [1981], well, let me go b- back a little bit first. Like, your involvement with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], when did you start interacting with NABJ? Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], the [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman year. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: When it was here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: We're not here yet. But in '81 [1981]--now, when you--when you came back to Atlanta, Maynard Jackson was mayor, right? I guess, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson, and then in '81 [1981], [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young is elected. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is a different Atlanta from the Atlanta you grew up in, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, entirely different. Speaker 1: It happened so fast, too, it seemed to happen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, and it's still happening fast. You know, that's why in my move--you know, I'm really not sure where I'm going to be right now, because I just, I need to feel, feel the area out a little bit. Speaker 1: And in, now, any big stories around this time, you know, around the time period that--? Well, the biggest story in Atlanta would be Andrew Young being elected mayor, I guess? Speaker 2: During that time when I first started? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, after the Atlanta Missing [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders], then Andy Young--oh, also during the time, I did a large show--and this is after--with Maynard Jackson with the opening of the new airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a big story. Speaker 1: Now, this is big, because? Speaker 2: There was so much--because Maynard stood up to the architects and contractors, saying, "You--you will have 30 percent minority participation in this, or else you don't get the contract, period." And people would say, "Oh, isn't that racist?" And it's, "No," (laughter). Speaker 1: So, this is the largest airport in the world, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and expanding, because Concourse E just opened up. That was designed and built by black folks. And folks don't know that. Oscar Harris designed it, and Circle D [Circle D Enterprises, LLC, College Park, Georgia] and several other minority groups, with Joe Jackson, built it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. This is history making for a lot of different reasons. Story_ID: 663647 Speaker 1: Also in '81 [1981] is the, the Janet Cooke story broke. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the Washington Post [The Washington Post] writer, black writer-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --wins the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Feature Writing], but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --she's found to have faked the story ['Jimmy's World']. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, what were your thoughts in those days? Speaker 2: Well, I kind of dismissed her, you know, because I really didn't take her seriously from the beginning. And so, I only took this one incident and I said, "Oh, forget it," you know. It had no real effect on me, nor did I think that other journalists of any color thought poorly of African American journalists. She was like out there by herself. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you think--a lot of people in the country say things like they were embarrassed--black people--it had nothing to do with--they weren't even journalists-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --felt angst around Janet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, because you know, so few of us have reached in that position, you know. But I wasn't embarrassed at all. Story_ID: 663648 Speaker 1: Now, in 1983--now, I don't want to skip over 1982, but in 1983 you were married, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did you meet your husband, and what happened? Speaker 2: Again, it was like a cross between journalism and life. That was the year of the governor's race. And there was a forum being held at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], by the NAACP, at the original Paschal's Restaurant [Atlanta, Georgia], not the one that's here now (background noise). Speaker 1: This is a phone that won't die. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Paschal's, the black Paschal's. Speaker 2: Right, the black Paschal's, where they had the carousel, you know, lounge [La Carrousel Lounge, Atlanta, Georgia] in there that I could go to, you know. But they were having a governor's forum, and there was a guy named Tom Watson [sic. Jack Watson]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --who was running. And so, I just went just to, as a journalist, just to see these guys--number one, how they would react around black people, because it was all white candidates that were running. And so, I went to check it out. And my then husband--then, well, I didn't even know him--guy, was working for Tom Watson. And for some reason, we had one of those freaky, torrential Atlanta [Georgia] rainfalls, even though we were parked out back. And so, he came up to me and said to me, "Hi, I'm," you know, "Buryl Sumpter [B. Garnett Sumpter]. I worked on your mother's [Emellen Mitchell Estes] funeral in '81 [1981]." He was, he said, "I came and got you, and I," he was the lead driver, apparently. But you know, I don't remember anything from that day. Plus, Mrs. Stone, Mrs. Estella Stone [ph.], had told all the young men who worked on the funeral, "Don't you talk to these young girls." Because she knew that there was going to be a lot of--around my age--and a lot of TV people there at the funeral. So, she had already warned them, "Do not talk to the people at the funeral." So, here we are, fast forward maybe about a year or two, and he reintroduces himself. I'm just sitting in the lobby, because it's just pouring down. Nobody's got, has an umbrella or anything, because it was just one of those freaky storms. So, I'm just sitting down in the lobby. He comes and talks to me and says, you know, who he is. And then goes--don't ask me where he got it from--he found an umbrella from behind the clerk's desk at Paschal's. Went out and got my car, and brought it to me where they had this overpass. And that's really when we started talking (laughter). That's how I met him. So, it was like one of those freak occurrences (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And you were married in nineteen eighty--'81 [1981]? Or-- Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], '83 [1983], okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In August, okay. Story_ID: 663649 Speaker 1: So did you get involved with NABG--BJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: In '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], okay. Because I have a note here that says that you were the chair. And it--that wasn't in '86 [1986], though, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just worked on the committee in '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so-- Speaker 2: And then ran for regional director in '88 [1988], and served two terms, which was four years, as regional director. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And then was elected for regional director. In 1991 was when I became president. Speaker 1: Okay, in 1991. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were the-- Speaker 2: National president. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: But I did it na- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been Atlanta [Georgia] president, I've been the Atlanta parliamentarian for the Atlanta Chapter of NABJ. Speaker 1: When were you president of the Atlanta chapter, or chair of it? Speaker 2: I would, it was the year--what year did Oprah go on the air? Speaker 1: About eighty--now, that's a--she, well-- Speaker 2: When she started, first started her show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']? Speaker 1: She must have gone national in '85 [1985] or '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: It might have been '85 [1985], because the only reason why I remember that is because we brought Oprah Winfrey down here when her show premiered on WSB[WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, WSB helped us to bring her. But she was just premiering, going national with the show. So, I guess I was chair from, of the Atlanta chapter, from '84 [1984] to '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. And in--all right, so all right, so, how important was the Atlanta chapter of--AABJ [Atlanta Association of Black Journalists], I mean the NABJ? Speaker 2: We used to be awesome. I mean, we would have programs where we would invite every news director, editor, who were all white. And they knew they needed to be there. They were there. We had every politician. I mean, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young came, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, Maynard Jackson, anybody who was somebody knew they had to reckon with AABJ. Speaker 1: Now, you were awarded the pioneer black journalist of the year award, and a lifetime membership in the organization. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Makes me feel like I have one foot in the grave (laughter). I said, "Wait a minute, you're supposed to be like old to be a pioneer," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Who was the chair before you in Atlanta here, do--do you remember? Speaker 2: Ann Kimbrough [Ann Wead Kimbrough]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who is now the dean of the journalism school at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: And who came after you? Speaker 2: After me? I'm trying to remember. I want to say Maynard Eaton. I'm almost sure it was Maynard. Because we weren't too happy about that. Because he had started his (air quotes) problems, you know, and had gotten--was not on the air, and all that other stuff. So, people thought that was going to bring down the chapter a lot. Speaker 1: So, now, he was--what is story of Maynard Eaton, I mean, that those of us from Atlanta don't know? Speaker 2: Oh. Maynard was down in Miami [Florida] for a long time, you know. He has great demeanor, a great report- very aggressive reporter. Came up here to our Channel 11 [WXIA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], the same kind of demeanor. You know, you would never want to mess--if Maynard Eaton showed up at your meeting, you were in trouble, you know. But he started fooling with the snow [cocaine]. Speaker 1: Oh? Speaker 2: And after a while, it overtook him. But, and so he went and he sold shoes for a while. And now I hear that he is communications director, or whatever, at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And the last time I saw him was maybe about a year ago, and he looked very aged. And I think it was because of what he has gone through. Story_ID: 663650 Speaker 1: Atlanta [Georgia] in '88 [1988], there are a number of, of--I don't know why the outline jumps to '88 [1988]--I don't know, there must have been something else going on in '88 [1988]--'87 [1987]. But we're jumping to '88 [1988] where oh, the mayor [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] pro- proclaims Sidmel Estes-Sumpter Day. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, this is all--now you're not even--are you on the air--you--on the air at all during this period? Speaker 2: No, this is all--I was manager-- Speaker 1: You're all, yeah, right. Speaker 2: --during the--I was never on the air in Atlanta. Speaker 1: So, you were producing the newscast [at WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you started off as just, as writing news copy. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then about, what time did you become, what year did you become the producer of the news? Speaker 2: I would say it was probably '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's early, that's a year after you start? Speaker 2: Right. Oh yeah, I mean, because I had--I just did those other jobs to get my foot in the door. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then it became obvious I was a Northwestern graduate [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], and so, I got more and more responsibilities. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you're involved--are you involved in a lot of civic activities during this period of time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. But a lot of them were related to journalism, because that's my core value. But also, the church. Speaker 1: Okay. And what church were you attending? The same--same one? Speaker 2: Now, I'm at Columbia United Methodist Church [Columbia Drive United Methodist Church, Decatur, Georgia] in DeKalb County [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the family church, Bethel-- Speaker 2: Big Bethel [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah. I left Big Bethel right after I got married, because my then husband [B. Garnett Sumpter], we were going to church at his church which was Ben Hill--no, Cascade United Methodist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I met the famous Walter Kimbrough [Walter L. Kimbrough]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And fell in love with him, and ended up--we believed that the family at that point needed to be together. So, I joined Cascade from Big Bethel. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And Walter Kimbrough is the, the-- Speaker 2: Pastor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) pastor, at Cascade-- Speaker 2: --at Columbia [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 663651 Speaker 1: Now, '88 [1988] was a big news day--year, in Atlanta [Georgia]. The Democratic National Convention [1988 Democratic National Convention, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was some pi- I pulled some pictures out. I worked on that, at the convention center [Omni Coliseum, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: So, this is the convention where-- Speaker 2: Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran. Speaker 1: Oh, the second, this is actually the second run. Yeah, I mean, his second run. He ran in '84 [1984], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. But the one I worked onsite was '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, this is, is this is the--this isn't the election where the Hymietown remark is uttered? Is that--that was '84 [1984] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Hymietown was-- Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 2: Ninety--'84 [1984], '85 [1985], because it blew up in '86 [1986] at the '86 [1986] convention [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, there's also--has something to do--there's a big MARTA story around this time, too, right? Speaker 2: MARTA opened-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for the first time. We did a live shot from there when the first train rolled out. Speaker 1: Okay. This is the Metro Atlanta Regional Transit Authority? Speaker 2: Rapid Transit Authority (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rapid Transit Authority [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: For the train. Speaker 2: Or, the racist terminology is moving Africans rapidly through Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, well--there's some Africans that actually say that, so, with pride, and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter). Speaker 1: So, I don't know how--it depends on how you look at it. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 663652 Speaker 1: Robin Roberts comes that same year. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, well, tell us about how that worked. I think you alluded to her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--Robin was a great person. And she was always very professional. And she would hang in there with the big boys, you know. But at that point, the news department and the sports departments were not ready for a female newscaster. And so, life was very difficult for her doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. But as we know, things turned out for the best. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, as--so was it--did you, you moved so fast at WAGA [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], I don't know if you encountered any difficulty there or not. I mean, was everything as smooth as it appears on paper here? Speaker 2: Pretty much so. It wasn't until the end when it got ugly, because of the fact that FOX had taken it over, had taken over the station. It bought my whole group of stations. We would store broadcasting at the time. And so, they bought about eight stations, and really started changing the whole philosophy of the news department. They wanted us to be what I call borgs [cyborg], you know, all of us are supposed to look alike. All of us are supposed to sound alike. And we--with my big mouth, said--oh, I'm sorry, I'm hitting the mic (laughter)--me with my big mouth would say, "No, Atlanta [Georgia] is not Dallas [Texas], it is not Los Angeles [California]. We have our own unique thing going on." You saw the pictures. We had Patti LaBelle, you know, George Clinton, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], you know. We had [HistoryMaker] Evander Holyfield, Jermaine Dupri. You know, this is what it--they came to Atlanta, they came to my show ['Good Day Atlanta'], which is different from Dallas and New York [New York]. But they started like really making us use the same graphics, the same set designs. And I said, "This is just not working out well." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--go ahead. Speaker 1: I was going to say let's leave that there, that's in, like in the future, from where we really are right now, the takeover by FOX. I mean, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, but this was-- Speaker 1: --purchase of the station. Speaker 2: --ten years ago. Story_ID: 663653 Speaker 1: We haven't talked about the development of your show yet. So, I wanted to talk about that first-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and then let's go on down and pick that up as we get to it. So, so, we know this is going to happen. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But tell us about 'Good Morning Atlanta.' Speaker 2: 'Good Day Atlanta.' Speaker 1: 'Good Day,' okay. 'Good Day,' okay, where did we get that? Speaker 2: 'Good Day Atlanta.' Speaker 1: You're right, 'Good Day Atlanta.' Speaker 2: Like I said, at that point, we [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] were a CBS affiliate. And 'CBS Morning News' had absolutely horrendous ratings here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And so, my news director and I said, "We can do a better job on the morning news than CBS," plus people want to know what's happening in their backyard when they first get up. So, we started a two hour show from seven to nine [o'clock] in, what was that, 19--? Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], right, right. And it was so popular, that we expanded it to three hours the next year. Then two years later, it was expanded to four hours. And by that time, that's when FOX started taking over things. And I said-- Speaker 1: So, you've got a four--just, just--you've got a four hour morning show? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It starts at seven A.M. and runs to eleven. Speaker 2: No, no, no. At that point, it was on the front end from five to nine, five A.M. to nine. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you added hours in the earlier-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, five A.M. to nine, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Now, I did that for over thirteen years. Speaker 1: Now, what was the, what did the show feature? What were some of the features of the show, and who were the hosts of the show? Speaker 2: Amanda Davis, Paul Ossmann, they started the show. They were the first anchors for the show. Then we got Gurvir Dhindsa. And we went, we've gone through now, I believe, four, four sets of anchors that are there. But it's always been a multi--multicultural group, which I think is good. Speaker 1: Okay. And I saw some of the pictures earlier. Just--I don't know, all kinds of celebrities would actually come to Atlanta. Speaker 2: Yeah, and we wouldn't pay them a dime, you know. They would just show up, because they knew--'cause we were--'Good Day' at one point--because I remember my news director came and shared the news with me--we beat 'The Today Show' ['Today'] and 'Good Morning America' in the Atlanta DMA [designated market area]. And, because everybody wanted to see what was happening on 'Good Day.' So, we would do, you know, the crime du jour, because you want to know what's happened overnight--if your house is--or, or something has happened to a friend of yours. But then we would move on. We did a lot of medical news, we did a lot of lifestyle news. And like you saw, all these entertainers would come by--professional football players. And we were the place. Authors--now, that's where I met Cornel West, that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley, that's where I met all these folks, is because they came to Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, the--so, you're beating the networks out? Speaker 2: We were beating--we were beating them up, because we were Atlanta, and everybody would identify--I would go to the grocery store, you know, or I would go even to a gas station, you know. Or, it's--don't let people know me, like people in my church, you know. Because they want to give their little two cents (laughter) about what they want to see on, on 'Good Day.' And so, I became sort of an invisible celebrity, because people knew who I was. Because I was doing, making all these appearances and working in the community. But I was never on the air there. But we were number one in Atlanta, and proud of it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now--you're doing this all up, all through the '90s [1990s] until-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When did the show, like, run into trouble? Speaker 2: When did the show's ratings start running into trouble? Speaker 1: No, when did the show start running--I mean, you said there was a--when FOX took over the company-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it changed things. Speaker 2: Right. I would say, let me see, I would say around 2002 or '03 [2003], because that's when they started messing with all the anchors, and messing with all of our look. And we just had a difference in philosophy. Speaker 1: Now, I think the, the actual merger with, I think it was--the station was taken over by a company called New World, is that correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, New World Communications [New World Communications Group, Inc.], right. Speaker 1: New World Communications. And that's with--? Speaker 2: And KKR [KKR and Company, L.P.]. We went through several ownership changes. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, and by, in 1997 there's a, New World merges with FOX, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Well, they were bought out by FOX. Story_ID: 663654 Speaker 1: Now, all during this time, from what I understand (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're like writing now for--there's an article that appears in The Boston Globe. You started to write for Essence. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're doing a lot more than just producing a show ['Good Day Atlanta']. Speaker 2: Right, right. Because I had reached national prominence because of my being the first woman president of NABJ. And because of that, I was frequently asked to write articles for these major publications. I was honored to get the invitations. Speaker 1: Yeah, and you're the president of NABJ in 1991? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991] and '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Yeah. And you were, were you preceded by [HistoryMaker] Albert Fitzpatrick? Was that, or was he--? Speaker 2: Tom Morgan [Thomas Morgan] was before me. And then Al was before Tom. And then before Al was Merv Aubespin [Mervin Aubespin], who was at, in Louisville [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're the first woman-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --president of the NABJ? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: National Association of Black Journalists. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, did you have--I mean by this time, though, aren't like at least half of the journalists women? Speaker 2: It was--almost 75 percent of the organization was female. And that's what was startling to me. Why do we keep on electing these men? You know, (laughter) and maybe they felt that men would be better leaders, or whatever the case would be. And there was some women who ran before me, but they never made it. You know, they were always beaten by these guys. So, I really had my work cut out for me, because my opponent was [HistoryMaker] Roy Johnson, who at that time was one of the editors of Sports Illustrated. And so, you're talking about a sure enough macho man. You know, here's a guy who's in sports; he has the men from the sports taskforce, you know, backing him up and, you know, we have this guy thing going on. But I knew deep down inside me the major difference between Roy and I, and we're still to this day the best of friends, is that Roy had no legacy of service--that I had worked in the local chapter [Atlanta Association of Black Journalists] for years and years. I had worked as a regional director, I had worked on a number of committees. All Roy had done was help co-found the sports taskforce, period. And so, the real NABJ people knew that I had a track record of performance. And even though they liked Roy, a nice guy, it was a squeaker. It was a squeaker in terms of the election. But I did end up beating him. Story_ID: 663655 Speaker 1: Well, tell us. What was your agenda as president of the National Association of Black Journalists, what--in 1991? What--where were you going to take the organization? Speaker 2: Well, people tease me. The night I was inaugurated and they announced that I had won and tears were just streaming down my face, I stood up and I told the industry, I said, "You have never dealt with a black woman from the South before." And I meant that, you know, because sometimes they would take advantage of NABJ, a lot of these big news organizations. So, my agenda-- Speaker 1: In what way? What do you mean? Speaker 2: Well, people who were supposed to get promoted weren't getting promoted. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our numbers were not very high at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not organizationally, but as individual black people working in the-- Speaker 2: Right, in the newsroom. Speaker 1: The members of NABJ. Speaker 2: Now, remember I had from two to three thousand members across the country. It started out at two thousand. By the time I finished, it was up to three thousand. But one thing I did do, we had what we call the Pierre summit. And it was at The Pierre hotel in New York City [New York, New York]. And it was me and every president of journalists of color organizations. There was four of us. And I'm the only woman. But we sat down with the CEOs of every major media company and told them what we had--from Knight Ridder, to the president of the Newspaper Association of America [News Media Alliance], to you know, the Tribune Company [Tribune Media Company], to the Gannett Company [Gannett Company, Inc.], to The New York Times, Washington Post [The Washington Post]. These guys came to that meeting. And for two very long days, and very difficult days, we sat down and we told them why we have a problem in the industry--how the stories aren't being told properly--because your people don't know how to go into these communities. So, that was a major accomplishment. I also think that we did have a significant number of people who entered the business. I even have people now who run up and tell me, kind of embarrasses me, and say, "I remember you when I was in college, and you came to speak. And you inspired me so much." I was like, "Thank you." And now, they're in--they're working journalists, or they're on the air, and doing things like this. So, that was number one, was jobs. Number two was justice in terms of telling the story like it is. And number three was fair representation of the community, because that was not being shown. Merv Aubespin [Mervin Aubespin] used to say that, "Unless people see themselves in the newspaper, they can't use it." And most newspapers, you don't see yourself, you don't see your neighbors, you don't see people of achievement out there. So, people aren't going to buy the papers. And they wonder why there's a problem. So, and we were very, very successful. People were scared, as they put it, of Sidmel [HistoryMaker Sidmel Estes]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, did you get, you know, compliance generally from--I mean were they, did things change any? Speaker 2: Yeah, it changed. And it--and we did have--even though it was a different administration--we did have the power of the law. You know, the fairness doctrine was still very strong. Equal opportunity and equal hiring was still very strong. People were actually talking about racial issues in the community. And so, that's what I think made the big difference from then, and as--instead of right now. Speaker 1: Okay. So, anything else from your tenure? Did--as president? Speaker 2: Well, we created the Ethel Payne scholarship [Ethel Payne Fellowship], which is a scholarship where journalists can go to Africa and spend time there and follow stories from there. And that was a big accomplishment. We su- supported and strengthened the Ida B. Wells Award, which is still being given out to- today. We also put the organization--not only in terms of the number of members, but the--our financial position was tremendous. We were giving out scholarship money right and left. I remember we did one at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], where we gave out scholarships. So, the fact that--and we started both broadcast short courses during my administration--one at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and the other one at North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And those two programs just celebrated their twentieth anniversary. I'm very proud of that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were president from '91 [1991] until-- Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I was the immediate past president. I was on their board longer than (laughter) than I ever knew. Story_ID: 663656 Speaker 1: We were talking about, you know, the FOX merger, I mean (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they were trying to--you know, I guess create uniformity, I guess, in the station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] and the message (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. They even told our general manager that, "If I wake up in Dallas [Texas], I want to feel like I'm still at home. You know, or if I wake up in Atlanta [Georgia]--." I said, "That doesn't make any sense." So, there were philosophical differences there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you ever, did you ever have a meeting with Roger Ailes at all? Did he ever come down to Atlanta to talk to you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. I figured it probably was not-- Speaker 2: No, and in fact it was almost insulting when Rupert came one time. Speaker 1: Oh, Rupert Murdoch. Speaker 2: Right, when we were going through all this--just to give us like this (gesture) Queen Anne thing. But the insulting was, he gave us all twenty dollar bills. I mean, really, you know? (Laughter) Understand--people, black, white, I don't care--nobody liked that. No, because it was just so imperialistic. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the culture was changing with FOX? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you resisted it for a while, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, so, the show--the show suffered, you were saying? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Good Day Atlanta' was suffering as a result. Story_ID: 663657 Speaker 1: In the meantime you're writing, you wrote--wrote an article on Paula Walker [Paula Walker Madison]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A television news director for Essence magazine? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, this is about the first African American woman in network news, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Paula and I are great friends. Paula is--even though we haven't had an official mentor type relationship, (background noise) she's always been there for me, and always supported me. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, she was the first African American woman to head up a major commercial TV network in New York City [WNBC-TV, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I always looked up to Paula. She's a little, just a little bit older than me, you know. But I wish I had that Paula Walker money--you know, from not only network, but you know, she owns a WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] team. And her brothers--in fact one of them owns the Red Kiva, or something like that, that's in Chicago [Illinois], downtown Chicago. And they've, they have brownstone homes in Harlem [New York, New York] that they've made a mint off of as a family. So, I'm really proud of her. She's really done much more than TV. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. She's, well, she owns the Los Angeles Sparks, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's the, that's the basketball team. So, okay, as we--. Now, was FOX, what was FOX's position on diversity? Was it any--? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't care. They still don't care. It doesn't matter to them about--diversity is not on their radar. Speaker 1: Okay. So, no, nothing there. In eight--'98 [1998], you wrote an article called 'Tricks of the Trade.' What was that about? Speaker 2: In which--? Speaker 1: In Essence. 'Tricks of the Trade,' that's the name I have here. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], yeah. Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't even remember that. That--that may not be right. Speaker 1: May--kay. Well, it's-- Speaker 2: Or maybe I had a different title, and they cha- changed the title. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't know. Well, anyway, let's, let's go past that. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 663658 Speaker 1: How long did you keep doing 'Good Day Atlanta'? I mean-- Speaker 2: 'Til 2006. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: I left in July of 2006. Speaker 1: So, it was about ten years with FOX being involved in it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was the major struggle with FOX around the show? Speaker 2: I just didn't think they wanted us to be us. They wanted us all to be and look and act the same. And that wasn't our cup of tea. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, while all this is going on, Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] continuing to grow-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and get bigger. And the Olympics come here [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], and all the other things that are going on. So, well, what was it? Was there a straw that broke the camel's back, in terms of your involvement with--? Speaker 2: Well, it was that I was approaching a hundred grand [one hundred thousand dollars], because I had been there for twenty-seven years, you know. And when Rupert [Rupert Murdoch] came into all of our stations, it was a part of his borging of us is he said that all of us would have a web unit. But he didn't give them any money to have the web unit. So, my boss was put into the position where he had to find the money out of his budget. So, not only my boss, but every other news director had to come up with this web unit. And you know, most web people don't make but fifteen, twenty thousand dollars because it's just cut and paste. They aren't reporting. You know, they're just cutting what comes on the newscast and putting it on the website. So, they called me in and said that, you know, they were going to do this web unit. And I've always said I wanted to do my own job. And so--do my own thing, in terms of having my own company. So, maybe I should think about doing that. And I was like, what, what, what? And then finally, it just hit me. I said, "This is not going to work." And so, that's when I started BreakThrough in 2006. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so that's when-- Speaker 2: And they divided up my job between three people, by the way. So, I was doing the work for three people, and didn't know it. Speaker 1: Okay. But they were making less money than-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they still are. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is when you form BreakThrough Incorporated [BreakThrough Inc.]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 663659 Speaker 1: Now, before you formed BreakThrough [BreakThrough Inc.], just before you formed that, you, you wrote a book called 'From Fat to Free' [ph.]. Speaker 2: I'm still writing it. Speaker 1: You're still writing it, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Well, I have it--I've renamed it, called, I've called it now, 'The Fat Lady Sings' [ph.]. You know, because I want--and it's more of a niche book for people. I've lost over a hundred and sixty pounds, you know. Speaker 1: Now I--I saw the pictures earlier. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I could really see your weight fluctuate. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One time, you were real slim, the other time you were bigger, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it goes back; it seems like in different time periods it goes up. Speaker 2: Right. But now I've, since 2000, since 1999, it's been pretty even, you know. But--or I've kept going down some. So, I've lost a whole person--you know, which I felt, feel good about, you know. But I just felt like I needed to do something more with my life, and do more with my community and with my craft. And so, I wrote that. I also have another book that I'm writing called 'Confessions of a Media Maven: What They Won't Tell You' [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I'm going to tell the truth about this one sidedness that the newspaper business has gotten into now. You know, all the little tricks that they pull. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's basically about the-- Speaker 2: The television industry, how when I started--almost exactly what we've done here--when I started in the business until I left--what has happened, and how, how do we turn it around? Because I have some very, very, dire predictions about what's going to happen. Story_ID: 663660 Speaker 1: How have things changed? I know, I know we talked about it before we started rolling. But how, what are the major changes in the--? Speaker 2: People don't think, they don't question. They don't ask the hard questions. They don't do their research. They don't go and talk to people who know. They just go to talk to people that, you know, they find on the street. And because of that, the quality of journalism has gone down so much. And it's--and, and what makes it worse is that there is so much information out there, it is now much more difficult for people to discern what's right and what's wrong. And there's so much misinformation about it, and it's going to get worse as technology continues to evolve. Speaker 1: Do you, do you see any hope on the horizon for me- media? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I will never give up hope. I would hope that I would get some comrades with me to push it, because we've got to have media. We have got to have a voice. We've got to have people who question. We need to be the watchdogs of society, or people will run rampant. Government will run rampant if we don't put some of these things in checks and balances. And the only people who can do that is journalists. So, if we aren't there, who will be? Speaker 1: Now, does--does the advent of digital journalism, you know, spell any hope for you? I mean, in the possibility that people can--I mean in actuality, now that you, you can actually own your own means of--? Speaker 2: I think it has its pluses and its minuses, giving people who don't have a voice a voice. But these people need to be trained. And they need to know how to not put out the junk that we've been talking about. Digital journalism is great. I mean now it gives me a headache, because I can barely keep up with all the various groups and websites that I look at. But I know where to go to get the right information, where a lot of people don't know where to go. So, I see this is going to be evolving for at least another ten years, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you like any particular websites now, or think they do a good job? Speaker 2: There are a few of them out there--thegrio.com; msnbc.com; Huffington Post [The Huffington Post]. And I'm affiliated with another website--I've been somewhat negligent recently--called u-metro.com, u-metro.com. And we're an aggregate for African American material that we pull from all over, all kinds of different sources. And it's geared toward that same kind of group that we were talking about--Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia], middle class, upwardly mobile, want to achieve. That's what our site is. It's not the booty shaking, it's not the gold teeth and gold this, that and the other, shoot this. You know, we are appealing to a very specific audience, because we don't think it's there. Story_ID: 663661 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about BreakThrough Incorporated [BreakThrough Inc.]. Now, it's not a PR [public relations] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --firm, right? What is it? Speaker 2: I help people--basically, I will tell you, it's very simple. It's three major things: what are you trying to say, that's number one. Number two, who do you want to reach with that message that you're trying to say? And number three is, since I've been around the block a few times, I can provide you access to almost every news organization in the country. Because either I know somebody, or I know somebody who knows somebody. So, those three components. So, I advise them, in terms of, what--what's--what is your messaging? I've had so many of my clients--I've had businesspeople, professional athletes, entertainers, you name it. And I say, what is it you want to say? Why do you feel that your media efforts haven't worked? And when we start that kind of talking, then they suddenly recognize that I can help them, but I'm not going to change them from what they do. And I don't fool with certain people, because it's just not good for me. Speaker 1: Okay. An example, without naming names. Speaker 2: I had a professional politician, big name, in the metro area who would lose his temper constantly at--he couldn't stand the rest of his commission. And so, he would frequently get up there and act a natural fool in the board meetings. And I would pull him behind closed doors and say, "Woosah. Chill it out, you can get your same--," in fact, I walked in the day he interviewed me to hire my company. He's on the phone cussing out the editor of the major newspaper. I said, "Oh, that's going to get you some real high marks, you know, with that." So, those are the kind of things that I try to work with, saying, you know, "I know media. It's--media is my life, I'm a journalist. So, why don't you listen to somebody who knows what they're doing?" Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, some of your, some of the people you work with have included the Frederick Douglass Family Foundation-- Speaker 2: Right. I'm still working with them, pro bono. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what are they trying to do? I mean-- Speaker 2: Stop modern day slavery, which is human trafficking. That's, that's the primary mission. And it's still going on. You read--it was just in the Atlanta [Georgia] paper a couple weeks ago about--even at major sporting events, that's what they fear. In Russia, they--these groups were bringing in girls and children for prostitution, because they go to these major sporting events. So, they're trying to stomp out modern day slavery. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. The Tupac Amaru Shakur Foundation [Stone Mountain, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. They do performing arts for kids who cannot afford to take lessons in DeKalb County [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. The Atlanta Center for Creative Inquiry [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: In fact, I have a meeting with them tomorrow morning. They are a group of architects, construction managers, and engineers who volunteer their time in the public schools to try to get more young people into those fields. Because there's so few of, of African Americans in those construction fields like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about--you've got a project through BreakThrough called Journalists to Go. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what is that? Speaker 2: Well, I can't be, you know, I'm not big enough. You know, my company isn't big enough to be everywhere all the time. So, again, it goes back to my contacts with fellow journalists. There are many, many, many of my friends who were veteran journalists who can still write--still got--in their right mind--who are all over the country. So, let's say you have somebody in New York [New York], you know, or Chicago [Illinois]. Well, instead of me flying up there, I will call a [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment, you know. Or, call a [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson in Boston [Massachusetts] and say, "Such and such a client needs you, you know, to help them get their messaging straight." So, that's what we do, because we're sort of like a matchmaker. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That makes sense. Now, what else is BreakThrough working on? Speaker 2: Well, I do some things with--like I said, the Wilson Pickett family, we put on a show on that. I put together various media kits. Right now, what I'm meeting tomorrow about is I've put together a brochure to mark the tenth year anniversary of ACCI. Because we graduated ten classes. That's almost two hundred students who are going that way. I help edit some material. I also help people write when, you know, when they want me to read over something. I also do video productions. I'm about to do one in June for a pastor who's retiring, just so they will have something for prospe- posterity. You know, so I still practice my craft, I just do it differently now. Story_ID: 663662 Speaker 1: You're teaching, too. You, you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When did you start teaching? Speaker 2: Four years, well, no, ten years ago. Because I started off at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] for five years. Then they lost their minds and got rid of the department. Then I started teaching at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] four years ago. And we talked about they've got money issues there. And just this past semester, thank you Lord, I started working at the Atlanta Metropolitan State College [Atlanta, Georgia], which is part of the University of Georgia Regents Ce- Center [sic. Georgia State University Regents Center for Learning Disorders]. So, I teach--I taught there last semester, and I'm teaching there this semester. And I love it, I just love it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are you a part of any projects, or was the Atlanta Association of Black Journalists involved with any projects with high school students or grade school students? Speaker 2: Not AABJ, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They don't have any of those yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we've got a lot of new people. That's the other thing. I don't know half--it used to be I would know every black journalist in the city. Not now. I look on the air, and I say, "Who is that?" (Laughter) There's so many new people coming in and out. Story_ID: 663663 Speaker 1: In 2008, you're a part of 'Kerner Plus 40' ['Kerner Plus 40: Change or Challenge']. Speaker 2: Right. That's a documentary I did. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Oh, okay, it's a documentary, okay. Tell us about it. Speaker 2: That was when I interviewed the Dorothy Gilliams [HistoryMaker Dorothy B. Gilliam], B. Hines [HistoryMaker Bea L. Hines], Merv Aubespin [Mervin Aubespin]--people who were thrust into newsrooms when America started rioting and burning down. And a lot--and the fact is, the Kerner Commission report actually accused the media of being complicit in causing a lot of this disruption around the country. Because, again, they're not reporting the news correctly. So, what I did was, I interviewed some of those who were just--like Merv was an artist. He had never reported on not one story. And they threw him into the streets of Louisville [Kentucky], because the white reporters were too afraid to go in there, you know. But he had never done journalism before in his life. And there were so many stories like that. And then I talked to McCormick Fellows [McCormick Tribune Fellowship] who are journalists today, like Shirley Carswell at The Washington Post, about what has changed in forty years since the Kerner Commission report came out? And unfortunately, the majority of them said very little has changed in forty years. Story_ID: 663664 Speaker 1: That leads to into a question that we always ask, I guess. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the future of African Americans in journalism, and what advice would you give to young people today? Speaker 2: Number one, we've got to start owning stuff. That's, that's the key. You know, right now--back in the day there were a few little television stations, black owned television stations, when I was president [of the National Association of Black Journalists]. Today, there is not one black owned commercial television station in the entire country, today. So, we've actually gone backwards with that. And you know the newspapers are like dying on the vine like crazy. So, number one, we've got to own something to do something to change things. Number two is we've got to bridge this technology gap. We are killing ourselves by not keeping up with the latest technology, because that is the future of America right now. So, we've really got to focus more on that. Speaker 1: Technology gap, ownership. So we've got our work cut out for us. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 663665 Speaker 1: And you were part of a group that was trying to buy Ebony and Jet recently, right? Speaker 2: We wanted to buy the brand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we knew that Ebony as a magazine was not financially viable. It cost too much to print, print it out, especially what it was doing. So, we went to Linda Rice Johnson [sic. HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] and we went to several of their people, and with some investors, and said, "We want to just buy your brand. And then number one, make it electronic." You know to put all that stuff--I was telling you--all those pictures--on the Internet. Make it electronic. And then that--the revenue from that would sus- would support the printing of the Jet, you know, because that doesn't cost as much. And people still want their Jets, you know. So, we were still going to print Jet, but that was going to be down the road. Yes, but a group of us tried. But most of us in the group were journalists, not financiers. So, and then Linda would not open her books. And our financial people told them, you have to go--we have to have due diligence on this, and she--they refused to open the books. Speaker 1: So, it fell through, basically? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 663666 Speaker 1: What about the UNITY conference [UNITY: Journalists for Diversity] with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Te- tell us about that. What, what was that about? Speaker 2: UNITY has strayed away from its primary mission. Because I was the official incorporator of UNITY--and so, I had the incorporation papers of it. And it's, it was just supposed to be basically a convention based organization that brought us all together, as well as, when there was an issue with people of color we could come together to make demands on the industry. Well, unfortunately, UNITY started changing as the board started changing, and the mission of UNITY is starting to become, basically, a fifth organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Other than the four (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was supposed to be just an alliance of the Hispanic journalists, the Asian-- Speaker 2: Asians, and Native Americans. Speaker 1: Native American. Speaker 2: And African Americans, you know, just us getting together and, you know, singing 'Kumbaya,' you know (laughter). But, and then meeting every four years, four or five years, just to you know, show that we're together here. But other--newer boar- boards started changing the mission. Like I said, really forming a fifth organization. And when it really got bad was when they were competing against these other organizations for grant money, for the same--for programs, and that's what really buggered it up. And then NABJ wasn't getting its fair share in terms of profits from the organization--they've asked for a restructuring. It wasn't anything that was ridiculous that NABJ was asking for. They just wanted this, you know, stuff, because of our participation and our control over it. But now, it's strayed on, and now it's involved in gay-lesbian groups. Oh, and many--and I know for sure that many of the (air quotes) gay-lesbian people who were involved in this group are the same white folks who are oppressing people of color in the newsroom. You know, so they want to play it both ways. So, now it's sort of, it's really fallen apart now, unfortunately. And it's going to take a lot to get it back together, if ever. But our mission has been on race and promotions and jobs, not all these other issues that the gay and lesbian journalists want to do. Story_ID: 663667 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Hm, good question. Number one, we've got to stop doing, what I remember as a little girl, killing each other. We have to stop preying, stop preying on each other, you know, robbing and mugging and doing all that stuff. We've got to read more, we've got to study more. And in order for us to be able to compete, we are, like I said, going to have deal with this technology gap, and it is humongous right now. And until we deal with that, we're always going to be left behind. Story_ID: 663668 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would undo or redo? Speaker 2: I don't know if I would have any regrets. I wish in a way, though, I had learned more from my parents--or that they would have been here to guide me. I basically have lived longer than both of my parents have ever been alive. My mother [Emellen Mitchell Estes] died when she was one month from turning sixty. And my daddy [Sidney Estes] died when he was fifty-seven. So, I've spent most of my adult life without them. So, I've not had anybody to really be there for me. And I've had to learn on the job. And so, learning on the job, you make mistakes. And I've made my share of mistakes. And sometimes I learn from them, sometimes I don't, you know. But that's, that would be--I won't say it's a regret, it's just I wish there were some other people in my life than, than what, where I am right now. Story_ID: 663669 Speaker 1: Once again, if you look back at everything you've done at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, my, my big dream--and it's a really big dream--is to build a media institute, and train people from all over the world. And I don't know where it would be, or, you know--but right now, I'm just a poor little broke journalist, so (laughter) I've got to find a way to get the proper amount of funding to put the media institute--because I want to turn the ins- I want to turn the industry around. I want to get us back to our roots. And the only way to do that is to start folks when they're young. If you can get them when they're young, you've got them for life. But now, what these young people are being exposed to, I don't know how they can think left or right. Because it's just, too much confusion is there. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think journalism has become too polemic or something, or? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. You know, we're not supposed to be taking sides, you know. We are supposed to be reporting the facts--the good, the bad and the ugly. And we're not doing that anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. So, back to the original question. You asked, actually, another--you answered another question I was going to ask you. What would you like to do next if you could? But, but in terms of legacy, what would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Hm, I think my legacy would be I made a difference in somebody's life--that I helped them see the way; and that I served my community, I served my profession; and that I served for justice and righteousness; and that I hope that everybody will see that as being my living lega- legacy. Story_ID: 663670 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: You mean? Speaker 1: You've got children, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I've got a--one [Sidney Sumpter] is about to turn twenty in May. And he wants to go into criminal justice. Don't know why. I'm not too pleased about that. Because I said, "You know, you can't solve--as a detective, you're going to have to be out there with the po po [police] getting shot at you know," (laughter), "and stopping cars and all that." But we'll see. He wants do criminal justice. And my oldest one, who will turn twenty-five in--I think that you all saw--is into edu- he got the education bug. He wants to be a principal and a coach. And in fact, he is talking--he's the main one I think is going to be leaving first, because he wants to go, come to Chicago [Illinois], you know. So, I said, "Fine," because he's been in Atlanta [Georgia] all his life, and he wants to expand his horizons, you know. He's--even though--we'll have to see how it goes, because he's a big football player. He played for West Virginia, and he's played for Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. But Morehouse did not give him money for this spring. And so, we didn't have Morehouse money for the spring. So, he is going to Atlanta Metro [Atlanta Metropolitan State College, Atlanta, Georgia] this spring. But that's why he is now talking to the coaches and athletic director about, "Well, y'all going to give me money in the fall or not? Because if not, I'm not going to be here." But they, they're the love of my life, you know. They're in--so, I'm trying to get used to being myself, you know, and living my own life. Because I know in a year or two, it will just be me. It'll just be me. And so, me and God. So, that's why I'm--I'm going through that personal transformation myself, with them. And I'm still very, I'm very good friends with all of my siblings [Edward Estes, Cheryl Estes Hollis and Christopher Estes] and my stepmother [Barbara Estes]. I'm still very involved with my church [Columbia Drive United Methodist Church, Decatur, Georgia], which has given me a great deal of strength. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father [Sidney Estes] get a chance to see you, you know, become news director here in Atlanta? Speaker 2: No. He knew I was producing, you know. And it was, it was odd. He used to fight with me because he--unfortunately, he had prostate cancer. And his last month, his doctors had told us, you know, "We'll just try to make him as comfortable as possible." But I guess whatever they were giving him would swell up his tongue or whatever. So, here I was, 360 pounds, pregnant like crazy, in the middle of the summer, you know, waddling up to the hospital just to see my daddy. And he couldn't hardly talk at the time. So, he did see me achieve professionally. But he would fuss at me, you know, (makes sound) coming up here, because he didn't want to see me be passing out, or something happen to the baby. So, it wasn't until, it was two weeks after Joshua [Joshua Sumpter] was born, is when he passed. It was kind of like--and I couldn't bring him to the hospital, because he was in intensive care. And so, I would take him pictures and stuff and say, "We're okay, daddy." You know, "Here's the baby, we're okay." And after he saw that we were okay, he was able to let go, you see. But I do think that I did--he did get to see me at least get to the production ranks. So I don't think--he wasn't around when I got, made it into the management ranks. Story_ID: 663671 Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. This has been one of the longest interviews I've ever done in my life (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. So, it should be pretty easy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) She was a good woman. She was a warrior for truth and would be always be there for her profession. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you guys. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 663672 Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandfather, Edward Caesar Mitchell [Edward Mitchell]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hang on one second. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the one that taught at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Morris Brown, he was dean at Morris Brown. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: And that's my grandmother, Luella Mitchell. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: Grandfather on my daddy's side, William Estes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hang on a second, no, hold it. Hang on. Okay, next. Speaker 2: My grandmother on my father's side, Fannie Estes [Fannie Webster Estes]. That's the one that lived to be ninety-six. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Me and my mommy, Emellen Mitchell Estes, just days after I was born. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on please, just another second. This is a slow camera. Speaker 2: You had a lot of hair. Speaker 1: Yeah, she told me I gave her indigestion. And also on top of that, she ate two sweet potato pies--because my birthday is the 27th--November 27, which falls around Thanksgiving. And she ate two whole sweet potato pies the day before. And I said, "Oh, it's me or the potatoes." Speaker 2: That's my daddy and my mama-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --right after I was born. Speaker 1: What's your daddy's name? Speaker 2: Sidney Estes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Me and President Bill [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. I was the first, the first person to bring a presidential candidate to NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], and he was the one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sideways. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He calls that my glamour shot. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, one second, hold on, still going. Next. Speaker 1: Me and [HistoryMaker] B. B. King. He's another one of these little dirty old men. Speaker 2: Is he? Speaker 1: He loves women. Speaker 2: (Unclear) kids, I know that, yeah. Speaker 1: Loves women. Me and Heather Headley. Speaker 2: Heather Hadley, yeah. We interviewed the person [HistoryMaker Albert Stiles] that trained her, in Fort Wayne, Indiana. Speaker 1: And me and right Reverend, Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Me and woof woof man, George Clinton, Parliament-Funkadelic. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on a second. Okay, next. Speaker 1: Me and little bitty Usher, and his mama [Jonetta O'Neal Patton]. Speaker 2: He was a little bitty guy. Speaker 1: Uh-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one minute, hang on please, and-- Speaker 1: He may have grown more than he was in that picture. And that's the mama that, who was his manager, that he fired. Speaker 2: He fired his own mama? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: That can't be right. Speaker 1: Me and Tyra Banks. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is when I won the Silver Circle award from the National Association of Television Arts and Sciences [sic. National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences]. And that's my boss right there in the middle, Gene McHugh. And we all, we went at the same time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. One more, sorry. Okay, next. Speaker 1: Me and Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], one of the best presidents ever at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Me and Kweisi Mfume, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], when he was--he was in the NAACP thing then. Speaker 2: Me and Leonard Nimoy, better known as Mr. Spock. I'm a 'Star Trek' and 'Star Wars' junkie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it. Speaker 2: We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols out in California on the last trip. Speaker 1: Really? Me and Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.]. And he had the nerve to have, wear a Diamondbacks [Arizona Diamondbacks] hat. Speaker 2: Me and Charlton Heston. Both of us are Northwestern graduates [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], by the way. Speaker 1: That's right. Cold dead hands. Speaker 2: Me and former Braves [Atlanta Braves] manager, Bobby Cox. Who--isn't he being inducted into the hall of fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] this year? Speaker 1: Bobby Cox? Speaker 2: I was thinking, I know he was on the list. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Okay. This is me hanging out with my editors in the edit bay at Channel 5 [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is me trying to type at my desk at Channel 5 (laughter). Story_ID: 663673 Speaker 1: Yeah, NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], we've got to get that. Speaker 2: Yeah that's Tom [Thomas Morgan]. That's the one that preceded me. Speaker 1: Right there? Speaker 2: Right there, yeah. He died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: There's some more glamour shots over here on this side (laughter). Where is it? Speaker 1: Oh, really. Speaker 2: Oh, I can't find it now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Should I pause on the tape or should we keep going? Speaker 2: You can keep going. Here's a-- Speaker 1: The top one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one are we doing? Speaker 1: The top one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Actually, in that case, Larry [Larry Crowe], for the light, put it on the bottom. Speaker 1: I think those are just me at various functions for NABJ. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Is this [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone? Speaker 1: Uh-hm, he's still alive. But he's not in right mind, though, unfortunately. He has Alzheimer's (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Okay next? The bottom one? Yeah, you can do that one. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good picture of Chuck, yeah. Speaker 2: This is you as a little girl here. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This one-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was elementary school [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], I think. Speaker 2: Now, this is-- Speaker 1: That's of Louis Sullivan and--who else? I can't see who else is on there. Oh, yeah, those are all Louis Sullivan there. Speaker 2: Okay, we'll get Dr. Sullivan. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Me and [HistoryMaker] Dr. Louis Sullivan. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one is that on the top? Can you put it on the bottom please, the light's better down there. Speaker 2: Is this your house? Speaker 1: That was my old house. You don't need that, I don't think. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's just my daddy [Sidney Estes]. Speaker 2: Okay, here, let's see. Speaker 1: Oh yeah that's me when I was a little girl. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one are we doing? Speaker 1: That one. And then the one up under it is me and my brother, full brother [Edward Estes], when I graduated from Northwestern [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay, next, the Democratic National Convention. I don't know which one you want to-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm trying to--I don't want that--the little dark skinned person, that's my ex [Estes' ex-husband, B. Garnett Sumpter]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, let's not use this one (laughter). Speaker 2: All right, all right. Let's see. Okay. Is this is the national convention? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's at the national convention. Speaker 2: Okay, next, okay, now, this is--? Speaker 1: What is that? Oh, that's [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax, who's in charge of UNCF [United Negro College Fund] now. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that's the same thing, in terms of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we already shot this one, yeah. Speaker 1: You already shot that one, yeah. So, I think we're done. Speaker 2: Except for the band. You didn't-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Find a plain background to put behind that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Oh, how about this? Speaker 1: We--we got it, we got it. That'll work, yeah. That's your high school picture? Speaker 2: Um-hm, my senior picture. Speaker 1: What's the name of the high school? Speaker 2: Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1972? Speaker 2: It was '68 [1968] to '72 [1972]..