 Story_ID: 648930 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer; and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like to start out by having you state your name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Susan Fales-Hill. It's F as in Frank A-L-E-S-Hill. Susan is the plain vanilla S-U-S-A-N (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And, then can we have your date of birth? Speaker 1: Oh (laughter). Speaker 2: And, place of the birth. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (Laughter) Born August 15, 1962 in Rome, Italy. Speaker 2: And, can we have today's date? Speaker 1: Today's date is Friday the 13th of December, 2013. Speaker 2: And, your, and your occupation? Speaker 1: My occupation is, I'm a writer. Although in the new age, I would call myself a content creator because (laughter) I work on various platforms from the Internet to books, so. Story_ID: 648931 Speaker 1: So, I wanna ask five People magazine-ish questions. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Short answers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is bread, which I can't eat 'cause I'm gluten intolerant (laughter). Speaker 1: A favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring, 'cause it's a time of hope. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: There's--tomorrow's another day. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: A favorite place to vacation. I would have to say Paris, France. Story_ID: 648932 Speaker 1: So, I wanna ha- start out by asking you about your mother-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, what you know about her background (unclear). Speaker 2: So, my mother, Josephine Premice, who many know as a groundbreaking performer who began her career as a dancer. As a very young girl at--first big performance seventeen at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] and the first ever African dance concert [African Dance Festival]. Which was a historic event because African dance until then had been regarded as sort of an ethnographic freak show that you may display at a World's Fair. Not a form of art that was worthy of a stage, certainly, not a stage of the magnitude of Carnegie Hall. So, she was the headliner in that dance concert. And, Eleanor Roosevelt was in the audience as was Mary McLeod Bethune, and they were friends. They grew up together. My mother was the daughter of Haitian immigrants. Her parents were both born in Haiti and her father [Lucas Premice] was a political exile and they met here. Her father was the son of a military man and sort of landed gentry. In fact, when I was nine we went to my great aunt, his sister's, coffee plantation in this town and it was essentially run, like a medieval (laughter) estate. Anyway, so, landed gentry on her dad's side and her mother [Thelomaine Premice] was the daughter of a horse trainer. A very remarkable, strong, and resilient woman, and they married and had two daughters that they raised in Brooklyn [New York]. My grandfather became a furrier by trade and eventually was the head of the furrier's union in, here in New York [International Fur and Leather Workers Union]. And, it's interesting, I was on a--I was involved with an event having to do with Paul Robeson back in the '90s [1990s]. And, I met this old union guy and he said, "Oh, I worked with your grandfather. Your grandfather was a real hero." In the world of unions. But, he was--they were both cultivated people. And, there was nice thriving middle class community in Brooklyn; black middle class community. And, so, I don't know if you know the name Ulric Haynes [Ulric St. Clair Haynes, Jr.]. He became our, one of our ambassador to the Caribbean [sic. Algeria]. I think under Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Educated man; they grew up with him. And, my grandfather was always helping people get out of Haiti or Cuba, or whatever, oppressive Caribbean country, so. My mother said, "You never knew, when you got home, who was going to be," (laughter), "in your living room, eating your mother's food, and maybe even wearing your clothes." But, it was a happy household. Story_ID: 648933 Speaker 1: She and her sister [Adele Premice] had to learn classical music. My aunt was a very good pianist. My mother [Josephine Premice] was forced, against her will, to study the violin. She loved dance from a very young age. But, the barter was in order to study dance, which they didn't approve of, she was made to, to do the violin. And, eventually she auditioned for [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham when she was sixteen. And, Katherine wanted to take her on the spot. But, my grandfather [Lucas Premice] would have none of it, because she was a proper middle class girl, and he said, "My daughter dances solo or, or not at all." So, it was in the midst of a time when blacks, even up here in New York [New York], were second class citizens. Here was this immigrant family that managed to create a kind of a magical cocoon for these girls. And, they grew up knowing they were the equal of anyone. They were something. They were somebody. They went to public school. But, public school then was excellent. They went to Eastern District High School [Brooklyn, New York]. I think Mel Brooks also went to that same high school. And, it was when public schools were well run, so. It's funny, a woman I know who went to the same high school and few years behind my mother said, "How come your mother speaks the way she does?" And, I said, "That's," (laughter), "they were educated people." That's how she spoke. That's how my aunt spoke. So, you know, the notion of talking black, all these stupid notions that we are burdened with today, just didn't exist. My grandmother [Thelomaine Premice] had a lot of style; a lot of taste. And, recently a relative sent, one of my mother's cousins, Haitian cousins sent my daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill] a purse. And, with the purse, it was very carefully wrapped in beautiful tissue, a hand embroidered handkerchief. And, then the note she said, "I'm so sorry, I almost forgot the handkerchief." Like this was, you know, blasphemy. And, the thought's, that's so revelatory of the culture my mother came from. That a lady, in every handbag had her beautifully, hand embroidered (laughter) linen; not, not tissues, not Kleenex, but a, a little handkerchief. So, it's that kind of attention to detail and delicacy. They didn't have money. But, there was a lot of savoir faire, if you will. They wore perfume, and they dressed beautifully. And, my grandmother was an exquisite cook. And, she would say to my mother, "I'm not gonna teach you to cook 'cause you will enter a kitchen only to give orders," which (laughter) didn't end up happening. So, my mother taught herself to cook. But, she would teach her daughter how to set the table for a, you know, five course meal. So, there was a lot of refinement and a lot of, again, what the Europeans call savoir vivre, knowing how to live. You know, the things that people make fun of Martha Stewart for today. But, there was nothing pretentious about it. It was just the little delicacies that made life more genteel. So, I--when I think about what was going on, you know, this all against the backdrop of the Depression [Great Depression], the war, and we still had segregated troops. A time when, even though there wasn't de jure segregation here, there was de facto segregation that certainly, if you walked into certain places, they can say to you, "Well, we don't really serve your kind here." I remember the whole kerfuffle with the Stork Club [New York, New York] with Josephine Baker. So, against that backdrop of, of inequality, of a country trying to find its way, a certain amount of brutality, certainly in the South. Here were these young women being raised to look at what was beautiful in life, to create beauty in every moment. So, it's, it's kind of remarkable. And, I think, that upbringing gave my mother her unwavering sense of self, which is what you needed, certainly to be a performer. Certainly to be black, female, dark skinned performer at the time that she chose to take that very risky path. Story_ID: 648934 Speaker 1: Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill], how much do you think your, your mother [Josephine Premice] or your grandparents spoke of Haitian history? Speaker 2: Oh, my, my grandparents spoke a lot of Haitian history. My mother was very, very aware of that as her heritage. She spoke French. She spoke Creole. She went to Haiti a lot as a child. Because my grandfather's [Lucas Premice] family certainly had been part and parcel of Haitian history. That was--it was intrinsic to her life. And, also, there were all of these political figures coming through. And, one of her cousins was Albert Mangones was a very famous architect down there. Who did, if you've ever been to Haiti, there's a famous art sculpture of the, the conch blower ['Le Marron Inconnu'] who represents Haitian independence and he designed that. And, he was, you know, he was boy growing up with her. So, she was, she was very aware of her history. So, again, at a time when in school certainly no one was learning that blacks had ever done anything (laughter). She was well aware that that wasn't true. And, she, she would always tell me when I was growing up, well you have white ancestors who fought in the American Revolution and you have Haitian ancestors who fought in the American Revolution. 'Cause, of course, there was a whole contingent that fought with Lafayette [Marquis de Lafayette]. So, she, she--history was always part of her life. She was aware of her father as a somewhat historical figure when he was in--already (unclear) America--the Haitian government confiscated his passport. So, she was, she was keenly aware. And, when her mother [Thelomaine Premice] died and they brought the body back to Haiti, they opened the casket to make sure that they--my grandfather wasn't smuggling guns into the country. So, she was-- Speaker 1: So, your grandfather's buried in Haiti? Speaker 2: My grandmother is. My grandfather's buried here. But, my grandmother who died many, many, years before. She died, my--it was, she probably died in the '40s [1940s] 'cause my mother was eighteen. Nineteen twenty-six [1926] plus eight, let's do the math; '44 [1944]. She died in '44 [1944]. So, my grandmother's buried in Haiti. Story_ID: 648935 Speaker 1: And, let's talk about your father's [Timothy Fales] history then. Speaker 2: Yes. So, my father's family was one of the--this was always impressed upon me, one of the oldest family's in the country. Some of his direct ancestors came on the Mayflower. He's a descendent of Governor Bradford [William Bradford]. The first governor of Massachusetts big colony. So, one of my white cousins would always tease me, "You're the first black descendant in the Governor Bradford--." I'd say, "Well, actually no, that's my brother [Enrico Fales] since he's," (laughter), "three years older." So, I'm the second black descendant, known black descendent of Governor Bradford. And, and then his other ancestors, direct ancestors came from, you know, soon after the, the Mayflower in the 17th century, essentially. And, settled in Rhode Island; Bristol, Rhode Island and, you know, made their way to Boston [Massachusetts] and other places. And, my grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.] was the president of the New York Bank for Savings [New York, New York] and the commodore of the New York Yacht Club. In sailing circles, people of a certain age don't know about him. There was just a piece actually in The New York Times six months ago about his yacht, the Nina, which has gone missing now. And, they talked about him and the fact that he'd been the commodore of the New York Yacht Club. And, he created a sailing commission and that there's a certain rule that he helped institute. So, he was quite a brilliant man. He was a big bibliophile. He had at one point the third largest collection of first editions in private hands. And, he ended up giving that to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], which is--it's now the little Fales library at NYU [Fales Library and Special Collections]. And, there's everything there from Dickens' [Charles Dickens] own copy of 'A Christmas Carol' to-- interestingly and he collected it, Harriet Jacobs' 'Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl,' which he bought as a young man before it had been reissued, before people were interested in the slave narratives. Maybe he had an inkling (laughter), what turn (laughter) the family tree was gonna take. But, I--very interesting choice for somebody who is collecting in the teens [1910s], you know, and he started collecting in 1911. So, and, my grandmother [Dorothy Mitchell Fales] was, you know, from a similar background. Story_ID: 648936 Speaker 1: And, when my father [Timothy Fales] started seeing my mother [Josephine Premice] and, you know, was going to marry her, my grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.] was not pleased. My grandmother [Dorothy Mitchell Fales] said, "I'm gonna meet her, and make my own decisions." And, this was a woman who, I mean, she was from--when people watched 'Downton Abbey' she was from the American equivalent of that. People think of the American equivalent of that as, you know, Newport [Rhode Island] and that's not it. Those were the more sort of to be, blunt, nouveau [nouveau riche] Haiti people. It was more of the people that you read about in 'The Age of Innocence,' the Edith Wharton novels; the old, old families. That's really the equivalent in terms of the mentality and the lifestyle. They went fox hunting. It was, anyway, so, she didn't even have black help. And, certainly, she was from a very class bound caste. And, so, she met mother, she took her to lunch at the Colony Club [New York, New York], down the street here (laughter). Where I think that they--I don't think they had black help there either. They're probably Irish ladies who probably dropped their trays in the shock. But, she liked my mother and that was that. And, my parents moved to Italy when they first got married because they experienced so much backlash and hatred. And, father lost his job, and name expunged from the Social Register, and they were getting hate mail. Their parents were getting hate mail. My grandmother interestingly, again, with a sense of history kept all the hate mail she got. Even the letters from illiterate people in the South. Every single piece of mail. Ugly letters from friends, mentioned friends who wrote her letters of condolence when my father married my mother. And, she kept it all. And, it's all in the family archive. I'm grateful to her for that when I wrote my book about my mother ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill], I saw all of this for the first time. And, again, I thought how remarkable for someone to be aware that this was worthy of being kept. That it was important. That it would be a fascinating artifact, happily (laughter). This is not the--what the reaction would be today, probably. So, and then, when my parents moved, my grandmother would come and see us in Italy when we were living there. And, then when we came back when I was two, my grandfather finally said, "All right, what am I doing?" (Laughter), "I'm gonna get myself together," and so he embraced us. And, the rest of the family had always--part of them felt, well, the poor children. I mean, the usual attitude to all those tragic mulattos, they'll never fit in anywhere (laughter). They're gonna be, you know, like Pinky [Pinky Johnson] (laughter). So, but, they never harbored any resentment and actually a member of the Chubb family, you know the famous insurance, only they're old friends of my father's family. And, I was working on a project in Hollywood and one of them was working out there and we were on the phone and I said, "Oh, I think our families know each other." And, he said to me, "Yes, when I saw your name, I asked." And then, I can tell he, he didn't, he didn't wanna say, but he didn't, he said, "But, then I--I didn't think you would be related." And, it was obvious 'cause I was black. So, we met and he--took him a long time to sort of process, you know. So, your father married your mother and then finally he looked at me and he said, "Oh, but then again, your family was so ancient, they could afford it." And, it was almost like, they could afford the blow (laughter). You know what, a more social climbing family who were trying to establish themselves, who didn't have this history wouldn't've been able to (air quotes) afford (laughter) the blow to their status of having black relatives. But, you know, it was like you're old nobility so you can, you know, you just get absorbed in it. It was very funny. It was such an interesting reflection. So, anyway, it's all, for me more than anything, historically fascinating. And, you know, when I read an Edith Wharton novel, that's, that's, my father's family's world. As again, particularly something like 'The Age of Innocence,' which really talks about that set, that, that came here in the 17th century. And, all associated together and had a certain noblesse oblige attitude. And, worshiped down at Grace Church [New York, New York], where my family still has a pew. And, so, I wanna meet Julian Fellowes, the createor of 'Downton Abbey,' 'cause I know he's doing again, the American version and I wanna say, "It's not Newport," (laughter). Go to Middleburg [Virginia]. Go to Gladstone, New Jersey [Peapack and Gladstone, New Jersey], that's, that's where you'll find the counterparts to the Crawleys. Story_ID: 648937 Speaker 1: Now, was--does your--was your father [Timothy Fales] raised, was it--was he raised knowing all of his history? And, was it purposely passed down? Speaker 2: Yes. And, I mean, in those families because lineage mattered. It was something that people just understood and you knew who you were related to. And, they all had country houses in the same area. And, they all socialized together and you knew, you just knew. And, then my grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.] did a history of the family. I have the book. And, he, he went and documented every single generation and who they were, what they did, and wills, and it's actually a great resource. They see people scrambling to figure out who they were and whom they're descended from. I've got it all written for me in a book. So, he was very well aware of that. He wasn't that interested in it. And, he was a maverick and he was somebody who felt an affinity with cultures that weren't his own. His mother [Dorothy Mitchell Fales] was a big Francophile and he loved France, and languages. And, he was always fascinated with African culture and the cultures of the African diaspora, so. But, I think, when I look at his wide ranging intellect and his curiosity that really does come directly from his father. And, even when I look at what some of his ancestors did, they were--many of them were sailors. His namesake was a sailor. The sea is a big theme in the family. Writing and public speaking, there were orders. So, it--I'm a big believer in the nature and nurture combined. But, you see, you see the intellectual inheritance. You see the line that comes down. And, his brothers [DeCoursey Fales, Jr. and Haliburton Fales II], though they followed different paths from his, they all shared this sort of wide ranging curiosity about history and mathematics, and cultures not necessarily their own, so. Story_ID: 648938 Speaker 1: Where did you father [Timothy Fales] fit in, in birth order? Speaker 2: My father was the youngest. He was the baby. He was the save the marriage baby. And, so, I think that also contributed to his being the more rebellious one. There was also the rumor in the family that my grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.] was half Jewish, which of course, in those circles was scandalous. You weren't supposed to, you know, they didn't even say, Jew, they would say juif, you know. So, apparently his mother, his mother was allegedly Jewish. We don't, we don't know (laughter) that we don't know for certain. But, my father was aware of that and kind of felt this resentment that this was something that people were trying keep under wraps, so. Speaker 1: I see. So, he knew the story? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know why he--do you ever know--where was he--he was hanging around sort of circles with entertainers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or, you know, do you know how that happened? Did he ever explain? Speaker 2: Well, so, he went all over the place, and he hung out in clubs in Harlem [New York, New York]. My mother [Josephine Premice] never even went to. I mean, she used to joked that the first time she ate chitterlings was with him, 'cause that's, you know, she grew up on Haitian food it's--and it's a different kind of soul food (laughter). It's soul food with millefeuille pastry in it (laughter) very, very different. She did not--we don't do grits, we do Haitian cornmeal with beans and so forth. But, he--they had a mutual friend called Jen--Johnny Gallier [ph.], who was kind of a man about town. So, dad was sort of an uptown and downtown boy. He hung out with society people, and he hung out with, you know, as I said, people up in Harlem who's kind of all over the place. But, this fellow, John Gallier, who was very much a man about town, British, had lived through the London Blitz and, you know, knew the Duke and Duchess of Windsor [Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson]. And, anyway, he, he was a friend of dad's, just probably through the society circles. And, also, we have to think about the time. The '50s [1950s] when there was a little bit more crosspollination, you know. [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and all of these women were performing these fantasy clubs here in midtown. So, they were meeting all kinds of people. Anyway, so, John Gallier is the one who brought my father to see 'Jamaica' [E.Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy] because John was, was friends with my mother, but very close to Lena Horne at that point. And, so that's how my dad met my mother. But, there was a lot of that going on. If you ever talk to the great jazz impresario George Wein. He talks about how much integration was going on because of these nightclubs, really. And, it was the thing to do, to go to the (unclear) or one of these nightclubs in the '50s [1950s], and you know, these society boys would fall in love with. Eartha Kitt was pursued by a man name John Ryan [John Barry Ryan III], whose mother made sure (laughter), he didn't end up marrying her. But, there was a lot of that going on. And, again, it's hard for us to imagine today, 'cause we're in some ways a bit more segregated today than, than they were even then which is more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I know that [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's, I think, a lot of her dancers married white men-- Speaker 2: Married white men. Speaker 1: --in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. 'Cause there was just so much interaction going on and people going to Europe. And, and then, you know, you had people like Doris Duke, who was very interested in all kinds of cultures. And, today the very wealthy live in sort of a permanent gated community. And, if anything, there's just more associating amongst themselves. At the time, it was people had songs and people, you know, wanted to see what the latest thing was. And, you know, they would go study dance at Bennington [Bennington College, Bennington, Vermont]. I mean, there was, there was a greater curiosity, I think, about what the wider world was holding, so. Story_ID: 648939 Speaker 1: And, talk about your parents meeting. Speaker 2: Yep, so my mother [Josephine Premice] was doing 'Jamaica' [E.Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy], which was a musical on Broadway with music by Yip Harburg, who famously wrote 'Over the Rainbow.' And, it starred Lena Horne and Ricardo Montalban, which people will remember from 'Fantasy Island,' (laughter) and the Cordoba leather ads. And, and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis was in it as well. At any rate, so, there was my mother, she was what, thirty-two years old, and she was nominated for a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] in this performance. She was really the show stopper. David Merrick who people have termed, the abominable showman. He's very, very famous Broadway producer, was the producer of it. And, so, John Gallier [ph.], this mutual friend brought my father [Timothy Fales] to the performance and he actually, at the time, was still married, he was about to separate from his first wife. And, he just took one look at my mother on stage wearing her sarong (laughter) singing, 'Leave the Atom Alone.' And, that was that. He said, "That this is for me." And, he persuade her for two months. And, she wouldn't give him the time of day 'cause she was very much about her career and she'd had her heart broken several times. And, he was still married. And, then finally, one day he called her, and he said, "Look I've had the best day ever and I know you're not gonna say, no." So, they went to the Oyster Bar at the Plaza [Plaza Hotel, New York, New York], which the Plaza still exists but the Oyster Bar sadly doesn't, and that was that. It was, it was as Mom says, "We married in a coffin," and she just, she knew then. She would spend the rest of her life with him, so. Story_ID: 648940 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill]? Speaker 2: Good god (laughter). That's a tough one. Probably what comes to mind is being three or four and my mother [Josephine Premice] practicing with her accompanist at home. Her accompanist would play the piano that was in the foyer. And, she would be belting out her songs. That's what--those are--that's the image that comes to mind. Speaker 1: Now, were you in Rome [Italy] at the time? Speaker 2: No. We're in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: You're in New York. Speaker 2: On the Upper West Side. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Upper New York. Yeah. I don't, I don't have memories of Rome. I was a baby. I mean, I think for most of us, when we think of earliest memories, what comes up is we're three or four. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: That's kind of the-- Story_ID: 648941 Speaker 1: Now, with--so where are you living at this point? Speaker 2: So, we're on the Upper West Side [New York, New York], 97th [Street] and West End [Avenue]. And, which was not fashionable at that point. But, my mother [Josephine Premice] spent a year trying to find an apartment and was turned down by a lot of places 'cause she was black. My father [Timothy Fales] wasn't coming with her sometimes. Apparently, my brother and I would come along with the nanny who'd come with us from Italy, who was white and who was a very elegant lady. And, if she wasn't in an apron, so people would start talking to her and, you know, thinking my mother was the nanny. And, anyway, but finally found this place, which it turns out, I found out as an adult, it's actually one of--there's a famous architect called Rosario Candela who does a lot of beautify buildings. But, this was one of his building on the West Side. The West Side when it was developed was kind of the Jewish answer to the East Side. So, there's some nice size apartments. But, the, the amenities, some of them weren't as luxurious and so forth. And, at that point, as I said, the neighborhood was kind of dodgy. There was a bit of everything. You had dry cleaners on the street in the morning (laughter), and across the street was this hotel but it wasn't as fashionable that it is now. Very derelict, and anyways, but again, my mother created-- and my parents created a cocoon for us. But, with beautiful furniture, and went to great schools, and ate great food, and so, in the midst of the not sheekest neighborhood in New York, we were very cosseted, so. Speaker 1: And, your brother, can you give--'cause you have a brother. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Yes. So, my brother is Enrico Fales, and a very brilliant man. Three years older than I. So, he probably would have different memories (laughter). We have a shared history, but every child grows up in their own family. So, being male, he had a different experience of my mother than I did. And, the family lines divided on sex lines as well. I would say, I'd probably identify much more closely with my mother. He adored my mother, but there was this sense of the women versus the men. Story_ID: 648942 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sight, smells, and sounds that remind me of growing up. Great question. So, sights, the lights on Broadway. Sardi's restaurant [New York, New York] on 44th Street. The sign hasn't changed. That distinctive burgundy canopy, and just that 44th Street in Shubert Alley. That to me is growing up. The West Side of New York [New York], which again, has changed somewhat. But, still have that wonderful eclectic feel. So, those beautiful old Beaux Arts buildings, like The Apthorp [New York, New York], and the (unclear). And, sounds, I would have to say, any, any musical overture (laughter), because I grew up going to Broadway musicals. So, that right away when I'm sitting in a theater and the orchestra strikes up an overture that brings me right back to my childhood. If I listen to West Indian music, particular French West Indian music that would bring home Christmas, Christmas Eve. My dad [Timothy Fales] would be blaring (laughter) Haitian and Guadeloupian music. Smells, the smell of cooking. The smell of delicious cooking. A roast in the oven. The smell of just delicious onions and of chicken marinated in, in lemon, and in white wine. My mother [Josephine Premice] was an amazing cook. So, to me it's very comforting--she wasn't a baker (laughter). It's not the smell of cookies. It's the savory smells of cooking. The herbs and the spices. So, I like to--I don't get to cook too often. But, for holidays, I love to, to cook and that. It's just a very reassuring thing to me to smell a roast in my, in my oven. And, then perfumes because we, we believed firmly in perfume (laughter). There's a Chanel [Coco Chanel] saying that I think is great. She said, "A woman who has no perfume is lost." And, I firmly agree. You gotta have your--gotta find your scent and stick to it. So, when I was six, my mother gave me my first bottle of perfume. It was Muguet de Bonheur, which was a lily of the valley fragrance by Caron which is an old French house. She--when she was--when my brother [Enrico Fales] was younger, wore Joy perfume. When I was born, it turned on her, so she couldn't wear it anymore. But, there was a Miss Dior fragrance that she wore that had kind of a citrus undertone. And, then there's a fragrance called First, by Van Cleef and Arpel [Van Cleef and Arpels], so. And, then the sensation of the combination of the feeling of fur mixed with the scent of perfume. Because my mother always wore fur in the winter and she always had scent on, so. Oh, and the jangling of bangles, because my mother always wore jewelry and often bangles, so. I ware bangles, not wearing them today because I don't want the annoying clink, clink, clink, over this interview (laughter). Which would have people say, "Could she under accessorize." So, I'm under accessorized today, it's very difficult for me. I'm having traumatic experience. Story_ID: 648943 Speaker 1: Talk about growing up in the, in the Fales household, what was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. The Premice-Fales household-- Speaker 1: The Premice, okay Premice, that's right. Speaker 2: I should say, 'cause it was very, very, much--yes. So, it was just wonderful because, it was so eclectic. We had antiques that were from Italy. We had Fales family antiques, some of which I have here now. And, my parents, when they lived in Rome [Italy], spent a lot of time at the flea market. So, like I said, we have all these Italian antiques, you know, 18th century painted furniture. And, then there were African pieces. So, the--even the decor of the place bespoke the eclecticism of my parents' union and our family heritage. And, it was a tumultuous household emotionally in a lot of ways for a lot of reasons. But, there was always a lot of laughter. My father [Timothy Fales] and mother [Josephine Premice] both had an amazing sense of humor. They were both bigger than life characters. My--one of my mother's boyfriends had been Richard Burton, and you know, when I think of Liz Taylor [Elizabeth Taylor] and Richard it wasn't quite that crazy. But, in its own way, it was. Obviously, there wasn't as much money. They weren't doing it all on yachts and they didn't get married twice. But, it's that same kind of people of that era were just more reckless. They drank a lot. They lived big. They, they didn't go to therapy (laughter). So, their emotions was huge and they had their rows and you knew the rows were going on or you were a witness to the rows. And, I used to joke, we had a cow bell, an African cow bell over our breakfast room table where we'd have dinner. And, if my parents were going at it, I'd go ding, ding, ding, and you know, put an end to the, to the argument, so. It was loud. It was ruckus. It was alive. It was stimulating. It just--it was bigger than life, is the way I can describe it. And, we were, we were not wealthy because we were essentially living off of my father's trust. But, there was a sense of richness in the deepest ways because of the culture richness, because of the beauty that my mother had created around us, because of my parents' wonderful eye and imagination in terms of putting things together. So, I never felt deprived, you know. I went to private school [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York]. And, there were certainly kids who lived, most of them lived on the East Side [New York, New York], which I was very well aware was a more fashionable neighborhood, and richer neighborhood. But, I never felt inferior in any way. Because it was--it's like that silly ad for Bottega Veneta, "When Your Own Initials Are Enough" (laughter) sort of. My parents raised me on the principle, you don't need an address, you know, you are who you are. Maybe it's because they couldn't afford a 5th Avenue, or Park Avenue address. But, it was sort of, that's not what you need to be a respected human being. That comes from within. So, that was very strengthening. And, it was not a conventional household in any, in any way. I mean, people walked around naked, and (laughter) it was--my mother didn't cook in an apron; she'd wear an evening gown, you know. It was--she wore false eyelashes every single day. So, it was, it was theatrical and alive. And, but, to me it was normal. So, it was only, only as an adult that I realized not everybody's mother comes in throwing open the curtains saying, "Rise and shine" (laughter). That's not the way most people wake up in the morning (laughter) and she was a great cook but breakfast wasn't her thing. So, she'd make me, you know, like a protein shake and, I mean, but she'd pack this beautiful lunch for me that was not, you know, Wonder Bread. She got me, before anybody had artisanal breads, she would get these beautiful breads from Zabar's [New York, New York] and Westphalian ham, prosciutto, you know, things that Americans weren't eating at that point, so. So, we're in our own universe, really. The thing I related to once, I was reading an article about, her name will come back to me. She's an actress, who's actually of Russian descent. Lee Grant, and her family were basically Russian aristocrats. And, they had basically recreated their life, lock, stock and barrel in this apartment on Riverside Drive. And, I thought, okay somebody else grew up in the same (laughter) crazy cocoon that I did. Where they created this universe that was this blend of eras and epics. And, my room looked like something out of the Edwardian era, 'cause that was my taste. And, I mean, long before 'Downton Abbey,' I was addicted to 'Upstairs, Downstairs,' and the whole family was. And, you know, we thought we were those people. And, so, we created our own environment. And, so, that actually is a big gift to realize no matter where you live, how through imagination and a little bit of money to buy a--you can do it at the flea market (laughter). You can create this magnificent environment that's palatial for your child. Story_ID: 648944 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask, 'cause it's not like your parents [Josephine Premice and Timothy Fales] are going off to work in the traditional sense-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, that's what you're talking about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: So, what was li- I mean, can you talk a little bit more about life inside the household? Speaker 2: So, I mean, it was the normal, you know, your mother wakes you up every morning, which she did. Every single morning. Even if she was doing a show which at--when she did 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] was when she really went back to work in the earnest, when I was eleven. And, even if she was doing the show out of town, she would take the bus home every night so she could be there to wake us up. And, that was a memorial that stayed with me, 'cause that's a lot of dedication. She could have just stayed in a hotel in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but she insisted on being home. So, it was, you know, wake you up. Here's your protein shake have a, you know, in bed or whatever, and get dressed and go off to school. And, when I came home, she would usually be whatever. She might be rehearsing with her accompanist or she might be sowing something. She was always creating and she'd make--I'd do my homework for hours 'cause I went to a French school [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York]. We had four hours of homework a night. So, I don't wanna hear a lot of these complaints about, oh, too much homework, two hours a night (laughter). From age nine, four hours a night. So, I'd lock myself up in my room, do my homework, and then we'd have dinner as a family. And, that was a lot of conversation, and a lot of talking about what our days had been. My father, at that point, wasn't working full-time, he was interested in researching Haitian, and Guadeloupian history. So, he would just often be just be hold up in his study. And, so we'd have dinner as a family and then, you know, it was time to go to bed. So, yeah, it wasn't dad's going off to the office. And, then when my father went back to sea when I was thirteen, then he'd be away for months at a time. But, then when he was home, he was home, and around, and again, usually in his study, buried in some book or research or something. So, everybody was a little bit in their own world. I was in my world of--I was very academic. My brother [Enrico Fales] was in his world of whatever. He was more rebellious and went through different phases of whatever being interested in graffiti, being interested in Jimi Hendrix. And, then my mother was, was doing her thing. Story_ID: 648945 Speaker 1: So, what is the, what is--how are you finding your space then? And, you're holed up, are you an internal child at this point? Are you-- Speaker 2: Well I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) living inside your head? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm a bit of an oblivious child in some ways because as I look back there were things that I sensed were going on. My father's [Timothy Fales] infidelities. Certain things that were not great, you know. Too much drinking. Some of my mother's [Josephine Premice] unhappiness about her career and her marriage. Issues with my brother [Enrico Fales], which I don't really wanna go into. But, you know, there were stuff going on. So, I, at that point, I mean, I was very outgoing and loud, and I was always in the school play and so forth. So, I'm not--I wasn't an introvert and I wasn't huddled in a corner. I thought my life was perfect. I was very happy. But, I put on blinders and didn't look at certain things. And, I do think my little--my room with my pretty things--I can just remember I had an oval table that my mother had covered in a beautiful tablecloth and that was my desk. And, I would do four hours of homework (laughter) a night. And, I loved history. I loved things that were beautiful. And, there's a portrait of one of my ancestors that's over there that hung in my bedroom and she's named--I'm named after her. I'm not really technically named after her, but we have the same name. And, so, I was in my own universe, created my own universe that was based on some real things. Obviously, (laughter) it wasn't delu- it wasn't someone in the projects pretending that she was a princess. I was pulling on the things that were sustaining to me; family history, the creativity of both my parents, the intellect. But, yes, I probably was very focused on my own world and creating my cocoon. And, my mother, I think, strongly encouraged that because she really wanted me to be able to flourish and to have wings. And, so, she encouraged a certain amount of, I call it delusions of royalty (laughter). Sort of you're a princess. Not in an obnoxious way but sort of, you've got a path to forge in the world. You can make something of yourself. You're going to be a leader. Didn't say those words. But, that was pretty much the, you're, you've got something to say, you're special in some way. Not, again, lording it over anybody, but just you're unique. You represent a unique set of circumstances; and you can break barriers and do things. Story_ID: 648946 Speaker 1: Now, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill], at that time, there weren't waiting lists for schools, but you went to a private school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It wasn't like it is today where you have to get-- Speaker 2: No. Please, as I joke, my daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill] goes to the same school now. And, I joke, you know, then you could call drunk from a French restaurant and say, "I have a kid to enroll," and they be like, "Sure," (laughter). "Bring her by now," you know, it's--you have to sell your mother to get into these schools. So, it was not all of that and I--and they purposely chose this international school because, I think, my--there were both very well aware of what we might endure in a more homogeneous environment. And, this school was--had every nationality you can image. To this day, there's sixteen nationalities. A lot of African diplomats, a lot of mixed kids, because it's more European. So, we didn't stick out in any way. And, also, when children don't look like each other, they're united by their difference. And, everybody had a different name, you know. I had a Madagascarian classmate. I had Lebanese classmates. I had Algerian classmates. I had Cote d'Ivoirian. It was just literally everything under the sun. And, so, nobody said, "What are you?" And "Why is your mother this?" It was just a non-issue. Speaker 1: Now, the name of the school? Speaker 2: It is the Lycee Francais [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York] and it was created in 1935 and it became a place of refuge for a lot of French people who came, or European in general who came to escape the Holocaust. And, so--and, at the time, it was in these beautiful Beaux Arts mansions that were made to look like 18th century French chateaus. So, again, (laughter) part of the fantasy and the delusion. One of those buildings is now a luxury condominium that a lot of CEOs live in and the others been bought by the emir of Qatar, so that sort of tells you how palatial it was. I mean, soaring ceiling, and beautiful crown molding everywhere, and marble floors and marble fireplaces, and so. That does something to you, walking into that kind of of environment, every day. Again, just daily aesthetic enrichment, and giving you a sense that you belong in an environment that splendid, so. Story_ID: 648947 Speaker 1: Now, are--where do you know--where do you sort of sense a difference between your parents [Josephine Premice and Timothy Fales]? I know, you talk about that, you know, in your book ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill] that you didn't understand, you know, color, or differences-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, what do you--is there any exposure, 'cause really by the time that you're entering elementary school, I mean, you know, elementary school or going to school, it's really the late '60s [1960s], you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, yeah. I was born in 1962 so my first realization that they were of different colors was literally, I was five. So, it's 1967. And, I'm out with my dad and he hails a cab and it just stops automatically, magically. And, I just thought this was the most wondrous thing because I usually was out with my mother and cab, after cab would pass us by. And, so, I came home, and I said, "Mommy, papa's really good at getting taxis and you're terrible." And, they didn't discuss color up until that point. And, she said to me, "Well, there's a reason for that. Look at me." And, she said, "People think I'm going to Harlem [New York, New York], which is a poor neighborhood. And, your father's white and they think he's going someplace nice. And, that's why." So, that was the moment of realizing, oh--'cause, you know, people don't seems to understand, children for them colors are colors in a crayon box. It doesn't have any value. But, that was a--the moment of understanding. This represents a difference in social status. This represents a difference in the perception of others. You know, because to me my mother was a goddess. Who would not want to take her anywhere? And, who would possibly imagine that she wasn't going someplace fantastic, you know, so. So, from then on, I was certainly aware that they were different colors and that that meant something to the society outside. Story_ID: 648948 Speaker 1: And, then when I was seven, my mother [Josephine Premice] took me up to Harlem [New York, New York], and I just absolutely loved it. It was so happy. I just thought it was the most exciting place. And, she bought me a ring that had, you know, the black, a black bead, green bead, and a red bead for the little African flag, and then it was the, it was the African continent on the other side (laughter). I thought that that was the most beautiful thing ever. And, I was--I found it fantastic, and then we got in a taxi and I said, "And, now we're going back to New York [New York]." (Laughter) She said, "Harlem's in New York." So, you know, it's--none of it was tragic or traumatic. The moment that was probably most horrific to me was, in terms of racism and racist perceptions was, when I was eight years old, or nine. And, my mother was doing a show at the Lambs Club [New York, New York], which now is a hotel and restaurant. And, she finished a performance and my brother [Enrico Fales] and I were with her, and she was always, you know, dressed to the nine. She was in a fur, standing on 44th Street and a cab slowed down and the guy said, "How much?" And, my mother went ballistic and was cursing him out. And, I didn't understand what the man had asked her. What--but, I could just see that my mother was quaking with fury. And, I said, you know, "What was that and what did he want?" And, she said, "He thought I was selling myself and you." And, you know, I was young, I didn't quite understand what that meant, but you knew this wasn't something good. And, and again, there was that profound realization of, this would not have happened to my mother if she were white. So, the awareness of race was certainly there. And, backing up, probably from when I was six or seven, they really started talking a lot about culture and history and what it meant to be black. And, the constant message was, all black people in this country are the product of some form of miscegenation (laughter). So, you're not some huge exception. You're not something weird and special. You look at your Haitian relatives. Most of them are lighter than you are. This is, you know, join the club, basically. You're a mutt like everyone else. And, my father's [Timothy Fales] (unclear) was always, there's only one race; the human race. But, they were very--they talked a lot about race and how we would be perceived and the disconnect between how we would be perceived and what the truth was. And, the truth to them was, you're a human being first. You hail from these wonderfully rich cultures, and you get to carry all that within you. And, some people are gonna see it and some people aren't. And, some people are gonna think you're a child of a lesser god. But, you know, just keep going on your way. I did feel the pressure, and my brother, I don't know if he would see it the same way. I did certainly feel the pressure of, I had to represent everybody. There was a sense of, you have to be impeccable. You have to be better than. You're gonna be smarter than. You're gonna be more educated than. You're going to be more elegant than anyone. Because the world is watching you, was a little deluded (laughter). Nobody really cares (laughter). But, there was a sense of when and where I enter, you know, the whole race enters with me. And, in our case a lot more besides, you know, this family and that family, and this lineage and that lineage; so it was--there was that pressure as well, which I'm not putting on my daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill] (simultaneous). Story_ID: 648949 Speaker 1: But that's pretty sophisticated in a way, you know, 'cause people have a hard time, so I, you know, around that subject. I don't-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting, when I was working on ' Different World' ['A Different World'] this woman who was doing--she was a, a Scandinavian woman married to a black man; a white Scandinavian woman, I should pres- make a precision because, not necessarily white. But, anyway, she was white married to a black man, and she was doing her Ph.D. thesis on biracial kids. In preparation really for being a mother, which I thought was fantastic 'cause she really wanted to understand what sets people up for failure, what shores them up, how do these kids perceives themselves, and this is back in the '90s [1990s]. So, now there's so many more. But, then there were, not that many, who were directly mixed. And, not as many interracial marriages. And, so, we talked and she said, "You talked about race at home?" I said, "Yes." (Laughter) And, she said, "I interviewed thirty people and you're the first person I've spoken to in whose home race was discussed." I was absolutely floored 'cause I thought that's just child abuse. I mean, you can see an elephant in the room. And, especially at the time that we were growing up, it was, I mean, the backdrop was the Civil Rights Movement. The backdrop was the Negritude movement. (Laughter) The backdrop was, you know, the guys raising the fist at the Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico]. I mean, how can you not have any conversation about this? It's insane. And, you know, at a certain point, our family was our family. So, we didn't--when we would go and be with our white relatives, we didn't feel weird. But, I knew in certain instances, if there were someone who came along who didn't know us that they would wonder, well who are they. So, you can't--it's just the elephant in the room. You've gotta, you've gotta address it. And, it's just, it's just denial of reality. Story_ID: 648950 Speaker 1: So, you, when you were out, did you as a family, was there a lot of going out as a family? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, people-- Speaker 2: Yes, there was a lot of going out as a family. We went to restaurants a lot and--I mean, we cou- ate at home a lot. But, we also, whether it was going to the Chinese restaurant in the neighborhood or--that's another actual memory being smacked down because I put soy sauce in my soup one day. And, it turned very dark. And, I said, "Mommy look my soup is Negro." And, my mother [Josephine Premice] said, "What on earth are you saying?" You don't--that a stupid (laughter) it's like okay, don't say that. It's like okay, bad joke (laughter). But--and, so, I also say that to say that a big cardinal rule in our house was, you don't make fun of any ethnicity, you know. We are ethnic people, all of us, and so, every, every ethnic group deserves respect. We don't call people by names. We don't, we don't make disparaging comments about groups. This real sense of our common humanity. And, a real sense of the world's cultures are to be respected. And, people who are different from you are to be respected, so. Speaker 1: So, did you--so your father's [Timothy Fales] role in this though, he, he really, he in his heart loved parts of the black community. Speaker 2: Oh, my god! Not just parts. I mean, he preferred the black community (laughter) to his own. I mean, if anyone with disparaging about WASPs [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], it was he. He was not nearly as proud of his own family's history as he was of my mother's family's history. And, even as an adult, we were having a conversation and I said something about my--his mother's [Dorothy Mitchell Fales] southern roots. And, he said, "Oh, but, you know who owned far more slaves than her family, your mother's family," (laughter), "in Haiti." I said, "Well, I don't think that's a big point of pride," (laughter). That's like being Jewish and your, you know, your ancestor was a Nazi kapo. I mean, this is not, this is not something I wanted to broadcast widely. But, anyway, and that--he wasn't proud that they were slave owners, but it was just--he loved that they were this noble landed family of landed gentry. But, in general, he just, he had traveled so much. All over the world, really. And, he had--was a real chameleon. He could speak Creole so well. But, when he was in the islands, they thought he was working for the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] because most Caucasians, certain Americans, so. And, he, you could ask him any question and he knew. And, it was interesting, there's a beautiful book that's come out called 'The Black Count' ['The Black Count: Glory, Revolution, Betrayal, and the Real Count of Monte Cristo,' Tom Reiss] which is about Alexandre Dumas', the author of 'The Three Musketeers,' father [Thomas-Alexandre Dumas] who was a mulatto from San- Saint-Domingue which is now Haiti. And, he was the son of a French nobleman [Alexandre Antoine Davy] and black slave. And, he became a great general in Napoleon's [Napoleon Bonaparte] army. And, he, he was at the major battles against the Austrians. He led the Egyptian campaign. Anyway, the--every article in the book kept saying, "The never told story, the never told story." And, I met the author at a book fair, and I said, you know, "I'm so glad that you've written this book, but with all due respect, this is not an untold story. I grew up on this story." And, he said, "Well, how did you grow up on it?" And, I said, "Well, my father knew it." And, he said, "Well, your father's a very unusual man, because there has been no official--." And, so, I mean, this was just a year ago, two years ago, (laughter) and I thought, he really was. And, in his study he had, he had reproductions of portraits of Toussaint L'Ouverture and Dessalines [Jean-Jacques Dessalines], in their elegant, you know, 18th century military uniforms. I mean, those are the portraits that he, he did put his ancestral portraits, these were the portraits, those were his heroes. So, that's very empowering to have a Caucasian father from the family he was from, who is basically saying to you, this is every bit as important if not more important than, you know, the Mayflower. Most people would perceive it as, oh, my mother married up. But, he made it clear, he married up or at least his equal. So, that's, that's very centering ethnically and racially. And, as many emotional issues as I've had in my (laughter) life, as much time as I've spent in therapy, it certain hasn't been over issues of identity. Oh, I'm so torn or oh, this is so--it's not hard, it's just--this is reality, this is life. This is, you know, we're all children of all kinds of blendings and diasporas. So, now the world is sort of catching up to that and realizing globalization has been going on for two thousand years (laughter), whether it's through the spice trade or the textile trade and things that I just grew up knowing that because of my parents, and in no small part 'cause of my dad. Story_ID: 648951 Speaker 1: --I think it's amazing, you know, that that occurred in your household. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, given, even the backdrop. So, how, where, and what discussions are occurring in the house about the racial times? You know, the things, the uproar, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so. Are we rolling? So, one of the things I, because I had been a baby when we left Rome [Italy], I was whatever, two, I had nostalgia about, my gosh, we lived in this place that was called the palazzo. Of course, I didn't realize at the time that every building in (laughter) the world was called the palazzo. It doesn't mean it's a palace. But, I just that, oh, it would be so glamorous, you know, to still be living there. And, my mother [Josephine Premice] said, "No, it was really important, and it was time that we came home. Because if you had grown up there, you would've been an oddity your whole life. And, we didn't want that for you. You were American. You needed to understand what it is to be a black American and to be back here." And, they had friends who were very heavily involved in some of the political discussion and activities. [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte was a very close friend. And, so, I remember when there was the massacre at Wounded Knee [South Dakota] that we went to a whole talk about. That at their home, there was some sort of fundraiser. And, at that point, Julie Belafonte [Julie Robinson Belafonte], Harry's wife, wore her beautiful long dark hair in a long braid and she had the headband. And, you know, I was a kid and you're not really concerned about what color anybody is, but I turned to my mother and I said, "Is Aunt Julie Native American?" You know, Indian at the time we said. And she said, "No. She's a nice Jewish girl." (Laughter) You know, she, she had so many different appearances. So, I finally got it straight at eight, and she was white and Jewish, not--she wasn't the light skinned black woman, she wasn't a Native American. So, we talked about the different currents and things that were going on. And, they were friends with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and, who obviously, you know, as a writer was very politicized. And, also, I was very aware of the role my mother was playing in the theater at the time, 'cause that was really the birth with Joseph Papp of non-traditional casting. And, my mother was doing, you know, mobile Shakespeare going off to parks in the Bronx [New York] to do Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. And, when I was nine she had the production of 'The Cherry Orchard' [Anton Chekhov] that was supposed to be directed by [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, but ended up being directed by Michael Schultz [HistoryMaker Michael A. Schultz]. But, James Earl Jones was in it and so I was very aware of the racist reviews. John Simon called them the black cherries. So, we were very aware of how race had impeded my mother's career and the careers of the pretty remarkable people came through the house. Whether it was [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne, who was like an uncle to us. And, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and Diana Sands and, you know, all of these people were there. So, a lot of the political upheaval I was seeing through the lens of performers. And, what they were doing to try to change things; and the roles that they were playing in various marches and so forth. Story_ID: 648952 Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those conversations that had an impact on you, where people were talking about their struggles, you know, on the stage? Speaker 2: There were so many (laughter). So, it was, I mean, that was at least a bimonthly occurrence. And, just that understanding that, here's all this talent and I remember a group of them trying to get a black soap opera done. And, my mother [Josephine Premice] coming home from the meetings and it just wasn't gonna happen. And, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll calling her, you know, saying, "Well, you know, there's a new series about a modeling agency and they wanted to look at me for the head of the modeling agency. But, they wanted footage of me where I'm glamorous and dramatic. And, I told my agent, 'Tell them that role has yet to be written for a black woman.'" So, there was, that was just a constant conversation. And, I'll never forget watching Diahann on Cher's show. Remember 'The Sonny and Cher Show,' the variety show? And, I always that Cher was great looking. And, I would listen to her song, 'Half Breed,' (laughter), that was my, my little mulattos anthem (laughter). Even though I didn't feel the way (laughter), I love to hate the word (laughter), you know, those stupid things. But, it was like, oh, at least somebody is talking about this, this is interesting. But, Diahann came out and they did this duet and I remember turning to my mother and saying, "There's just no comparison," you know, Diahann is so much more magnificent looking. She's a classic, exquisite beauty. And, and again, feeling the unfairness of--but, she did have a variety show ['The Diahann Carroll Show'] for a while but it never took off the way this did. So, there was an absolute constant sense of the inequities. And, also because I knew, I knew the level of preparation that all of these people had been through. I mean, their rehearsals and their knowledge base and, and their dreams. They talked so much about their dreams, and wouldn't it be great to do this, and literature and poetry and so forth. So, to see the refinement that they represented and the high artistic levels that they represented. And, yet understand that they probably weren't going to get the chance to show the full range of that. And, solely based on, on color. So, I was, that was a constant. That was a constant. Which is why I'm a bit of a lunatic when I see a repetition of some of those same horror stories today. And, for someone who was not a fan of the film, 'The Help.' (Laughter) I--the book ['The Help,' Kathryn Stockett] was better but, still the film to me was a horror movie. And, I just was so angry that these exquisite actresses, beautiful inside and out, very gifted, that this is what they're reduced to playing at this time. And, my mother also was very open in discussing how, you know, she went from being too dark, when she was coming up. You know, it was the Cotton Club era [New York, New York] and they wanted light skinned girls and she almost didn't get the part in 'Jamaica' [E.Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy] 'cause David Merrick didn't think she was light skinned enough. And, didn't think she was pretty enough to be Lena Horne's friend. And, and then in the '70s [1970s], she wasn't black enough. She was skinny (laughter). She had very sharp features which wasn't considered black. Which was like, this is crazy. Those are her features and she is black, so how is that not black, you know. And, she, she wasn't raising her fist and she wasn't, she was very deeply soulful. More rhythm than anybody, but not in the ways that, you know, she wasn't Aretha Franklin soulful, so. I just, the notion of how there were these ridged archetypes that were set up for black women and men. But, the focus was probably more on the women, in my mind, was always just ever present in my mind. And, that definitely had its imprinted impact. And, my mother would also say to me, "If you become an actress or a nun, I'll kill myself," (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, she wo- I was gonna ask you that. So, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. She never wanted me to be an actress because of what a hard road it was. And, she really believed it was a calling that you should only do it if it was the only thing you could do and be happy, and, she didn't see that for me, at all. So, I did not, I mean, I was absolutely brainwashed from a young age. And, she would say, it was her running commentary, "You can do anything you want, but if you become an actress or a nun, I'm killing myself," (laughter) so, I knew, I didn't even--though I enjoyed acting, and whatever. And, I remember once being in plays because she was talking to a friend about having seen me in the school play. And, she said, "She's a good little actress," which, you know, she was a tough critic, so. But, I just knew you're not going down that path, 'cause it's just--you're not getting anywhere. And, for me it wasn't--I do believe it's a calling. I do believe it's something you're either chosen for or you're not. And, there're plenty of other things that I can do and be, be very happy, so. Story_ID: 648953 Speaker 1: The sense of the injustice towards these women in particular, the men as well. But, there were so many of these women, these vibrant women in my house was so palpable and so strong, you know. To see these incredible looking, and I saw them in their downtime (laughter) and even with no makeup or even on a regular day, they looked exquisite. And, so, the disconnect between a world in which they didn't rate the cover of magazines but these white women did. It just has never, ever left me. And, so, and then again, today to see that repeat. To see, not enough black women on the covers of fashion magazines and not represented as, as glamorous and reduced to being the help in movies. And, made to look awful. It's--that sits heavily with me just 'cause of what I grew up around and I was so aware of how those images were used. It was very threatening to put [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll next to Cher because she blew her out of the water as a singer. And, she blew her out of the water as a beauty. And, that upsets a balance, if you will, so. Speaker 2: So, you--also, your mother [Josephine Premice] taught you a lot about manners, and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, appearance-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and, the proper things to do? Speaker 1: Yes. No, no, no, we were the big etiquette household. And, also because they, both my parents had this strong sense of noblesse oblige. There was this, you know, this is how we behave. This is how we stand. This is how we carry ourselves. This how we present ourselves. My mother really drummed it into me. You must look impeccable at all times. There is just no excuse. And, part of that definitely was racial. Part of that was the joy of dressing. Part of that was this is something no one can take away from you. No matter how they perceive you, you can present yourself in this way. So, part of it was fun. But, part of it was armor. And, that I've abandoned either because, it's just part of who I am. It's just the way I grew up. But, it is, it's funny because I feel like a reactionary sometimes. Someone sent me an email yesterday about the president's selfie. I know people are making too much of this and I wrote them back and I said, "Actually, I don't think they are." I'm embarrassed for all three of them (laughter). And, I'm trying to raise a child [Josephine Bristol Hill]. And, if she were taking a selfie at a state funeral, or funeral, or in church, I would reprimand her very stiffly. And, so, why is it okay for them to do that. And, then I had an awful thought, I said, "Well, he didn't have a black mother," (laughter). (Laughter) You know, I hate to say it but, no child of a black woman would be sitting there taking a selfie unless he's Kanye [Kanye West]. But, these that--Kanye's Kanye, so. That sense of, again, when and where you enter, and this person who wrote me is actually older and a black gentlemen and just loves the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. He said, "This was instigated by the president of Denmark [sic. prime minister, Helle Thorning-Schmidt]." And, I wrote him back saying, "You know, my mother would have said to me, 'Let the white girl do that. You're not white!'" And, noblesse oblige, (laughter). So, no. You have to set the standard. And, it's funny, you just have these moments where it brings you back to how you were brought up and the things in your upbringing that you do hold dear. And, I'm thrilled that my mother had that standard and, you know, some people say, "Oh, you can never relax." And, it sort of--you relax in other ways. But, the notion of upholding some kind of standard and representing something and being a leader and conducting yourself doesn't mean you have to be stiff. Doesn't mean you don't have a sense of humor. Doesn't mean you can't ever fart (laughter). But, you've got to represent something. Story_ID: 648954 Speaker 1: That's right. Well, there's been generally just the dumbing down of society. I mean, just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The dumbing down and the slouching, and--but, it's also, I just think for young people, it's very confusing. And, I--if I read one more time, they say, "And, the celebrities at the funeral were President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]," and whatever. I'm like, "President Clinton is not a celebrity. He's the former president of the free world." Let's--these are politicians. These are leaders. That's a separate category from Bono and these other people. And, it's as you say, dumbing down but also blurring of lines, in a way. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: That's just not, I don't think it's helpful. And, also, I know there was a lot of jubilation at the funeral. Because it's an African funeral [for Nelson Mandela], and in many African cultures there's a sense of the soul is going to a better place and we rejoice. We don't sit there dour and weeping into our hankies. We celebrate, but you don't take a selfie. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Sorry. So, it's--and that, again, I realize oh, my god, I'm just this relic. People just aren't raised that way, so. Speaker 1: And maybe in the old days you would never see a picture anyway, if they were doing it. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You know, that's the other thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the other thing, it would've been covered up somebody would've been taking, taking a Polaroid and it would've vanished, and so. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: But, it was. I realized, oh, my god! Just that sense of the importance of being a leader and representing that I got from both side of my family. Speaker 1: Well, you would never do it at a funeral. That's the other thing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, I mean, even you know, the phone even being out and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was like, wait a minute. Why is your iPhone out? As we're awaiting to hear, and probably somebody was speaking or about to speak, so. Anyway, just that a sense of decorum and propriety. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, that I'm thrilled I was raised with that and I'm passing that on. It's an uphill battle in this environment, but somebody's gotta do it (laughter). Story_ID: 648955 Speaker 1: Now what--you were spending summers at your [paternal] grandparents' [Dorothy Mitchell Fales and DeCoursey Fales, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: --and, so, where--what--when did those summers begin? What age were you, what age--? Speaker 2: From little. Really, from the time we came back and my grandparents', this is where the Downton Abby nostalgic comes. They had a beautiful estate in Gladstone, New Jersey [Peapack and Gladstone, New Jersey], which is hunt country. I mean, fox hunting was--is still practiced actually there. And, the hunt went through their property. It was 450 acres so it was the size of Monaco. And, there was different houses on the property. My uncle's house was down the hill from my grandmother's. And, so, we had a little cottage on the property. And, we would, we would go, I would go and have tea with--my grandmother served tea every, every afternoon at four o'clock and I'd go and sit with her and sip tea. And, then if you had dinner there or lunch, everything was very ritualized. It was sherry and warmed macadamia nuts. And, then you would go into the meal which would be served by white help, definitely (laughter). She had, for years, these two ladies, Blanche [ph.] and Easter [ph.], who were Irish sisters. And, then when they got too old, then she had a Spanish couple that she didn't quite approve of because the cook was too fancy in her manners. Anyway, so, it's a whole other era, really. And, the ringing of the bell for the butler to come out and change the plates. And, she used finger bowls in between the main course and the dessert. And, I was explaining the concept of the finger bowl to my daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill]. And, I said, "You know, actually, it was completely absurd 'cause we didn't eat anything with our hands. So, I don't know why we were rinsing our fingers in this crystal bowl with water, with a lemon wedge in it." Absolutely, makes no sense what so ever 'cause we even ate our fruit with a fork and knife (laughter). So, I have no idea. But, it was just part of one of those quaint rituals, so. But, it was great fun and I loved it. And, I think one of the things my grandmother recognized in my mother [Josephine Premice] was somebody who had the breeding to deal with this. And, was very comfortable in this environment and knew exactly how to conduct herself. And, then looking back and I realized it when I was writing my book about my mom ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill] that she--most people would try to fit into an environment like that. They would try to dress differently or maybe not wear so much makeup (laughter) or something. My mother was just completely herself with the false eyelashes and in her designer clothes and in this incredibly Anglo-Saxon environment where, you know, everybody's in headbands. They don't wear makeup. They have pearls. They have, they're in Talbots, that's where they shop, so. And, she didn't, you know, her whole attitude was don't try to fit in when you don't. Just be yourself. And, I think that's why people loved her so much, 'cause she had that sense of herself, so. Again, as I have come to understand the ways, the things that made me the way I am. I remember when I first worked in a very male environment in Hollywood, and I'd wear skirts and I'd wear frilly blouses and a woman I worked with said to me, in a year into it, she said, "Well, you've set me free to be feminine." And, I said, "What, what the heck are you talking about?" And, she said, "Well, you know, until you came along, I always tried to hide my body and wear boxy suits 'cause I just didn't--I wanted to fit in." And, it was sort of, well, you're not a guy (laughter). So, putting on a suit is fooling no one. And, again, I realized that just completely came from my mother who was just, you don't, you're not a chameleon. You remain yourself wherever you go. And, so, I wouldn't be a very good undercover journalist (laughter). I'm not, I'm not adapting. But, just that sense of be yourself and don't try to blend in when it's absolutely hopeless. You're never going to blend, you're going to stand out. So, go ahead and stand out. Story_ID: 648956 Speaker 1: Did your grandmother remain the maverick she was when she first met your mother [Josephine Premice] and approved or was that--? Speaker 2: No. She was, she was and really she was an interesting mixture of maverick and at the same time super traditionalist. One--I mean, she--it's funny talking to my cousins who are older than I am who, you know, knew her--a different side of her and she would say to them, "When you marry, you will have to stop riding and--'cause ladies don't ride," and so forth. I mean, she was very of her era. She was a post--just a, just cusp of Vic- the Victorian era really. The end of the Victorian era. She was born in the Victorian era. And, she was an American Victorian in many ways. But, at the same--and she was very class bound. I mean, she would talk about, you mustn't spoil the help. You know, the old--get ideas above their station. So, there was that sense of caste. But, then she embraced sort of the future and was--she never went to university because you didn't. You married well and that was the end of it. And, she was so proud that I was going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, like, so many of my male Fales ancestors had done. And, I have a cousin who's a lesbian. And, she's the one who first said to my mother, "I think, I think she likes girls," and, you know, so. And, this is not somebody, I mean, this is way before gay rights, way before. So, she was kind of clear eyed and somebody who just moved on with things. And, a journalist called her when my parents were dating and said, "Aren't you concerned that your son [Timothy Fales] will marry this Negro?" Said, "Aren't you worried?" And, she said, "I've never worried about anything in my life. I'm not going to start now." And, so, she was just very no nonsense. And, by the time my brother [Enrico Fales] and I came along, she had mellowed as a grandmother. She had five grandchildren before us. So, she was softer with us than she was with them. And, very, very embracing. And, we--she loved the theatre and she loved literature so we would correspond. I still have letters that I wrote her and letters she wrote me when I was a girl. 'Cause I'd write her when I was seeing a play or reading something interesting and she loved all that, so. And, she was very proud of us. She was the first one who took us to, you know, the local church there in Vernonsville [ph.]. Where, again, I mean, there were no black people in this area. There's one family somewhere in town and that was it, so. The first time my mother [sic. grandmother] went to the general store, she said, "I'm Mrs. Fales [Dorothy Mitchell Fales]." And, they said, "We know," you know. It was just, it was that kind of environment and she trotted us in and said, "These are my grandkids." And, so, no--another thing that made me angry with the film 'The Help,' which is about, you know, Junior League ladies. My grandmother was a Junior Leaguer and she was not anything like those ridiculous women. I'm sure there are women who were that racist and would be that small minded. But, she was, she was a bigger person than that. And, so, it's fascinating to me when I read her diaries from when she was a young girl. And, talks about, I was in Germany and we had a--we went to a, I don't know where they went, she ended up dancing with peasants. And, you know, she was so fascinated that she was dancing with peasants (laughter) and yet embracing, you know, whatever seventy years later, black grandchildren, lesbian granddaughter, you know, just moving with the times while remaining herself, while maintaining her traditions but embracing. Speaker 1: So, there were never any uncomfortable moments betw- you know-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: No. I never--when I hear these horrible stories of, "Oh, my grandmother used the word nigger in front of me or--," no. Not once. Ever. Ever. Ever. And, again, I attribute it to a level of just raw intelligence and sophistication and ability to just process and go, all right, this is--wasn't what I was raised to think is right. But, maybe that wasn't--and, and that her father [Clarence B. Mitchell] was an arch racist who wrote pamphlets against miscegenation so, if she had been bigoted she would have come by it extremely honestly. But, she had a remarkable ability to just sort of move, move along. Story_ID: 648957 Speaker 1: That's fascinating. Now, the--so, you, you're going to, let's see Lycee au- Francais-- Speaker 2: Lycee Francais [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lycee Francais. And, so, what are the subjects you liked? Is it-- Speaker 2: I loved history. I loved literature. When we did, we did 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe]. I loved English. We did 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' when I was fourteen. And, that was my first time every feeling like, oh, my god, there's a book that's about me. And, I had loved everything else we were studying before then. But, it was--I was on fire about this book. And, I realized it was because it was relevant to my own personal history. And, the history of black people and the intersection of black and white people. So, I just remember being like a light had gone off. I had, I had gone on, not off, but on (laughter). Because it was so relevant to, to my life. But, I loved school. I just loved the humanities more than anything. Science was really badly taught at the time so (laughter) I didn't--when I look at how it's taught now, I think gosh, if I were growing up today, I might become a biologist 'cause it's beautiful. I was--you know what, I was drawn to what was aesthetically beautiful. So, words and language of course, my family was all about that, so. Literature, I just loved and the imagination. But, history was beautiful because the books were magnificently illustrated and we were in this environment that mirrored what we were studying. And, so, it was just beauty. But, when I look at the biology films that they make now, and the books, it's beautiful. And, if I had had that, I would be studying ichthyology (laughter). Story_ID: 648958 Speaker 1: Now, so when you apply to school, where do you apply? Speaker 2: So, I went and visited Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and wasn't captivated. But, when I was fourteen, I had gone to visit my [paternal] aunt [Iten Noa Fales] and uncle who lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts not far from the Harvard campus [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, they lived right in Harvard Square so I--went spent a lot of time in the Harvard campus. And, I can remember walking the campus and thinking, this is where I wanna go to school. And, I came home from this weekend and I told my parents [Josephine Premice and Timothy Fales], "I wanna go to Harvard." And, that's when my father told me that his namesake [Timothy Fales] had graduated in the year 1711 (laughter). So, there was a long family history. He had gone to Harvard and--but he never talked about it. So, I know his brothers [DeCoursey Fales, Jr. and Haliburton Fales II] all did and my grandfather [DeCoursey Fales, Sr.], but all the way back to 1711. So, that appealed to me even more 'cause I loved keeping up family traditions. And, also, again, I was very aware of being the half-caste in this family and so I wanted to be the ultimate of what a Fales should be. Not because the family expected me to fail but because the world--there was the sense of the world expects you to be a screw up and I'm not gonna be a screw up, so. Anyway, so that's where I set my sights and I had very strong grades. And, it was a less competitive time than now, I must say (laughter). I don't know if I'd get in today. I didn't start a soup kitchen in the Sudan. Speaker 1: That's right (whispers). Speaker 2: So, it--then it really was about, you know, what are your grades and are you a good well rounded person and do you have some interesting extracurricular, but anyway, they--I did early action. Which was the early application process and I was on the bus headed home thinking, oh, my gosh, I really gotta figure out what other applications I'm filling in because this might not work out. So, I, I gotta get moving here. It was literally on the crosstown bus having this thought. And, I got home and my acceptance letter was there, so. That was the only place I applied. That was a big luxury that I would've been under much more pressure today. I mean, it was a much saner time. We had--we didn't have SAT tutors. We went and took the Kaplan course for $150 (laughter), you know, 'cause I'd never had a multiple choice test and I never had, I never had math and English, so I needed to learn the terminology, so. But, such a different time in terms of how you prepared. My parents weren't breathing down my neck, they just said, "Okay. Fine." They paid for the Kaplan course and what have you. But, it's--I feel really bad for my daughter's [Josephine Bristol Hill] generation. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: It's an ugly picture. It was a lot easier. Story_ID: 648959 Speaker 1: When you enter, who's in your class that we would know? I mean-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Carla Harris, who is not only a phenomenal singer, but a Morgan Stanley banker [Morgan Stanley Group, Inc.; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management]. And, I think actually she's about to go and do something with the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration. She's been named to a post there. I've forgotten which one. A few years behind me is [HistoryMaker] Soledad O'Brien. Pamela Thomas-Graham is a year behind me. Antony Blinken on the white side of things, Antony Blinken who is now at the NSA [sic.]. He's right beneath Susan Rice. He's a dear friend and in my class. And, we knew he'd end up doing amazing things 'cause his senior thesis was published as a book. What's his name, who had a late night show, redhead, Conan O'Brien was in my, one of my English sections. You know, just an eclectic mix. We had a lord from England who's the son of one of the wealthier dukes. A bit of everything. The woman who was our class marshal. Talking about starting a soup kitchen, someplace dangerous, she started a soap factory for women in Afghanistan. Her own NGO [non-governmental organization], so needless to say (laughter). Those of us who were nominated to be class marshal, when we saw her bio we said, "Okay." You better sit down, you've been working on TV shows. Saving the world through sitcom and (laughter) she's in--got bombs dropping overhead and is helping women who could've been stoned by the Taliban get jobs and so. It was just a wonderful class, extraordinary people. Some of whom have become very famous. And, some of them haven't become very famous but have done remarkable things. Story_ID: 648960 Speaker 1: So, when you--so, I applaud you for, you know, being interested in, you know--but, but you grew up around it too. The thing--so, when you go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] what is--who's in your--did I ask you-- Speaker 2: You asked me who was in my class. So, it is, you know, [HistoryMaker] Carla Harris is in my class. Debbie Wright [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright] is a few years ahead of me. Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] is a tutor at Leverett House. Antony Blinken who's now at the NSA [sic.] is in the freshman dorm behind mine. We have Lord Holland [ph.] (laughter) from British aristocracy. We have a bit of everything, so. Speaker 1: So, this is good though. I mean, for someone like you, it is good. It's not like being landed on 'The Blue Lagoon,' you know. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I'm very comfortable. The sticking point for me back to identity is, I arrived and I have no understanding of the notion that if you're black you're supposed to report to all these different clubs. And, the table and this and so this self-segregation is something I've never seen before. It's not anything that I grew up with. It didn't exist in my school [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York] where we did have a pretty significant population of kids of color and real Africans, thank you very much. So, and I'm arriving thinking I know I'm black. Of course, I'm black. And, so, I'm sorry you have to--why am I--why do I have to sit at a table to prove this? And, I remember having a conversation actually with Reggie Hudlin [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin], who said to me, "Do you know the people in your class?" And, I said, "Well, how would I possibly meet 1624 people and--," you know. And, I knew what he was talking about, but I was sort of making a joke of it. And, anyway, so, that was my issue. And, I, then I also started to hear rumors about myself that I, I thought I was cute because my skin was whatever; cafe au lait, and I had quote unquote (air quotes) good hair. And, first of all, it was news flash to me that I was considered light skinned because certainly, my family had never (laughter) imparted that information to me. And, my--I had many Haitian relatives who make me look like a field hand. I mean, they were blond and they were very pale and so I never in a million years thought of myself as a light skinned person. So, that was news to me. And, then the first week I hung around with this white guy who was just a friend and the rumor quickly spread that I was only interested in white men. And, at the time, I was actually madly in love with someone who happened to be black, so; who was back home, was older. So, you know, there was just all of this (laughter) a lot of sudden racial pressure thrust upon me. So, that, that was a difficult hurdle to, to overcome. Story_ID: 648961 Speaker 1: How did you react to that? You mean to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't react well to it because I just didn't understand. And, I had grown up with such a keen sense of identity and such pride in, I mean, I'd never wanted to be a white person. So, to suddenly be perceived as someone who thought whites were better and only wanted to associate with white and wasn't interested in, was really appalling to me. At the same time, I wasn't gonna bow to it. I didn't--I had no interest in sitting at a table just because everyone was brown. That didn't make any sense to me. I felt like this is a big bad world that we came to this school [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to meet people from all over the world. And, that's, you know, and also, I was a big believer in the person with whom you have an affinity doesn't necessarily look like you. And, the person that understands your deepest thoughts and heart doesn't necessarily have a background remotely similar to yours, so. Anyway, so, that was, I mean I laugh at now because I think, my god, you know, I was in- incog basically. I was going incogNegro as they say. A person who helped a lot with that was Diahann Carroll's daughter [Suzanne Kay] who was two years ahead of me. And, she'd gone to Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and she dealt with all that and she had it even worse because everyone knew Diahann Carroll's daughter was coming. So, they were all--she didn't say who she was for the first month. And, she would hear people talking about Diahann Carroll's daughter, "Well, it must be the snooty girl with the suite of Louis Vuitton luggage," or whatever, and you know, she's sitting in the room. So, she was a big help in terms of don't, don't let this get to you. And, then I remember there was a conversations among some whites that was a bit distressing 'cause they were slightly racist and so I was lamenting one day on the phone to my parents [Josephine Premice and Timothy Fales]. And, my father finally said, "You're not the first black student at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]" (laughter). So, my parents had this wonderful way of just breaking it down and going could you please shut up and enjoy the fruits of your life and stop complaining, so. Speaker 1: But, that's and you know, what you're also not talking about is, is class-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, because what was-- Speaker 2: Well, there was this perception of, she's a rich girl and I went to a French school [Lycee Francais de New York, New York, New York] and I spoke French and, so there was a class element. Although, many of them were really closeted bougie [bourgeois]. You know, everyone was pretending they were but, there were many of them who had a lot more money than I did. But, the other distinguishing element was the international piece. Because I was--I had traveled. I spoke different languages. My whole exposure was unusual for an American, period, black or white. So, that was-- Speaker 1: I still put that in a category of class-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in a way, you know. In a sense and so you have that part which could be intimidating to, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, no. And, than that's also, you know you're young, so you don't know. You're just going and one of the people who remains my friend to this day, a wonderful black woman, Alison Taylor, who has written a lot of movies, and for TV, brilliant woman. She came up to me and said, "Hi, how are you? I'm Alison." And, she was actually one of the youngest students in the class. And, I was so excited that someone actually had walked up to me to say hello. Because I had spent an entire week having to go and introduce myself to people. And, she said, "Well, I can just see, you just look sad." And you just felt like, won't someone just please come and speak to me. And, she was the only one who had perceived that I was shy. I wasn't full of myself. I was shy. And, I was tired (laughter). Tired of having to make the introductions, so. Anyway, but, you know, looking back it's, it's all pretty humorous now. But-- Speaker 1: When did it settle down for you though, than that's, 'cause-- Speaker 2: I would say, so the first year was terrible and I flunked out of my first semester. Not 'cause of the racial thing at all. That was--I went into a little depression and didn't do any studying, so (laughter). Lo and behold, I had dreadful grades. So, I had to take a year off which was a good thing. And, then when I came back I was fine. Story_ID: 648962 Speaker 1: So, what'd you do on your year off? Speaker 2: I, I worked for the Legal Aid Society [New York, New York] in the civil division, which handled mainly divorce cases; so, that was fascinating, for a woman who'd been in the second class at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that--law school that admitted women. And, and then I went to work for [HistoryMakers] Melvin Van Peebles, briefly. He was doing 'Waltz of the Stork.' So, that was fascinating and I worked as an assistant for him. Probably, I think for free. Probably, knowing Melvin. Everything's for free, so. Anyway, and then I went back to school. So, then it was fine and I certainly had black friends. I never became a rah rah, you know, I wasn't part of the black student association or any of that. I just, just wanted (unclear). But, you know, I was the one going to see Dennis Brutus, the South African poet. And, as I said a lot of--I certainly, I to this day, have black friends from, from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and from those days. The people who knew me, knew what my story was. And, then there was probably a contingent that thought, there's something wrong with her. But, you know, I didn't really care, so. Story_ID: 648963 Speaker 1: So, what--where were you spending your, your summers during, during undergrad? Speaker 2: During undergraduate it depended--I did the first--one summer I did summer school up there. And, then, then I spent a summer here [New York, New York] and I worked for a Broadway publicist. Then I spent a summer in Paris [France] working at a perfumery, which was hilarious and then, then I was done, so. But, not, I mean generally working. And, not using summering as a verb (laughter). Generally doing some kind of work and trying to get ready for the future. I wanna circle back though, to the notion of race at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It wasn't 'til I went back for a visit when I was about twenty-six. When I got reengaged in the school and this, and the Black Students Association asked me to come and speak about 'A Different World.' And, as I walked the campus, it struck me for the first time, how few people of color there were. I mean, there some, but it isn't--it did feel overwhelming and then I guess it was coming from an environment where I was surrounded every day by black people at work. That it struck me, oh my gosh, you know, no wonder there was this self-segregation. But, to me because this was such a part of my heritage and part of my family history. It just felt like home. And, because I was used to being around WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], you know, I looked at them and thought, oh, there's my relative. And, of course, they're not (laughter), they weren't looking at me at that time thinking that. But, so, there was a comfort of the familiar for me that there may not have been for some other students. And, that looking back, I went, oh, my gosh, I didn't, I didn't know what an oddball I was with my big mass of frizzy hair and all of that, you know, I thought I blended in and I didn't, so. Speaker 1: Well, you know, plus there was a great deal of pride probably. 'Cause, you know, that was a school--well you got into this school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I was thrilled. I was a duck in water. Speaker 1: Right. That's right. Speaker 2: I mean, this was home, so. Story_ID: 648964 Speaker 1: So, you graduate [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You--your degree is in history and literature (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And literature. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, at this point, who is, who is, who is dean of the history department? Do you know, or? Speaker 2: I can't even remember who the dean of the history department was. But, history and literature is an odd major. It is--you pick two countries during three centuries, or one country during five centuries. So, I did France and England during the 18th, 19th, and 20th century because I had a specific interest in colonialism. And, obviously, given my background and so forth. And, so, that's what I wanted to focus on, and that major gave me that opportunity. It was T.S. Eliot's major. But, again, that's where my sense of not having to join the black student union or whatever came from was sort of, I'm studying this. I'm (laughter), this is what my life's about, so stop telling me how I'm supposed to manifest my blackness. Story_ID: 648965 Speaker 1: Now, in the book ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill], you talk about when you graduate [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, you find out that your father [Timothy Fales] is, you know, right? Speaker 2: Yep. Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That your father is having a relationship with someone who is young-- Speaker 2: A year younger than I am (laughter). I was twenty-two. She was twenty-one. So, not just having an affair but on the verge of leaving my mother [Josephine Premice] for it. Yes. It was--I remember at graduation they looked--my mother looked sad, which seemed odd giving the occasion. And, I can just see the portrait. It was my father, his eldest brother [DeCoursey Fales, Jr.] who lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts], was very sweet and came to the graduation. He had a lot of hilarious experiences. He would always say, "Oh, my niece is here at school, my niece is here at school." He'd meet people and then I'd meet them and they'd go, "You're the niece," (laughter) you know, it was very funny. But, anyway, and there was mom between them just looking so solemn and my father looked sad too. So, that summer, that summer I went out to Los Angeles [California] to start working on 'The Cosby Show,' and they were doing their pre- they were doing the preparations for the season out there. And, then I came home in the fall to start the shooting schedule here and that's when my mother told me. And, because my father had traveled so much with his sailing, you know, his absences didn't-- Speaker 1: Didn't mean anything. Speaker 2: --didn't mean anything, so. Anyway, she had decided, they had decided not to tell me before I went off 'cause they thought it would be too damaging. But, when I got home, she told me, so. That was devastating news at the time. Because, when I look back, I think, well, it shouldn't've been such a surprise (laughter). This was, they had a very tempestuous marriage. But, you know, what you grow up in is what's normal, so. That to me was, oh, that's my Rock of Gibraltar is that they are together and we're a family, and so. And, then, of course, it's hard to have your father leave your mother for someone your age. Speaker 1: Right. I mean, it's all those things that's hard to even take in (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a lot to take in. It was a lot to take in. But, I do believe and I even understood a year or so after it happened, it was the best thing that ever happened to me. Because, I was too cuddled, too sheltered and it really forced me to say, you're on your own. You cannot rely on the--these people for money. You cannot rely on them for your future. You've got to build your own future. And, it was, it was that separation that ma- really made me say, you better get out there and stand on your own two feet and make away for yourself. And, make your own money because this is your life. And, also made me say, you can't be defined by your parents. You have to--who are you now? And, that was--so, it was the beginning of a kind of liberation. And, certainly the foundation of my sense of independence, my sense of every woman must have her own purse (laughter) as Susan B. Anthony says. Story_ID: 648966 Speaker 1: So, how did you get on with 'The Cosby Show'? Had you--? Speaker 2: So, that came through--that was nepotism. That was my mother [Josephine Premice] and being at a dinner with my father [Timothy Fales], with [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne, with Bill Cosby. And, Bill Cosby being fascinated by my mother and Roscoe telling him, Roscoe who knew me since I was a baby, what an extraordinary person he thought I was. And, that my father and I would do spoofs of French classical tragedies. And, Bill who is a polymath said, "What" (laughter), you know. "A black child who's been writing spoofs of French classical tragedies with her dad. I gotta meet this kid." And, he was a big, he's a big admirer of anyone getting an education, so. The fact that I was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], didn't hurt. Although, if I've been at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], that would've been more impressive to him, surely. Anyway, so, he said to my mother, "I'd like to meet your daughter." So, my mother, my mother called me in my dorm room, it was senior year in the early, early fall and she said, "You're gonna need to get yourself down to New York [New York]. You have to meet Bill Cosby." And, I thought to myself, well don't just show up. Do something. So, I did a spoof of 'Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous.' Which I called 'Lifestyles of the Poor and Miserable.' 'Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous' was like the first reality show, with Robin Leach. (Adopts cockney accent), "Here's to your champagne wishes and caviar dreams." He's a horrible, cockney man (laughter) going to these mansions and interview these awful people. It was really a precursor to the--all of-- the whole housewives franchise. Anyway, so, I did a spoof of it using different voices and this was all, I mean, this was the dawn of video. So, I didn't even do a video. I did an audiocassette. Now, I just have someone film me with an iPhone and send them an I-- IMDb [Internet Movie Database]. But, anyway, so he loved the spoof (unclear). It was topical and witty and I can do all these different voices. So, he said to me, "I'm gonna send this to 'Saturday Night Live'." They send--he sent it to them. They, they gave me a very sort of polite brushoff interview. It's not a very friendly place to women. And, certainly not to minority writers, at that point. Story_ID: 648967 Speaker 1: This is 1985, '84 [1984] or '85 [1985]; and, and then he said, "Look, we need to create more writers on our show ['The Cosby Show']. So, we're gonna--you're gonna come here and we're, we're gonna train you." Speaker 2: That's good (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, it was very good, so. Speaker 2: So, this, I mean, what year of the show was this? Speaker 1: The second season. I got to--it was the first year and then so, second season I joined the team. Well, join the team. I was allowed into the room. Well, I had to earn my way into the room (laughter). It was a--they, they weren't eager to have someone handpicked by Bill Cosby in their midst. And, looking back, I realized understandably, because, you know, they were worried. Is this person his spy? And, when you're--a writing room is a very intimate space and you really want to be around people that you trust. And, that people that you've picked. So, to have this person thrust upon you, whose work you haven't seen and they all--most of them had come up more traditional ways. They'd been standup comics. They had been writer assistants on shows. They had been writing plays for years. Whatever, whatever their background was. So, to have somebody who essentially had gotten the job because she went to a good school, is smart, and wrote something funny they liked, that was a sticking point. So, there was a, I would say a period of hazing where, for two months, they just wouldn't let me in the room and I'd show up to work every day and they'd pretty much ignore me. And, but, I just kept showing up every morning. And, bright eyed and bushy tail and saying, "Well, may I--is there anything I can do?" "Nope. No, no, no, no." And, finally one day, they came to me with--they needed research on auto insurance laws in Brooklyn [New York] (laughter). So, this is before Google. You would have thought they'd asked me to, you know, write the Magna Carta, I was thrilled. And, I went off and I, I researched everything I could. I don't even know how I found the information now that I think of it, 'cause now it's so easy. We're so lazy. I don't even know where I found this stuff. But, I did. And, I typed it up beautifully and wrote it up beautifully. And, that's when they went, ding, ding, ding. This girl is serious and maybe she could be useful. She may never--we may never be able to turn her into a comedy writer, but at least she'll be helpful to us. So, they let me in the room. And, I would keep the notes on what they were saying. 'Cause again, it was before the PC [personal computer]. So, in a writing room you're pitching ideas and somebody's gotta write down every pitch. And, then you decided what's gonna be in and you would hand write this and then you'd go hand it to the assistants who were working at their big ginormous computers. There were not (laughter) flat screen. It was a mainframe and they'd type it all up. And, so, that's, that's what I did. And, there was no better training. 'Cause they were really, really fine writers, who thought things through carefully and had a very highly developed sense of character. And that rel- a lot of integrity about the show. A lot of pride in the quality that they were trying to put forth. And, trying to be different from the usual sitcom where everybody's just insulting each other. Story_ID: 648968 Speaker 1: So, who--how many are in the writing team? Speaker 2: So, at this point there was Matt Robinson who was on 'Sesame Street' who's Holly Robinson Peete's father, now passed away. The head writer is still a good friend, John Markus. He, he ran the room. Matt Williams went on to create 'Roseanne' and lots of other shows, he was there. A guy name Carmen Finestra and then there was guy name Gary Kott. So, there're maybe five. So, it was a small room, relatively speaking. And, then the following year they brought on one woman. She didn't last that long, so. It was a small room. Speaker 1: It--'cause writers, often they're more male than, than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Usually, they're male. It's a kind of a boys club. And, they're very, they're very boyish often and so it was interesting. Speaker 1: So, how was the writing process work for a show? I mean, are they writing, I mean, how far in advanced are they doing. Is it-- Speaker 2: Well, they're usually doing a good three weeks to a month in advance. And, in this context because you had the wild card of Bill Cosby. When you have a comic who has a very specific vision and who's involved in the writing process, that skews things. So, he would give story ideas or would say, "I wanna do a show about," and then they had to beat out a story. Or, he'd pitch them an entire story. The disadvantage of that was, he can make anything funny. He could read the phonebook and you'd be in stitches. And, so, I remember after I'd left the show ['The Cosby Show'] there was one episode that was so laugh free that they couldn't even do what they call sweeten it. Where, you know, you infuse some laughter. But, to do that, there has to be a little snicker or something from the audience to begin with (laughter). This was flat line (laughter), and the actors were working to death. And, I can't remember what the topic was and I can just see it. I said, "Bill went in and pitched this story," and everyone was howling on the floor. And, then when they went to actually write this thing, it just wasn't possible. Anyway, so, they would beat out the story together. Literally, scene by scene, they were--in this scene this happens. In this scene this happens. In this scene, and then somebody would off and write the initial draft. Speaker 1: One of them would? Speaker 2: One of them. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And, then it would be brought back to the room. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And, then it's rewritten together. And, then you do a table reading of it, and you see what works, what doesn't work. And, again, Bill had a huge hand, you know, he--there were things he didn't like. There were things he like. Anyway, so, you'd get notes and then you'd rewrite. Again, based on that. In the room with people saying, "Okay, what if she says this?" And, it becomes like a musical collaboration because one--some- one person says one thing and another person builds on it. And, so, it can be a very exciting process. Story_ID: 648969 Speaker 1: You know Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill], you have a wonderful sense of humor, and I, you know, and I was watching on YouTube something you had presented earlier to a writers group. When did that sense of humor, did it, is this something that came from your household? Is it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, it, so I was wondering where it started. Speaker 2: No. My parents were both hilariously funny. And, my mother [Josephine Premice] had a fantastic sense of humor and a fantastic sense of the ridiculous. And, my father [Timothy Fales] also was incredible witty, and always playing, you know, practical jokes. One of my parents' friends was an English actor who really hated the British monarchy. He'd grown up in a lower class home. I remember being in England with him and we met this very pompous man at a pub and the man said, "My family were in mines, and what of yours?" And, (laughter) Ken, Kenneth [ph.] said, "Mine were in mines too, but they were in them--," (laughter), you know, so, anyway, he hated the queen [Elizabeth II]. So, my father, he was in New York [New York], and my father called him one day, and my father was great at accents. And, he said, "You've--her majesty requests the pleasure of your company to the reception at the British embassy," and he had the man fooled that the queen had invited him. So, I mean, this is the kind of home I grew up with--in where they were both just, they just saw the ridiculous in everything. And, they were--and we loved watching, as I said, things like 'Upstairs, Downstairs' and went to the theater all the time, so. From the time I was very little, I like acting and I like doing impersonations, and I liked doing voices. And, I would make my grandfather, my Haitian grandfather [Lucas Premice], 'cause he had a whole speech about where you should wear your pants and how high they should be. And, I would do this for my parents, and they'd be laughing and so. So, just, we were all performers, really. We were all hams. And, so, that was always there. And, Bill Cosby saw that early on in the spoof that I'd sent him. And, so, when I joined the writing staff [of 'The Cosby Show'] as an apprentice he said, "You're also gonna do warm up." Which is, you know, the warming up of the audience and you, you get out and you, you have to keep them entertained in between takes. And, I did this with somebody else. And, it's really tough work because they, the audience didn't come here to see you. They don't understand why this is taking two and a half hours as opposed to half an hour. So, it's, it's talking to a crowd that doesn't wanna see you and if they had rotten fruit (laughter), they might be hurling it at you. But, it was the best training ever because you really learn how to read an audience, how to tell a joke, how to get them laughing, how to get them on your side. And, you--there's really, it's hard to be intimidating talking to a crowd now. Because when you've had to address an audience that didn't come to see you. Most of the time now if I have to speak, people have on some level come to see me or maybe the people around me (laughter), they were at least willing, so, that was--it's the best gift. Speaker 1: So, in this room, so there, there, I was just wondering about that. But, in this room then, you're really learning, I mean, you're learning like the only way that people can learn in the industry. Speaker 2: That--no, when people say to me, "Oh, did you study that in school?" I say, "No." And, nor, nor should anyone study in--you cannot. This is on the job training. Because it's, it's the interaction with the actors. It's the constraints of the twenty-one minutes fifty-six seconds. It's, you know, you cannot--that--there's no course that you can teach that will any way, in any way really accurately replicate what that is (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I, but I bet taking down the notes helped in a way, really. Speaker 2: It was a huge--and the apprentices who followed me, wouldn't keep the book. Because they thought it was too secretarial. None of them became writers. And, I remember saying, "You tell them, you're to do everything they ask except, you know, provide sexual favors and buy drugs." I mean, this is--it's an honor to be in the room. And, you--I did learn a lot. 'Cause you, you, I, you, I needed to listen. It's one thing to have read a lot of plays and been to the theater. It's another thing to build a scene of dialogue that has to appeal to people from eight to eighty years old, insult no one's intelligence, and yet invite in everyone. 'Cause this was real co-viewing which we don't even have any more, really. Speaker 1: So, in this whole, this, the warming up the crowd, how many people are in the audience? And-- Speaker 2: The audience is probably about two or three hundred who've come to the taping and three hundred probably in the stadium seating. Speaker 1: Okay. And, how many shows were being taped? Speaker 2: So, you do two shows. You do, well, I'm sorry, you do one without an audience and one with an audience. So, you do one a night that's, that's--with in front of the audience. Who is, and it's like a real show because, you know, they're applauding and so forth. Speaker 1: So, it's like theatre? I mean-- Speaker 2: It is like theatre. Speaker 1: I didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is like theatre. Now, some shows don't have any audience at all. Bill is an old fashioned, dyed in the wool performer. He likes playing off that crowd. Because--and he's right. A different thing happens and a different energy builds when the audience is right there and you get the reaction right away. This works. This doesn't work, you know. So, it's-- Story_ID: 648970 Speaker 1: The other thing about 'The Cosby Show' that, you know, was [HistoryMaker] Dr. Alvin Poussaint. When--what at, at what point does he start playing a role? And, that was-- Speaker 2: He was on from the beginning and he was there to keep the show from being politically incorrect, keep it accurate, make sure that we weren't sending irresponsible messages unwittingly. And, so, he would read every script and then give his notes. Now, obviously, political correctness can be the enemy of comedy (laughter). Especially, psychological political correctness because, you know, he's super sensitive to this might offend women. Or, this might be perceived as too aggressive, and it was sort of like, the human beings behave badly sometimes or not perfectly. And, so, there was a little tug of war sometimes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Because I can't imagine the writers being too happy. Speaker 2: No. They were not happy. They were not happy. I was like, "Oh, my god, here come the Alvin Poussaint notes." But, he's actually a very lovely man, and I do think it's wonderful to have that conscience as annoying as it could be. And, on 'A Different World' we had even bigger problems because 'The Cosby Show' was very, very clean. But, you know, we--'A Different World' it was a college campus. And, I remember once, I think, Dwayne [Dwayne Wayne] or somebody grabbed someone to kiss them, and he said, "This seems like rape," and (laughter). Debbie [Debbie Allen] was like, "Alvin, you need to get out more," you know (laughter). Story_ID: 648971 Speaker 1: --How the show sort of was taped, you know, in a theater format-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, and I don't think people really sort of know that you hear laughter but sometimes-- Speaker 2: Well, everyone assumed it was the machine. And of course, that's a joke in the writers room, "Oh, the machine will love it"; or, you know, after you've watched (laughter) an episode where some of the jokes didn't quite land. But, they did have a genuine audience (makes sound) which most shows at that time did, so. And, even when they do what they call sweetening, where they might increase the laughter, as I was saying to you earlier, you have to have a laugh to begin with for them to sweeten with, if there's nothing to sweeten (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, how long did you work on the show? Speaker 2: I worked on 'The Cosby Show' for two years. And, then in my second year, which was their third season, 'A Different World' was launched and they said, "All right, you're young, you just got out of college, go west." And, I didn't want to, didn't wanna leave New York [New York]. I didn't wanna go to Los Angeles [California]. I didn't wanna drive. And, (laughter), so, and my mother [Josephine Premice]--and I was in love with somebody. And, my mother said, "You do not, at your age, twenty-four, twenty-five, make career decisions based on a guy. You must go. This is your opportunity." So, always did what my mother said, including not become an actress or a nun, so. So, I went. And, it was very liberating because though in the year and a half or two years that I was on 'The Cosby Show,' I did garner the great respect of the writers. I was still their little baby. I was their trainee, and I wasn't being myself; a loud opinionate person. And, because I was so aware of being fortunate to be in the room and minding my Ps and Qs, and trying to learn. And, they had made it very clear in the early going that they didn't like some of my ideas so (laughter), I just, I was very, I was quiet in the room. And-- Speaker 1: This is on 'A Different World'? Speaker 2: No. This is on 'The Cosby Show.' Speaker 1: 'Cosby Show,' that's right. Speaker 2: And, so, I get out to 'A Different World' and I'm in a new room with people I don't know. And, I suggested an idea and the head writer said, "That's wonderful," (laughter). That's the first time I've heard that. I'm used to hearing, "Well, maybe that's funny at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]," (laughter). "But, it's not funny in this room," so (laughter). One writer said to me once, "That joke is so obscure, you're gonna have to sell it door to door with an instruction booklet to go with it." So, I was suddenly, I was welcomed with open arms and the very first idea that I had pitched was hailed as something actually workable and not only worthy of the round file. So, from that moment on, I never shut up. I mean, I was just off, on and on and on. And, so, a few weeks into it the head writer pulled me aside and said, "You know, when you were coming out here, I talked to your boss that's in New York and they said, 'She's fantastic girl and really hard worker, you're gonna enjoy her, but don't expect her to say much in the room,'" (laughter). So, which when I look back that I think, wow that I was, that anyone was ever able to silence me is kind of miraculous. But-- Speaker 1: So, for two years you were silent? Speaker 2: I was, I was pretty much silent. I was, you know, I would--as I said, I ventured a few things and when you get smacked down enough (laughter), and then in such a humiliating way, you really don't want to. And, frankly, I think those two years of silence were useful, 'cause I think I learned more. And, my ideas probably weren't that good and my jokes probably did deserve to die a miserable death. So, with a little more nurturing maybe I would've come along more. But, I actually am grateful for that rough training because I just absorbed so much. And, then, then had the opportunity to blossom and to really be myself. But, what we've lost so much in, in any context whether it's school or the job, is this sense of--the apprenticeship. You don't know everything. You need to sit and listen and learn and absorb. And, then from there you can start to formulate your ideas. And, you need to earn your place and earn your voice. It shouldn't just be handed to you. And, and also the notion that, your every fo- utterance and your every flatulation is not a gift from the gods. It's--some of what you have put forth is not good and needs to be reworked. So, that, that's getting lost. Everybody's applauded for everything at every moment and it's, you gotta learn to deal with criticism and you gotta learn to, as I said, earn your, your voice. Now, to be frozen in fear is not good. And, to be cowed is not good and that happens a lot to women and to minorities. And, in my case, it wasn't about being a, wo- well, part of it was about being a woman because I was the only woman in the room most of the time. Except for this brief period when they had this playwright. But, it was much more about being younger, being there through nepotism, not having come up the way they had come up, to your point, a class difference, you know. Many of them were from very sort of middle class suburban backgrounds that weren't necessarily sophisticated. So, I was this oddball who spoke languages and so forth. Story_ID: 648972 Speaker 1: You know, the other thing I have a question about, is what would--did Co- Cosby [Bill Cosby] always have the ability to overrule? And-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Cosby and that was another source of difficulty or challenge for the writers was that they could spend hours on something and he could just throw it out. And, so, that for them was a source of frustration 'cause on most television shows, the writers are god and the actors have to do as they say and what they say, the way they say it, so. That was, that was challenging for them, and-- Speaker 1: And, Cos- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, that's unusual. Speaker 1: What, did they start to learn over time? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. They knew. They had such instincts. And, they were--they cared. You know, they wanted to--also, most writers are, we just want some praise. We're like dogs. Pat us on the head and tell us we've done a good job and we're really happy and the tail starts wagging. And, so, Cosby was not generous with compliments. And, most comics have a real mistrust of writers. So, there's a lot of--they're often very combative with their writers. And, Cosby actually was lovely 'cause he was rational. He wasn't a crazy person like some people who've we've heard stories about who, you know, kept them 'til all hours. And, would be just demeaning and insulting and what have you. So, he wasn't, that wasn't his stock in trade, so. Speaker 1: So, what--why is the show done in California? That's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Is it-- Speaker 2: So, 'A Different World'? Because most things are shot in California. It's cheaper. They've got the sound stages. You got the actors, you know, it's just an easier setup. It was an anomaly that Cosby ['The Cosby Show'] was done here because it was--Cosby lived in New York [New York] and he just wasn't going to pick himself up and pickup--his children were young at that point. And, he had no interest in raising them out there. He didn't like it out there. He didn't like the value system in the whole. So, he was a New Yorker and he liked walking down the streets. And, you could walk through the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] with him; people would say, "Hey, Bill." And, he'd say, hey back. And, he like going to his little jazz club so that was an anomaly. And, 'A Different World' joined a slew of shows that were out there. It was much more economical and that the executive producers really lived out there, Tom [Tom Werner] and Marcy, so. Their families were there so that was easier for them and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Marcy? Speaker 2: Marcy Carsey. Speaker 1: Okay. Carsey. Okay. And, so, who's the team than, that makes 'A Different World'? Speaker 2: So, there was a man initially called Sheldon Bow [ph.] who was very, very nice. And, but, they didn't like to first few episodes so they parted ways with him. And, then they brought in this woman named Anne Beatts who had been a 'Saturday Night Live' alumn back in the days when there were no women. So, she was the maverick. And, she also had done a show called 'Square Pegs' which Sarah Jessica Parker was in as a teenager. It was a very inventive show. So, she was kind of a hot female writer. She had never worked around black people, or, you know, other than, Garrett Morris on shows. She really didn't know anything about black people. What we will credit her with is the creation of Dwayne and Whitley [Whitley Gilbert]. Because, before the first four episodes, those characters didn't even exist. And, she said, "We need a bitch. We need that princess character. So, who is that?" And, there was a woman in the room named Cheryl Gard who's since passed on who said, "I went to school with a black southern belle." And, so, we started to create Whitley. And, Dwayne Wayne, she felt like we needed somebody who was kind of the nerd but, who was cool. And, so, that's how his character came to be. And then, you know, the two perfect actors came in to audition for it. And, the show really became the two of them. And, when you think of Dwayne, he's a bit of a revolutionary character. 'Cause even today, people who are involved in STEM and--science, technology, engineering and math, will say the depictions of people who are in science are always disparaging. And, they're always caricature, and they're always the nerds. And, he was both. He was sexy, and he was attractive and he was the kid you wanted to be, and he was a geek at the same time. And, you know, he wasn't Steve Urkel. He had a chicness to him. And, so, it was such a positive image for people. And, then of course, Whitley was America's best kept secret. The black bourgeoisie and like 'The Cosby Show,' but on a whole other level in another stratosphere. And, one of the big compliments I got was from [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch, who's the music critic, he said, "You know, that's the first time I saw, in the character of her mother, that whole dynamic. That, that elegant bourgeois woman with her attitudes." He said, "This was--it was refreshing." Story_ID: 648973 Speaker 1: You know, I--well, I'm getting emotions 'cause the--those show, both of those shows represent a period of time that I wish were revisit- it was groundbreaking--both of them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, who envisioned the series, though? Can you talk about-- Speaker 2: So, they took their names off of it 'cause they didn't like the way it turned out. But, initially, John Markus who was the head writer of 'A Different World,' Carmen Finestra, and I think it was Gary Kott. It was the three--no, no, no, it was Matt Williams. The three of them wrote the original pilot. And, it was Bill's [Bill Cosby] idea. It was Bill's idea to take Denise, who was going to college, and he was so enamored at that point with the historical black colleges [HBCUs]. And, he'd become very much involved with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and he loved the work that they were doing. So, he wanted to represent that. Which again, when you think about it, people didn't even know about historically black colleges. So, that was his conceit, was we're gonna do this. And, he came up with the character of Jaleesa [Jaleesa Vinson-Taylor] who was the woman who'd been married and divorced and was getting her education later than the others. He came up with Mary Alice's--no, no, we created Mary Alice's character [Leticia Bostic] who was the den, the mother, the house mother. He wanted the president of the college and he got Gloria Foster to play that [sic.]. And, it was his idea to put a white character in the middle of it, who it ended up being Marisa Tomei. But, actually one of the people who came in and read for the role and interviewed with the writers was Meg Ryan, before she really took off. And, God rest her soul, Whitney Houston read for the role of Denise in the original 'Cosby Show' ['The Cosby Show'] actually, so. Anyway, so, the concept was around Denise Huxtable goes to college, and goes to a historically black college. Story_ID: 648974 Speaker 1: 'Cause, I mean, so many people grew up on that show ['A Different World']. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, so what, so what, at what point are you really officially part of the writing team? Speaker 2: So, I was--from the beginning. I got a bump up in title moving out there [Los Angeles, California]. I was what's called a story editor. And, people say, "Well, do you edit?" "No." It means that you have an onscreen credit every week. It's the first level of onscreen credit, the story editor. So, I was a junior writer on the show. But, because I was young, had just recently gotten out of college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I could really understand these characters. And, then when we created Whitley [Whitley Gilbert], I just had an affinity (laughter), my inner southern belle girl bitch (laughter) (unclear). I could use a character to say all the most revolting things I ever wanted to say in my life, so. No, I loved having a character who was this snooty princess. It was a blast. And, again, something we hadn't seen. And, one of the things I loved about the show was that we showed the range. It was really from the way people looked, it was a rainbow. In terms of the background of the characters, it was a rainbow. So, so, it was from the beginning; very, very, hands on. Speaker 1: So, how old are you with this role? Speaker 2: I'm twenty-five years old. So, I was young. Speaker 1: That's amazing. Speaker 2: Well, but, here's where, this is where I always make this clear to people who think, my god, you were a wunderkind. I was a lucky kind (laughter). I skipped five years of running around schlepping for people's coffee and dry cleaning. I was lucky enough to come in immediately to the writers room as an apprentice. That's not an experience that many people have. Speaker 1: I know. But, some people have had the opportunity and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Not everybody makes it. That I will take credit for. Yes. I made it. So, that--so, but, just for those who are thinking, oh my god, you were so young. I did get a head start, if you will. Speaker 1: Now, I know-- Speaker 2: It wasn't my own head start program, it was the Hollywood version of the head start program (laughter). Speaker 1: But, look how popular that character became though too. Speaker 2: I know. I know. Speaker 1: That's the other thing. She really was the show (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was the show. And, that was--no, she was. She was the show. She absolutely was. Story_ID: 648975 Speaker 1: So, how, how many years did it, how many--? Speaker 2: So, that went for six years. So, by the end of the first season [of 'A Different World'], they promoted me to a co-producer. So I then went up again in rank. And, and then in the third season, I became the co-executive producer of the head writers, so. Speaker 1: How, how do you know-- Speaker 2: No. I'm sorry, the fourth season, sorry, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you, how do you negotiating your deal? Was-- Speaker 2: Because I had an agent. I mean, and see this is where also I'm so lucky I came in in the golden age. I mean, now it's so hard. They, they were--we have to go back historically. There only three real networks and there was FOX (laughter). That was a cub. So, I mean, it's a whole different era. And, if you had a job, and it's still the case today. If you have a job on a show, you can sign with an agency. They're gonna want you. So, initially, my first contract was negotiated by an attorney. And, then as soon as I got out there, because I was working on a hot show, I immediately was signed by a lovely agent. A woman named Abby Adams who was with CAA [Creative Artists Agency]. And, so, they negotiated all the contracts going forth from there. And, I was with her for, god, I think ten years or so, before hopping to other agencies. Speaker 1: Was your auntie Diahann, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, was she helpful at all in that whole thing? 'Cause she also had been having--she'd had a renaissance with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --'Dallas' [sic. 'Dynasty']. Speaker 2: Well, she, Diahann was always helpful with advice. She didn't, I mean, if I'd asked her to introduce me to agents. But, I didn't need her actually to do that. Just because people were coming to me at that point, as they do. I mean, they're always looking for clients. So, if somebody has a job, that's who they want. And, at the time also, there were so many jobs in TV that, you know, it just wasn't that hard to get representation once you had your foot in the door, you were, you're on a road. Diahann was always very wise about, don't spend too much of your time on Rodeo Drive (laughter). Save some money, 'cause this is all good and you're making a lot of money now. But, the day may come when the gravy train pulls into the station and you wanna be ready for that. And, you're not gonna be ready for it with your shopping bags from Neiman Marcus, so. Unless you wanna live out of them. So, she was always very clear on don't think that this isn't coming to, not an end, but just--and she wasn't giving a negative message. But, just the--be wise and be smart about your money. Story_ID: 648976 Speaker 1: And, what is your mother [Josephine Premice] thinking of then? Speaker 2: My mother was just in seventh heaven because she, it was her dream for me that I would be successful. That I would be independent. That I would make money. She was just in heaven. She was so proud and, and she--and I think, thrilled of the part she played in it. Because really when you think about it, I owe my career to Bill Cosby. And, I owe my career to my mother because she's the one who pushed for the introduction, which was not her usual way. She wasn't a pushy stage mother. So, she was completely beside herself with pride and joy and relief, I think, feeling, though she never said this that, I would never be in the situation she was in where I would be reliant on somebody else. Speaker 1: And, you're in charge. You're really making the decisions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: --as opposed to the-- Speaker 2: Well, no. As an actress and as somebody who had to be at the mercy of people who didn't understand anything about her background, to see me in the decision making position, that--it was the fulfillment of her dream. Speaker 1: So, what did those roles mean as the role, you know, as you're going from, you know, writer to co-pro- you know, to (unclear)-- Speaker 2: So, more responsibility, more say, you really are helping to craft the direction of the show. I mean, eventually, I was the head writer, so I was kind of responsible for the guiding vision of the show ['A Different World'] for hiring writers for--you have a lot of say in casting when you're a producer. You have lot of say in editing. So, you have--it was increases in power. And, you're the one interfacing with the network. There--you're the one they talk to about what the problems are with whatever episode it is. So, you have, you have a lot of, a lot of say. I wasn't the voice. I wasn't the only voice, you know, Debbie Allen was the onboard for--from season two or three onwards, so. Story_ID: 648977 Speaker 1: What shows are you particularly proud of? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have--? Speaker 2: So, I have several. We did a show about South Africa called "A World Alike," and we actually taped it three weeks before Nelson Mandela's release from prison. And, we didn't know he was gonna be released. So, at first, I was a bit horrified 'cause we had no reference of his being released. But, everyone thought we were brilliant at being so topical dealing with South Africa when he was (laughter) released. But, it was a lovely episode and it blended what I like to do, which is the serious and the comic. We did an episode on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] that I wrote, that [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg was in. But, I'd have to say overall my favorites are the ones that we did with Diahann [HistoryMaker Diahann Carroll], and Diahann with Patti LaBelle, 'cause those were just such fun to do. We also did one that was a political spoof that everyone's forgotten, where the roles were reversed. And, Whitley [Whitley Gilbert] was basically Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and Dwayne [Dwayne Wayne], it was a dream sequence and Dwayne was Bill [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. And, it was, it really hilarious send up of politics and it is, it's even more accurate. It's like the play 'Chicago' that's even more accurate today to what's going on than it was when it first came out. It was ahead of its time. So, and then there was one that I didn't write but, I definitely helped shape the thought process behind it, which was about the image of the mammy in black culture. And, Whitley discovers something she didn't know, which was that her family owned slaves. Her black ancestors owned slaves. And, it ends with a beautiful performance piece that Debbie [Debbie Allen] crafted. So, you know, things like that that I felt like, this has never been done on American television. And, this is giving a peak into history and our culture that hasn't been seen. Those are, those are the ones that really stand out [from 'A Different World']. And, just being able to work with people I grew up around was such a treat. Story_ID: 648978 Speaker 1: So, did you like the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] scene? You became very much part of it. Speaker 2: I--well I really spent most of my time (laughter) in the writers room. I didn't like L.A. at all. And, I wasn't social there, at all. Which is why when I moved back to New York [New York], I think, I (laughter) I overdosed. Because my whole twenties and part of my thirties basically locked up in a room eating out of styrofoam containers. So, I didn't, I only went to functions, you know, the Emmys [Emmy Awards] or whatever if there was a specific reason for me to be there. I didn't, I wasn't part of the L.A. social scene, I would say. I knew a lot of interesting people and I gave some interesting dinner parties in my house. When I look at the guest list, it was kind of awe inspiring but, Alek Keshishian, the director who did the Madonna movie, 'Truth or Dare' ['Madonna: Truth or Dare'], he was my roommate. So, and my thirtieth birthday party, my god, I had everyone from, you know, Jada Pinkett Smith to, she wasn't Pinkett Smith yet, she was just Jada Pinkett to Wesley Snipes to, you know, I had all kinds of people running around there. Some of whom were already famous and of whom weren't yet famous. So, it's interesting, in that it's interesting to see where everybody's landed. Ari Emanuel is an old friend, I mean, I knew him when he was starting out and driving around in this (laughter) used Jaguar, so. Speaker 1: So, did you, 'cause there people that say that the L.A. scene is not--is anti-intellectual too. Speaker 2: Yes. That, so, that I didn't enjoy. And, so, I would tend to spend my weekends with close friends and just going to dinner and people that I could really talk to. I didn't, I didn't go to a lot of L.A. parties. I wasn't--plus, at the time, I don't know if this has changed, but at the time, you really needed to be taken seriously. And, if you were seen running around, you weren't gonna be taken seriously. And, there also weren't some of the places to socialize in a business context that there are now. Like now, there's Soho House [Soho House West Hollywood, West Hollywood, California]. Which I don't know if it's intellectual but it's got this cafe atmosphere of convening and people talking seriously about their work. We didn't have anything like that at the time. So, it wouldn't've been good to be seen at, you know, all these parties. That wasn't how you--and it really was, everything operated on reputation. So, you know, to get your next job was more a question of, is there a show or are they looking for a show runner? Do you fit the profile? Is your agent thinking creatively? Story_ID: 648979 Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, so you went there in eighty-f-? Speaker 2: It was eighty--'85 [1985], '86 [1986], '86 [1986], '86 [1986] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, then you leave in ninety--? Speaker 2: I left in '97 [1997]. I was, I kept an apartment and I was bicoastal for three years after that. But '97 [1997] was when I moved out of my main apartment [in Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: So, one other question about the show ['A Different World']. Was, was there, would you say that there was a height of the show? You know, where it was-- Speaker 2: I would say our fifth season was our finest hour. Our sixth season had some good things. I'd say, though, our fifth season, I think. Speaker 1: And, why would you say that? Speaker 2: You know, it takes a show--everything jells. And, all the characters and the actors are so rich. And, we added new characters like, Cree Summer-- Freddie [Winifred Brooks], played by Cree Summer Francks and it just was, was rich. There was a lot and we find our stride. And, we knew what worked. And, the network had come to trust us and understand, okay, this may not look funny but give it a chance, it's gonna be funny. And, every show has that season where it hits its stride. And, it's not all downhill from there but it's not--it's hard to maintain a level of quality year after year, after year, after year, after year. Speaker 1: Right. And, the personalities because you're actually creating stars. But, so, was, so there wasn't conflict, it was really more of a family. Speaker 2: No. They really were a family. I mean, there were conflicts as there is in, you know, all families and there were a little rivalries and there were little moments. But, there was never--we were not a fractious set. We were not--and I remember once, we had an actor who (laughter), was on the show doing several charac- several episode arc. And, he was trying to stir up a lot of trouble and he was very two faced. He would say, "Oh, sure, you know, make me the fool in this scene," and then you'd get to the reading and he'd say, "How, how can you disgrace me this way?" I mean, he was, (laughter) he was ridiculous. And, I remember Daryl Bell going around, going, "Who does he think he is," you know. "He's messing with my family," you know. This is the--the actors didn't stand for it. They put him in his place. 'Cause it was sort of, who do you think you are? You're--should be happy to be here and we're a happy set. And, you know, you don't talk to--so, it was, it was that spirit of camaraderie. And, then sometimes there was tension between the actors and the writers. They didn't like what we'd done, and we didn't like what they'd done. But woe to the person who would come in from the outside and try to disrupt the balance 'cause they were not having it. Story_ID: 648980 Speaker 1: And, so, what, what--were you surprised when--with the sixth season, you know, that it was ended, or, what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. But, looking back, and this is something I've talked about before and it's, I think, a really important life lesson in not being a hothead. We insisted on doing our season opener about the L.A. riots. Because, we had all experienced them over our hiatus. That was remember the wake of the Rodney King verdict. The city basically burst into flame. And, so, we felt we had a responsibility to our audience to address it. Because we felt that's what people came to us for. And, we--that wasn't our imagination. We'd get letters. We'd get comments all the time about, this is so rich and helpful because we can--real things get discussed. So, the network was adamantly opposed because for a lot of white Angelenos, it was a terrifying (laughter) time. The Beverly Center [Los Angeles, California] was closed. And, no, I mean, frankly you could get beaten up in the wrong neighborhood. And, you know Reginald Denny, the white trucker was dragged from his truck and beaten up. And, there were awful things that happened, so. We insisted however, and we casted Sista Souljah [Sister Souljah] in the part. And, the network was objecting to that because it was right around the time of the elections. And, she had made some racist, well racist, she'd made comments that were disparaging of white people. And, anyway, they were so unhappy with the whole concept. And, looking back, I don't know if that was the nail in our coffin. But, I do feel that that two parter episode [of 'A Different World'] didn't help our relationship with the network. I do believe, they were gonna yank us anyway, because 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' was going to college. So, I don't think they wanted to have two shows back to back with a character in college. I think that was an element of it. But, I don't think we helped ourselves with--that's my personal opinion. Others might disagree and it may not be true. But, I felt like we, we won the battle and we lost the war. And, my whole MO [modus operandi] throughout my career has been, lose the battle and win the war. Don't engage in every little petty one. And, also, when I looked back on that two parter episode, it was okay. But, it wasn't our finest hour. And, we were so consumed with the riots because we had lived them. Elsewhere in the country, they weren't. So, I think we could have found a better way. Somebody could've just had a conversation or something, instead of. But, you know, hindsight is 20/20. I mean, at the time it was, it was a seminal event in race relations in the country and in the history of the country, it was replay of '68 [1968]. It was, history repeats itself. It was, that come to Jesus moment of how far have we come in terms of our true of each other? How far have we come in terms of rights? How far have we come economically? It was profound. But, I don't know that we were the right venue, so. Story_ID: 648981 Speaker 1: So, the show ends-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, so, what, what, what does every- 'cause that's--how was the last, the last-- Speaker 2: Oh, my god. Talk about the vale of tears (laughter). And, it was interesting because the actors had reached that point where they were restless and they were ready to go off and do other things. And, you're young. You don't realize what an extraordinary opportunity it is. And, what a rare opportunity it is to have that long a run, to have such a beautiful harmonious environment in which you have a voice, in which you're heard, in which you're loved. So, I think in that last episode everyone got it. Everyone was crying. And, we brought everybody back. And, we brought my mother [Josephine Premice] back. She'd been in a couple of guest roles. And, she was--everyone was weeping. It was very, very hard and we did that Boyz II Men song. The say goodbye song ['End of the Road']. So, it was, it was painful. But, we were also tired and we also felt like, it's a big bad world, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: The other thing (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're on a winning streak. We're just gonna keep going. So, the actors went off to different things. Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison] did some films, and Jasmine [HistoryMaker Jasmine Guy] did some films. Cree Summer was always doing a lot of voice overs. Jada [Jada Pinkett Smith] obviously went off to, she was on 'Fresh Prince' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'] and that's where she met Will [Will Smith], and she got married. So, life moved on. I stayed at Carsey Werner [Carsey Werner Company; Carsey Werner Company LLC] in a little development deal. And, I tried to develop a show about a black owned family business. I was happy to take the pace down and to have more time to spend in New York [New York]. That didn't work. Speaker 1: Now, which one was that? Was that (unclear)? Speaker 2: It was, no. That was 'Family, Inc.' [ph.], which was never produced. And, it was about a family like the Graves family, who owned magazines, and. Anyway, I develop it for CBS but they didn't move forward to it--with it. So, a year, whatever, a year or two later, I then went to do 'Can't Hurry Love,' that was my next job. So, that was interesting because that's when I had left my prior agency because they kept bringing me these sort of bad UPN, which we refer to as the underpaid Negro network shows. And, they'd say to me, "Well, we can't get you a job running a white show." And, I'd say, "Why not," (laughter)? "I ran a show that was in the top ten. I--wasn't written in Ebonics," (laughter). "I speak several lang- ." I mean, what? So, I went, I interviewed with another agency, and they said, "Of course, we can get you a job running a white show." And, they did. They got me 'Can't Hurry Love.' Be careful what you wish for (laughter). It was--I came in in midseason to replace a team that had been running it or misrunning it at the time. And, it was hard to go from a show that had so much meaning and that was so--that had evolved so richly and beautifully to something that was. In its first season that was a bit of an imitation of 'Friends' that didn't have--it was hard to write for something that didn't have the same pith. To me, I knew when we were writing 'A Different World' even in the simplest episode, that each one was making a big difference in terms of perceptions. And, here I just didn't feel we were making much of a difference. It was a silly show about people doing silly things. Out of it came a lifelong friendship with Mariska Hargitay. She was one of the stars of the show. So, that was lovely. And, and, I remember though when the season ended, I was absolutely exhausted. And, I got the call from the producer that the show had been cancelled and I did--I danced a jig (laughter). I was so relieved 'cause it was just not a pleasant experience. And, he was a hilarious man. He was like the David Merrick of TV. He would say things like, "We're 50--it's 50/50 in our favor," you know, it was as--what is 50/50 in our favor mean (laughter)? It would have to be 51/49 to be in our favor. So, anyway, that was-- Speaker 1: So, as executive producer, you hired the team? What--I mean, were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, no the team was already in place. Speaker 1: It was already in place. Speaker 2: So, I came in, I was, I was grafted onto a team who were all very nice, you know. There--I worked with some nice people, but. Speaker 1: And, then after that, then the next thing--so, you're with CBS really with 'Can't Hurry Love'? Speaker 2: 'Can't Hurry Love' was for CBS. Story_ID: 648982 Speaker 1: Then you go with Warner Bro- [Warner Brothers Television], or? Speaker 2: Warner Brothers, exactly. I made a deal with Warner Brothers and I did Kirk Cameron's show ['Kirk'], which was a family oriented show. So, that I enjoyed more just because the messages were positive. It was a sweet little show. I can't even quite remember the premise. But, oh, and, we got to shoot our season opener in Paris [France], which was a blast. Because-- Speaker 1: You love Paris? You love Paris? Speaker 2: I love Paris and also they, they produced 'Family Matters;' the same company. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And, so, they were gonna have these two characters get married. And, it was cheaper to go to Paris with the 'Family Matters' cast, who were already shooting over there and piggyback on all their stuff. Than it was to take Kirk Cameron and Chelsea Noble to Las Vegas [Nevada]. So, (laughter) we went to Paris. So, that was, I mean, to go a shoot on the streets of Paris, what greater experience is there? We had a hilarious incident where we were supposed to, they were supposed to do a scene where they were splashing around in the fountain. And, they had booked the Trocadero [Paris, France] and the fountain was being cleaned the day that they had booked. And, of course, you know, being French bureaucracy, there was no one at work, that person was on strike. So, it was like, how are we gonna do this fountain in a dry fountain? So, we're going around Paris trying to basically do a gorilla shoot 'cause we have no permit. And, we show up at one fountain in the 6th arrondissement, and of course a policeman comes along. And, he was African and I could tell he was Senegalese. So, I started speaking to him in French. And, I said, "You're Senegalese aren't you?" And, he said, "Yes." And, I said, "So, am I. I'm half Senegalese." And, so, I'm chatting and chatting and meanwhile they get to get this shot. (Laughter) But then I-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) They got, they got the shot (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They got the shot. They got the shot (laughter). Anyway, it was, it was hysterical. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's--that's cute itself. Story_ID: 648983 Speaker 1: So then you went from that to the, 'Suddenly Susan'? You worked at su- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Exactly, 'cause that was a Warner Brothers show [Warner Brothers Television]. And, so, when 'Kirk' went off the air, they put me on 'Suddenly Susan,' where I was just a consultant. So, that was a great job because it was the same salary, but I only had to work three days a week. So, could go back and forth to New York [New York] a lot. And, I think, by that time I was engaged. So, it was fun in terms of seeing my mother [Josephine Premice] and planning my wedding and that kind of thing. Again, and I loved Brooke Shields, she was the best thing on the show. It was a cute show. Again, I felt the frustration of, where's the meaning? It's cute. But, what are we really saying? And, what, what am I at the service of putting forth? Speaker 1: So, what are you thinking you wanting to do at this point? I mean, 'cause what, now what year do you get married [to Aaron Hill]? Speaker 2: I get married in '97 [1997], so-- Speaker 1: In '97 [1997]. Speaker 2: At the end of the Brooke Shields season. And, one development that would've been exciting that didn't come to pass and it's probably a gift. The Warner Brothers produced, 'Murphy Brown.' And, the executive really liked me and was impressed by me and he thought that I should be the person to run this show for the next season. So, I was excited and at the same time terrified because my mother at that point was starting to be ill. Well, she had--she was more than starting, she was ill. And, and I knew I would be a newlywed and I'd be, you know, working round the clock. So, fortunately, they didn't--he, he loved the idea but I don't think the power, the powers that be had their own (laughter), their own person that they selected. So, that didn't come to pass. But, if that opportunity presented itself, I would've done it, 'cause it would've been historic and it was a very, very prestigious show and that was the kind of thing that would've, you know, forever more no one could take away. You've done 'Murphy Brown.' And, I hate to say it but black shows are, other than 'The Cosby Show,' every other black show is a child of a lesser god. There's a little bit of the perception of, well, yeah, of course you did that, you're black. So, there--they don't quite understand the sophistication of what was going on. And, it's regarded in people's head as less sophisticated than, you know. And, I would watch 'Friends,' I would think, how is this more sophisticated than what we're doing? There's no way. But, they're white people, so. Anyway, so, I really was very intent on putting the right images forward. And, I got a job with Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] developing a show about a black diva, a Broadway diva who'd fallen on hard times. And, it was when that didn't go forth and they had no understanding of what this character was that we created, that I knew, okay, the revolution will be televised. You're just not what you wanna say and talk about and the kinds of people who are living in your head and in your heart that you grew up around are just not gonna see the light of day on TV. I actually believe some of them could now. But, at the time, it wasn't a reality (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Clears throat) Well, I mean, we're talking about, what, twenty years? Speaker 2: We're talking about '97 [1997], '98 [1998]. This is '98 [1998] that that happened. Yeah, so, it's almost twenty years-- Speaker 1: Twenty years-- Speaker 2: --later that some of what I'd like to see is possible. Speaker 1: How many of you were there at--in Hollywood at that time though too? Speaker 2: Not--well, there were some. You know Yvette Lee did extremely well; Yvette Lee Bowser. After 'A Different World,' she left there to go to 'Hanging Mr. Cooper' [sic. 'Hangin' with Mr. Cooper'] and then she created her own show. I mean, created three or four shows. But, we were still not, you know, there was Reggie Bythewood [Reggie Rock Bythewood] who had come out of 'Different World' [sic. 'Another World'], Gina Prince [Gina Prince-Bythewood] who ended up working on 'Felicity.' So, there were some of us, but it wasn't a critical mass. But, more than anything, in terms of what they would select--it even frankly, in terms of white people, it was just not, not what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 648984 Speaker 1: So, Bill--[HistoryMaker] Tim Reid came along with the opportunity to do 'Linc's' and that was very special and that was freer 'cause it was cable. But, once 'Linc's' went off the air-- Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, when you do 'Linc's,' are you in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] still? Speaker 1: So, 'Linc's' was shot, the first season we shot in Virginia. And, then, the second season we-- Speaker 2: Now, had he opened up his studio [New Millennium Studios, Petersburg, Virginia]? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And, the second season, we shot in L.A. and I commuted. And, I had writers [HistoryMaker] Charles Randolph-Wright who was, who has directed the Motown musical ['Motown: The Musical,' Berry Gordy]. Charles was one of the writers and Adriana Trigiani who's now a bestselling author. And, so, we were on a rotation. One week one of us would be out there, 'cause my mother [Josephine Premice] at that point was very, very sick. So, I didn't wanna be out there all the time so that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, how did, so you're, it's, now, you're married by this-- Speaker 1: I'm married. Speaker 2: --by this time, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you're commuting? Speaker 1: I'm commuting, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think that's actually a really good solution for marriage (laughter). You don't sweat the small stuff. You don't argue. You're not on top of each other. You don't have to share a bathroom all the time. It's very harmonious arrangement. Speaker 2: (Laughter) How-- Speaker 1: You can't do it with kids. But, you could, yep. Speaker 2: How had you met your husband [Aaron Hill]? Speaker 1: I met my husband on a blind date. We had--I knew his cousin and his cousin kind of put us together. We're still trying to figure out why, so. Speaker 2: 'Cause you're different. Both (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yep. Yep. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 648985 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so then you decide--so, you, you enjoyed 'Linc's' as, as a project (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. It was, it was creative, it was-- Speaker 1: Can you talk about the story line? Speaker 2: So, 'Linc's' was set in a bar in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] run by a black Republican and frequented by a motley crew of characters who make their living in and around Capitol Hill. And, we had Eleanor [Eleanor Braithwaite Winthrop] who was loosely based on [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman. She was a crusader for children's rights. And, a diehard Democrat who's always sparing with the bar owner, who was very sexy. But, who was more conservative in his views. And, then we had a character called Johnnie B. Goode who was a lobbyist, who basically would sell his mother (laughter) to make a fee. And, we had a white senator who just loved the bar because he was from the South and that was, you know, where he hung out. So, we could be topical. It was a dramedy. So, we didn't have to--it wasn't (makes sound). We didn't shoot it in front of an audience. We could take our time. And, again, we could just--it was like doing plays. We could do--and I really built the staff the way I wanted it. It was tiny. And, we were all sort of co-equal. And, we, we just had so much fun. We just had a blast. And, Pam Grier was phenomenal to work with. The whole cast was great, so. Speaker 1: So, you had--it lasted two seasons, right? Speaker 2: Two season, exactly. On Showtime. Before Showtime was anything really. And, then when that went off the air, I did one pilot for them. And, then I remember having a conversation with my husband [Aaron Hill] where he said, "Well, other than the money, what keeps you in TV?" And, I just stared at him blankly (laughter). And, it's, it was one of those ah ha moments where you realize, it's time to get off this train, 'cause it doesn't--you know, you're not growing artistically, you're not feeling fulfilled. It's time to go, so. Speaker 1: You mean, the frustrations of the industry? Speaker 2: The frustrations of the industry, but also when you have a vision of the world that you wanna talk about and-- Speaker 1: You can't. Speaker 2: --that doesn't mesh with what they're interested in and it just--you just realize, what am I doing? What am I doing with my life? And, so, I went down a different path at that point. Speaker 1: And, then so you decide, so, you come back to, you mean you-- Speaker 2: Well, I was already in-- Speaker 1: In New York [New York]? Speaker 2: New York. I'm sort of a back and forth and we write, Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Randolph-Wright] and I wrote one pilot for Showtime that didn't go forward. At that point, I wrote this article for Vogue about growing up biracial and that's when I got my book agent. And, she said, "You have a memoir." And, you know what I was thinking, I'm way too young. But, I--my mother [Josephine Premice] was dying and I went to her and I said, "You know, it's been suggested that I do a memoir." And, she said, "I want you to do that." She'd often been approached about writing her autobiography and she didn't wanna do it. She was so private. But, she--it was almost like a sacred trust. You need to tell our story. And, so, I started writing that and she passed away in the middle of the process. And, at her memorial, I showed a clip of her on 'The Merv Griffin Show' and she was singing in Italian a song about a dying mother. And, this is 1966. And, [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid after the memorial said to me, "Your mother was a brave woman. She could've gone on 'Merv Griffin' and done something from the 'American Songbook' ['Great American Songbook'] in the hopes that some record producer in the audience is gonna produce her. Instead of making that choice, she gets out there with a song in Italian (laughter) and basically tells America, we are not what you think we are. That's gutsy." And, I thought, you know, he's right. Life sometimes is about taking those chances. It's about going out of the box and not staying on a safe path. And, growing and helping to shift the paradigm. And, so, that's when, when--after he said that to me, I really thought right now I just wanna focus on this book, and getting this book right and telling this story. And, I can't be dabbling around. I gotta really throw myself into it and find my voice in a different way. So, I really got off the TV track entirely. And, then the year that the book ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill] came out, right around the time the book came out, my daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill] was born. So, that became a whole other (laughter) element of my life--center of my life, really. Story_ID: 648986 Speaker 1: You know, what I, I just have to ask, you're doing comedic--well you're, you know, even-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the dram- drama comedy or drama-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whatever you refer to it as, you're doing that kind of writing. This is different because it's narrative. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, not to say that you had not been a student of literature. Speaker 2: No. But, it's a whole different voice. And, it's a whole different discipline and, you know, I had to take myself to the public library to go and work. 'Cause otherwise, I didn't get anything done. So, I had to flex a different muscle and I'm thrilled to have done that. I haven't quite mastered it the way I want to. But, it's been an important part of my growth. And, now I am circling back and looking to get back into TV and, you know, people sort of look at you and say, "Well, what have you been doing," (laughter)? And, there's part of me that thinks, gosh, did I get off the track too much. But, when I think about it, I really believe I wouldn't have developed as a human being the way I have. And, I wouldn't have developed my voice for good or ill the way I have, because you--it's a different practice. And, you to have to write for a deadline that's nine months away takes a lot of discipline. Sometimes to write when you don't even have a buyer yet because you just believe in something. To finish a project that no one is necessarily waiting for and that may not ever get published, that's a whole other discipline. And, then just--you create a world if you create a show, but you really are creating a world when you write a novel. So, I, it's given me a whole other muscle to, to flex. Story_ID: 648987 Speaker 1: How--what did you learn about yourself in the process and about your family? I mean, you've--? Speaker 2: So, first I discovered my inner sloth (laughter) because when there isn't a deadline staring you in the face, it's awfully hard to get stuff done. So, I really learned I had to kick myself in the pants. Writing a book about your family is a great exercise 'cause it does really force you to look back. And, with hindsight, with distance, with some maturity one hopes. And, so, for example, I had been in this stage where I had a very negative view of my parents' marriage and thought, this was not a great thing. And, I came across a photograph that my father [Timothy Fales] took of my mother's [Josephine Premice] hand; just posed, like this. And, I thought, there's so much about this marriage you don't even begin to understand. Any man who would focus in on such a small detail so lovingly for all the mishegoss, as the Yiddish will say (laughter), there was definitely love there. There's a wonderful picture I have of them when they were first married. And, they're on a trip, and they're in a convertible, and they're both just beaming. So, you begin to understand that you don't understand anything (laughter) about the people around you. And, that you always have to remain humble and open that everything is so much more complex than what meets the eye. And, nothing can be reduced to a little box. And, again, that's not an exercise that if I had remained just in TV I could have undertaken. 'Cause that's not about those levels of complexity. Now, I think I can bring those colors to a television show and I think the best shows do bring those colors even if it's never overtly stated, you can feel it in the writing and in the acting. But, there're layers, and layers, and layers that they know about these people or that they created about these people. But, it's, it's all about learning and getting better. Speaker 1: So, what--you did a lot of, you know, book signings-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and things like that. So, what in the talking, you know, in the presentations, what also did you learn about yourself, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill]? 'Cause-- Speaker 2: In the talking about it--well, first of all, I would discover that my book ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill] had a life of its own. That, as I would think about what I would say to people, I would discover something new each time in my own books and things that were unintentional. I mean, this last book ['Imperfect Bliss,' Susan Fales-Hill], I realized, oh, my god, I created an homage to my father without realizing it. I am acknowledging the things that marriage has taught me in it. So, I--I'm proud to say, I really enjoyed talking to people and I've had such joyous experiences talking to people. I discovered that I am able to connect with an audience effectively. And, and that I have through trial and error and through falling down (laughter), learned a little something about life that people can connect with. Story_ID: 648988 Speaker 1: So, your first book, your book, talk about your book so the fir- you've written three (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, my first book--I've written three. So, my first book is a memoir written, well, really written twelve years ago, but published ten years ago. And, it's about mother-- my mother [Josephine Premice], and the process of growing up around her and the process of ushering her to the grave, really. So, and looking back on her life. Speaker 1: Did you have to, did it take you two years to find a publisher? Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I got a, I actually--that was a very pleasant experience. I had the deal. I wrote a proposal and was able to write the book on the proposal. But, it was a year process of writing-- a year and a half process of writing it and then it takes, you know, forever (laughter), it's like 1912 in publishing business. It takes forever to get these books out. Then, my next book ['One Flight Up,' Susan Fales-Hill] which didn't come out 'til six years later, seven years later, eight years later, was a novel about a group of women who all grew up in the same, going to the same elite private school. All of different ethnicities and different social economic background. And, now they're middle aged and the married ones are all cheating on their husband. And, the one who's not married is torn between two men. It's sort of the one that got away story. That character, her name was India [India Chumley], was the closest character was the closest character to myself that I'd ever written. And, that--so, that was the hardest because it's very difficult to crack yourself (laughter) open. And, then this last one ['Imperfect Bliss,' Susan Fales-Hill] is a send up of 'Pride and Prejudice' [Jane Austen], and, then what I'm hoping to achieve in my next book which will be a historical novel, God willing, is I realize with my novels, I have skimmed the surface emotionally for the reader. They're not, they're not getting the soul of me. So, which they did get a piece of in, in 'Always Wear Joy' ['Always Wear Joy: My Mother Bold and Beautiful,' Susan Fales-Hill]. And, I find people connect to 'Always Wear Joy' in the way that they're not connecting to my novels. And, so, I've realized you've, if you're gonna use this medium, you've gotta find a way to open your heart. As Barbara Cook, the singer, said, "Get up on stage and show the audience what life has done to you." So, that's what I've gotta attempt to do. Story_ID: 648989 Speaker 1: So (cough), you know I had, we had worked with [HistoryMaker] Charles Randolph-Wright. I didn't know the connection until-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --as I saw him listed in there. You--in the process, so, what is your process for writing? And, what is your process for choosing your projects? Speaker 2: My process is sometimes an idea will be mulling around like 'Pride and Prejudice' [Jane Austen] has been a lifelong obsession and my husband [Aaron Hill] has always encouraged me to do that one. The one on the cheaters ['One Flight Up,' Susan Fales-Hill], I read an article years ago about a group of women who were all cheating on their husbands and they had no desire to leave them. But, they had this whole sort of arrangement going. And, I also had a moment sitting with one friend who's actually now deceased and another friend who's Colombian from college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and looking around and thinking, we never see this anywhere. We don't see this grouping of women. So, I'll often begin with either an idea or a character. And, just start noodling and then one thing layers over another. And, often there're elements that I may have been obsessed with like in the, the most recent one, 'Imperfect Bliss' [Susan Fales-Hill]. I've been obsessed with the black Mozart, the Chevalier de Saint-Georges, who was a great violinist, and composer, and orchestra leader, and fencer in 18th century France, who was a mulatto. I've been obsessed with this character since I learned about him when I was working on 'Linc's' and I wanted to do something with him. So, he's an element in the novel (laughter), just sort of tucked in. So, it's, there's a layering that happens. It--you draw from different things in your life from an idea that you had a while ago. And, then all, then, then it's just, you gotta sit there and write. I'm struggling with my historical novel 'cause there's a lot of research involved. But, it's also, it's a very ambitious undertaking. It's a little 'Twelve Years a Slave'-ish ['Twelve Years a Slave,' Solomon Northup]. And, so, it's, how do I find the right tone for it? So. Speaker 1: So, you're talking about what's coming. Story_ID: 648990 Speaker 1: Can we go back to 'Imperfect Bliss' [Susan Fales-Hill] though? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Imperfect Bliss,' can you talk about the themes in the book? You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 1: --because you're-- Speaker 2: Yes. The themes in 'Imperfect Bliss' are much like in 'Pride and Prejudice' [Jane Austen], the opposition of the marriage of true minds and the marriage of true money. And, I use the device of a reality show to show the objectification of people which is really what 'Pride and Prejudice' is about. The opening line is about man as an economic object (laughter) and the woman. So, it's dealing with the fact that that's still a template out there for women. At the heart of it though, there's the love story. And, it's the story of this woman who is very open minded intellectually but not opened minded emotionally and has a lot to learn about the people around her that she thinks she understands. And, there's a line in 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson] where a character says, when most men look at a women, they see a line on the horizon. But, she's not just a line on the horizon, she's a whole world. And, I mean, that applies to how we see other human beings. We're, snap, Johanna [ph.], she's black, she's smart (laughter), you know, we don't see the whole world. And, so, it's about these characters learning to read each other with open hearts. And, it's also about a women who's fallen on her butt. She's a child of promise. She's brilliant. She's intellectual, and she married the love of her life. And, it's all gone to poop. You know, she's divorced. He cheated on her. She's got a child with a disability. And, it's sort of, what, what happened to my life? And, I think, in this generation a lot of people feel that sense of derailment, particularly post-2008 with the crash, there's this sense of, I was a child of promise. I did all the right things, and how did it all go wrong? And, one of my favorite themes is resurrection. Pulling yourself back up. You know, as Nelson Mandela says, "Don't judge me on how many times I fell. Judge me on who many times I stood up again" [sic.]. And, so, it's about somebody reclaiming their sense of hope and their faith in love, and their life in the midst of sort of the ashes and the wreckage of, of what they thought life would be, so. And, there's the theme of race and not class so much but, well, there is the theme of class because the mother's from a humble background and has clawed her way up and she wants something better for her daughter. And, there's the theme of using--she black and she married a white man, so she'd have nice light skinned girls. And, there's the theme of using your light skinned beauty to propel yourself forward--it's a bit of an old fashioned theme, but still very real for a lot of people. And, so, there's the clash of the main character who is the daughter who can pass and chooses not to, with her mother who's looking at her like, are you insane? You know, you could make your life really easy. What are you doing? And, I gave you this gift of blonde hair and green eyes (laughter). Use them. Don't throw them away. So, it's, it's about love and the twisted forms of love. But, also how little we understand the people around us and how it takes having your heart broken and, and being opened to really begin to understand people. Especially, the people closest to you, that you sometimes judge so harshly, so. That certainly has been one of the cardinal lessons of my own life, so. Speaker 1: Yeah. I thought, just a little bit I was reading, I was reading, I thought it was cute the--that it was set in now. I mean, that it's really a reality show, you know. So, I thought-- Speaker 2: No. And, I think if Jane Austen were alive, that's what she'd be writing about. Because that encapsulates everything she was talking about. That sort of market. Then it was balls and they'd parade these women through. Now, you know, we're doing these reality shows. Story_ID: 648991 Speaker 1: You have been also, besides your career, in the meantime, you've had a daughter [Josephine Bristol Hill]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, you've been extremely involved both in the New York society-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as, well, as philanthropically. Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Absolutely. So, it very funny, actually a white step cousin was complaining to my brother [Enrico Fales], "Well, you know, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill] has such frequent appearances on the society pages." And, my brother said to her, "That's what she was raised to do," (laughter). Again, that's a bit of a fulfillment of my mother's [Josephine Premice] dream. And, when I moved back to New York [New York], really full time, the social scene was in full swing because the economy was fantastic. It was like a neo-Gilded Age. And, that's what people were doing, is going out and women were sharing things and I felt something of a responsibility to be part of that and be one of the few people of color. And, also, to reclaim, it's an obnoxious word but, stake a claim or reclaim a stake for my father's family. 'Cause my father [Timothy Fales] sort of poo pooed all that and tossed it all away. And, I thought, you know, no. We have a reputation and we're an old New York family and I need to be part of this. And, I remember Lynn Whitfield saying to me, "I see all these pictures of these girls, you know, you should be in there." So, that's not why I started getting involved in certain organizations. I got involved with American Ballet Theatre, which I adored, because I love ballet. But, when you get involved in these things it leads to going to events and being photographed. 'Cause it was also, we gotta remember the birth of certain social blogs and so forth. So, suddenly your image is everywhere. And, also given my mother's history of style and participation in cafe society, there's the element of representing that glamour and that elegance. So, I wanted to be a social leader. I wanted to be a, I'm not gonna say the word philanthropist 'cause to me Carnegie [Andrew Carnegie], Gates [Bill Gates], those are philanthropists (laughter). But, somebody who was an advocate for, for the arts and culture. And, a voice that was a distinct voice. It's important to have people who are not Caucasian on some of these boards because you bring a point of view about certain things that people might not even be looking at. For example, in a ballet company, one of the things I'm really proud is that, I got the conversation going about diversity at American Ballet Theatre. And, now they've become really a national if not world leader in that cause, and nurtured some extraordinary dancers along the way. So, when I look back, some of it seems crazy because I think, if I'd known the crash was coming (laughter), I would've, I would've oriented myself in different ways. I think I participated maybe a little too much in some of it; went to a lot of parties, had a great time. But, I--when 2008 hit, it really, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], was like being in a rented ballroom and suddenly they flick the lights on and go, your contract's up, it's two a.m. (laughter). You realize your makeup's dripping and the beads are falling off your dress. It was a shock because the economy was going so well. And, everyone around us was doing extremely well. And, it was a party in every sense of the word. And, we also did a lot of really good things; gave money to important organizations, endowing scholarships at Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, New York, New York], at American Ballet Theatre, at some of our alma maters. So, all that's very important but, looking back, I think, I wish I had been a little wiser in the wa- some of the ways I spent my time. It's easy to get caught in the whirlwind. And, I think, going back to the very beginning of this conversation and my upbringing, I think I was a little too obsessed with this notion of noblesse oblige. And, you'vee got--you represent something you have to be out there and in a world where really nobody cares that much (laughter). And, I think I was fighting a crusade that not--my parents wouldn't necessarily have wanted for me. And, that was important only in my head, and not necessarily in the world (simultaneous). Story_ID: 648992 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill], what do you mean by that? I mean, I understand the, I understand part of it, but I don't think I understand the latter part of what you said, that? Speaker 2: Well, I feel that I had such, I was on such a mission, as I said, this would've reclaimed his position that to a degree I thought my father [Timothy Fales] had thrown away, and reclaim a spot. And, society quote unquote has completed shifted. I mean, the things that mattered when I was a girl, don't matter at all. Nobody looks at the Social Register anymore. Nobody--these things don't matter. And, and I remember talking to a friend about it and as I was sort of shifting things and refocusing on my writing career and I said, well, I've, I've reclaimed a bit of our position. And, he's like, "I had no idea that your family had lost its position." (Laughter) You know, sort of like, what are you, what are you talking about? This is not 'Gone with the Wind,' you know. Tara hasn't burned to the ground, what, what are you--so that's what I'm saying. It's in my mind I think I overdramatized this sense of I was Don Quixote on this quest that when I look at it I think, what really was the meaning of that quest? This is such a changing world. And, even in the time that I, from the time I moved back to New York [New York] to now, it's a Sea change. Again, things that mattered fifteen years ago that mean zero today. So, not just because the crash happened but just because the world moves. The centers move. And, there isn't one center anymore. So, I just think, I got a little carried away with my sense of mission that, you know, it was important to be, I hate the word socialite, but the black social leader who represented her white family and her black family. And, it was sort of who really cares? Speaker 1: So, your background is your background that's the other thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Absolutely. Speaker 1: It's--that's your history and no one can take it away from you. Speaker 2: No, no, no, absolutely. But, I think, I felt like I was on a mission and, and as I look at it, I think, is that really the right mission? Is that the most meaningful mission? And, if your mother [Josephine Premice] were alive today, is that--I remember her saying to me actually, when she was dying, she said, "You must not be seen everywhere and with everyone." 'Cause she certainly didn't want me to become that sort of flibbertigibbet, which I don't think I've become. But, the other element as a, as a professional women and as a creator, a thinker, is that when people--a picture is worth, it's not just worth a thousand words, it's worth a million words. It--when people see your picture, that's what they get caught up in. People forgot that I've had a career. People forgot what I'd done. Not black people. Not people who grew up on 'A Different World.' But, a lot of people who only met me when I came to New York, perceived me as a girl who wore dresses well. And, I gave a talk recently, actually, at the Colony Club [New York, New York] ironically. And, at the end of it, this woman said, "I absolutely love this." And, she said, "And, I didn't really expect much of it. I just see your picture all the time." And, so, there is that, that issue of, as I was saying about being in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], not being taken seriously which I didn't worry about when I moved back here. But, became a concern as I realized, all right, volunteering has its limitations. I'm proud of the work that I've done with some of these organizations; but it was time to get back to what I really love, which is creating. Story_ID: 648993 Speaker 1: So, where are you now in your life? You've talked, can you talk about? Speaker 2: Yes. So, my daughter's [Josephine Bristol Hill] now ten. And, I feel like I'm really finally coming into my own. I'm fifty-one years old. I have made enough of--enough dumb mistakes (laughter), fallen on my butt enough times. But, I also have become a lot clearer on who I am and who I wanna be. And, I, I feel like, and that part of it was imposed or the--somehow the message was given my parents [Josephine Premice and Timothy Fales] but I also think I took it on because that's just my personality. I don't feel any more than I owe it to my families. I don't feel the sense of duty anymore to them. I feel like, they lived their lives and you've done it. Now, you have to do what's in your heart and you have to become the person that you are. And, the other thing is that I--in my, in the last whatever book--until I hit forty-five I think there was a lot that I was doing in reaction to, you know, my parents had a chaotic marriage. So, everything in my life was going to be stable. Well, lo and behold, 2008 came along and showed us (laughter), you can be a banker and that's the most unstable career there is. Everything is unstable. And, so, I've become much more comfortable with the imperfection of life and the uncertainties and I realize what makes me tick is the ability to create. The ability to create joy. The ability to make people laugh. The ability to create emotional connection. The ability to give people hope. That--what feeds my soul is creativity. The performing arts first and foremost; history, reading. So, I'm very comfortable now in this notion of being a little bit more of a nomad in being more of a, not to sound pretentious, but an artist in my soul. It's funny when I, when I read profiles of a lot of corporate women. You know, when you're younger you think, well, I could have gone that road or route. Or, I could've gone that route and now I'm very comfortable at fifty-one saying, "I would never have made it at Xerox [Xerox Corporation]," (laughter). Not that I'm stupid and not that I could've learned the skills but that's not what's in my heart. And, when I think of, and all of these women are extraordinary. I mean, [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns is extraordinary and, and they're very creative in their field. But, when I think of the people who are my personal heroes and heroines, they tend to be performing artists. That's really for me. They personify my idea, what a beautiful life is. And, that's what resonates for me. So, I've reached that point where I'm comfortable saying, "This is what I care about, and this is what I love, and this what I wanna spend my time doing." And, of course, continuing to advocate for the arts and eventually there's some other causes, civil rights causes and so forth that I wanna get involved in. But, it's a time of owning who I am, and no longer being somebody's daughter. But, being my own person, belatedly (laughter); and feeling now it's time to chart my course as I see it. Story_ID: 648994 Speaker 1: So, what things do you wanna do that you haven't done, Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Fales-Hill]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I'm happy to say, actually, at probably more than the midpoint of my life that there's a lot that I wanted to do that I did do. I mean, even if my books only sold one copy each (laughter). Just to have them published and to have them out there, and to have completed them, I'm very proud of that and I'm very happy because that was dream. So, that's one off the bucket list. I probably would love to do a play that gets performed. Whether it's on Broadway or--I mean, that would be an ultimate dream just because I love Broadway, but its--that's a long, long, long shot. But, to do a play, I think, would be fantastic. I feel now that I'm not done with TV because I think there's such exciting things going on. Whether it's 'Scandal' or 'Homeland,' or 'Downton Abbey,' there's some fantastic work being done on television and it's like working with your own repertory company. So, I wanna get back in there with a great cast, and create great roles for women in particular. I wanna go back to graduate school at some point. I've always harbored the fantasy of going to law school (laughter), which everyone says it's not a fantasy. So, that might be something I do as a senior citizen (laughter), for the fun of it and no one will want me in their study group. 'Cause they're like, "What is this seventy-five year old doing here with her walker? Get her out of here." That's a big one. I am very fascinated with and concerned about the issue of child abuse. Because, I think it's kind of the seminal problem that then leads to every other social malady you could think of. People ending up in jail and so forth. So, that's a cause that I, I wanna get involved in, in a profound way. But, I have to pace myself on that one 'cause it's--I've gotta focus on my, my work right now. I just--I want to have a big life. I want to travel and I have a lot of people that I love, I wanna be around them. And, and, I also, I, I'm terrified to write this next novel. But, it would be a dream to write it and have it resonate on a profound emotional level. And, also reveal a side of history that hasn't really been explored. And, in keeping with what you're doing, I would like to be a voice for historical knowledge; that's a passion of mine. Maybe that's what I should go to graduate school (laughter), (unclear) a Ph.D. in history, 'cause I love history. And, I think, I'm a big believer in psychological therapy and history is therapy writ large for nations. And, I feel our country would be better off and so many other spots around the world will be better off if people had a true understanding of what went on and what got us to this point. So many of our problems can be traced back to our origins and to various things that went on. So, popularizing history; making history accessible. Making history exciting is definitely a dream. So, I'm hoping to create a successful show which then I would use my platform in a different way. And, I could use that platform then for dream projects like making history accessible, and, anyway. That's some of what's on my mind (laughter). And, hopefully, I'll have the thirty years or so to get it all done. Story_ID: 648995 Speaker 1: What are, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, for the black community I am very concerned about the men. When we look at what's going on. The statistics for young boys. The college graduation rates, which are falling. The incarceration rates, which are rising. It's, it's a very terrifying landscape. There's a kind of genocide going on. I remember twenty years ago getting a screenplay by a young black writer about, it was a science fiction, set in the future and they were killing off all the black men. And, I thought, okay, this is a little exaggerated but, basically that's where we are. And, it's all happened frighteningly through laws and so forth. So, I'm very concerned about the plight of the men. How are we going to save the young men? And, not save them, make the world safe for them, really. And, you know, it's a sad thing, but I'm gonna admit, I'm relieved I don't have a son. I think I'd be terrified every single day. I--when that Trayvon Martin case happened, I thought, my god, if you have a boy, it's terrifying. So, that's a big concern. I'm concerned that we don't know our history. I'm concerned about the educations gap that we're dropping out of high school. I'm concerned about the growing divide, because we have, it is the best of times and worst of times. We have some of the most successful people. We're seeing stories we couldn't have imagined even as little girls and yet we've got what appears to be a permanent underclass. And, and the, before at least with segregation, ironically people had to live together so there was a hope. You could see, even if you were growing up in squalor, Mrs. So and So down the street who was a teacher, married to a dentist, and now they don't even have that. So, I'm very worried that we've--large sections of our population have been written off and are being left behind. And, all of the, the chickens of slavery are coming home to, to roost. Story_ID: 648996 Speaker 1: Okay. Just a couple more questions. I want to ask about your hopes for the entertainment industry-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you were so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, a part of, and-- Speaker 2: Well, I have to say, yeah, we should take some heart (laughter), in what we're seeing. 'Cause in a year where we had, it wasn't easy to get made, but we had 'The Butler.' We had, we have '12 Years a Slaves.' We have 'Fruitvale Station.' We have 'Baggage Claim.' We have 'Black Nativity.' We have, coming out 'Belle,' set in the 18th century, the true story of a black woman [Dido Elizabeth Belle] who's the daughter of a rear admiral in the British Navy [John Lindsay] and a slave [Maria Belle]. And, there's a portrait of her that's now in castle in Scotland, Scone castle [Scone Palace]. But, it originally hung at Kennel- Ken- Kenwood [Kenwood House], which is this mansion outside of London [England], right in Hampstead Heath, you would go visit it. It's a museum. And, her great uncle was Lord Mansfield [William Murray, 1st Earl of Mansfield], who presided over the Somerset case [Somerset v. Stewart, 1772] which was the case that eventually dismantled slavery on British soil. So, this was his black great niece, whom he raised. And, there's a film that's been done about her. And, it looks absolutely beautiful; just Google 'Belle.' And, so, I see things like that, and I think, oh my god, that's my (laughter) dream project. I cannot believe it's come to the fores directed by a young black British woman [Amma Asante]. So, I think, really fascinating things, I mean, between her and Steve McQueen, our, our diaspora brothers and sisters are doing a lot of really fascinating work. When you think some of the hottest writers coming out are coming out of Nigeria. So, I feel like that the longed for title wave of justice ['The Cure at Troy'] (laughter) as Seamus Heaney would put it, it's rising up. I couldn't have imagined the show like 'Scandal' twenty years ago. And, then, yet, here it is. And, people are loving it, and it's a huge hit. And, Kerry Washington is doing a magnificent job. Talking about representing, and people do care (laughter) about her. So, I just, I feel very hopeful just because, there'd been so many breakthroughs. And, there's so many things going on and even in all these films, and most of them are independents. There not, you know, big blockbusters. But, they're making money and they got made. And, they got made because black people like Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson] got behind 'The Butler.' Or, Brad Pitt, God bless him, got behind '12 Years a Slave,' and I'm astonished at some of what's going on. So, again, Nelson Mandela, it's always impossible 'til it gets done (laughter). And, I find that exciting. They're--the possible, it's what's my mother [Josephine Premice] and her friends talked about and hoped for, and I really see it beginning to happen. It's not where it needs to be by any stretch of the imagination. And, at the end of the day, it's always gonna be about the bottom line. But, I do think for those who are willing to be experimental and not get a lot of money up front, there's extraordinary work going on. Speaker 1: So, you're hopeful? Speaker 2: I'm very hopeful. I'm not Pollyanna-esque ask and I'm not saying, "Oh, all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds." There's still a lot of challenges and it's still distressing, you know. In the best actress categories for any of these awards, other than Lupita Nyong'o from '12 Years a Slave,' there's nobody. You just think, well, how can this be? You know, this is, this is absurd. So, but, so it's not anywhere near where it needs to be. But, it's a long way and when you think of the films that I just named, the range of subject matter and tone. One, I'm forgetting 'The Best Man' ['The Best Man Holiday']. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So, there's a lot out there. It's not just one dimensional anymore. Speaker 1: It's a different than the Hollywood you left, though, too? Speaker 2: Very, very different from--I mean, in some ways similar. You know, you watch the Emmys [Emmy Awards] and other than [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and Kerry Washington (laughter), it sort of (laughter), where is Waldo? Where are the black people? And, as a friend of mine said, "If Sofia Vergara gets a cold, there goes the Latino population," so, you know. We--still, miles to go; but at the same time some really interesting stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --going on. Story_ID: 648997 Speaker 1: And, then what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Ooh, all right. I want my legacy to be one of beautifully written works whether they're plays or books or whatever ends up on the screen, that uplift people. That give people hope. And, again, that create that sense of our common humanity. And, my mother [Josephine Premice]--I asked my mother when she was dying, 'cause my mother lost her mother [Thelomaine Premice] very young, I said, "Now--I've never asked you this, but that must've been so hard? You were eighteen years old." And, she said, "No, it wasn't. Because my mother talked to me. And, she talked to me about our legacy. And, she said, 'Our legacy is to love. And, that's your duty. You have to go out there and you have to love, and you have to create a legacy of love.'" And, when I look at certain families, you see a very destructive emotional legacy from one whether--even if they left them fortunes (laughter), they just left a trail of dead bodies and walking wounded emotionally people behind them. And, I look at my mother and I think she created the opposite. Because there isn't a week that passes where I don't cross someone's path, and a wide range of people who say, "Your mother helped me through a difficult time." Or, "Your mother made me laugh when I had no laughter left in me." Or, "Your mother made me believe in myself." Or, "Your mother's performance gave me joy." And, even though I haven't had her with me for twelve and a half years, she's always with me. And, I have an enormous well of strength to draw from. I put a quotation that I created myself on my website, which is, "If you had a mother who loved you, nothing and no one can ever break you." And, I just did a reading down in Houston [Texas] and this woman came up to me and she said, "That is my mantra and that's how I'm raising my daughter." So, that gives me satisfaction to know that, if you can--life is hard, and if you can give people the spiritual and emotional tools to make it that next step, then you've done something of value. So, it's carrying on, if there's any really vital legacy to carry on, it's, it's the legacy of love. Which then spills over into the legacy of common humanity. And, I waiver in my religious beliefs, but I do believe we're all here for some purpose. And, I do believe that part of my purpose is to be a bridge. And, to be someone who helps open people's eyes to how interconnected we all are. So, if I can leave this earth having helped more people see that, again I will have fulfilled my purpose..