 Story_ID: 174735 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure. Frances Ellena Curtis Frazier. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: Frances, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, Ellena, E-L-L-E-N-A, Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, Frazier, F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 19th, 1948 and I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting. My occupation--I could say teacher, consultant, activist, motivator. Speaker 1: Okay. And your--do you have a focus or specialty? Speaker 2: I do. Well, I actually have--yes. My specialty is really looking at the educational and maybe spiritual development of African American women and girls. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: April 4th [2012]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Oh, April 4th of? Speaker 2: Twenty-twelve [2012]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? You don't have--don't give your address. Speaker 2: In my home. Speaker 1: All right, in? Speaker 2: Oh, in Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Thank you. Story_ID: 174736 Speaker 1: --Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we have to ask that are just sort of a warm-up and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food--pastry. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite color? Speaker 2: Right now, it's orange. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, as long as it's by the water and, and it has some forestry, some place close by. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I probably do, but I probably can't say it on the camera (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 174737 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side and then we're gonna try to put 'em together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Leticia Thompson. Leticia, do you want me to spell that? L-E-T-I-C-I-A, Leticia Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, but she was called Patsy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we could say Patsy Leticia. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was her nickname basically, in the family? Speaker 2: It was her family name. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Let's see my mother was born February 18th, 1917-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 174738 Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your mother's [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] side of the family? First of all, how far back and where do you trace them, how far back and where can you place them? Speaker 2: Probably just a few generations. I, I don't know my grandmother's [Mattie Mae Sylvia Jennings] ancestors, but I can tell you that my mother had two sisters and one brother, Fannie [ph.], I'm named after her, Ellen [ph.], I'm named after her and our Uncle Joe, Joseph, and we have a brother who's named after him. My understanding of the story is my grandmother's people were Ojibwe Indians from upstate New York and her father was a fur trader. I remember spending the night--my grandmother lived right next door to us, but when I spent the night with her, it was always like being some place totally different. And so she had pictures of her family and she had three uncles, who were all in robes from their own culture, the Ojibwe culture. And she talked about them. She went to convent schools. Now, my mother's father was a Portuguese fisherman, so we always wondered how my grandmother and our grandfather actually got together. Speaker 1: Okay, so, neither your grandmother or your grandfather was African Americans at all? Speaker 2: According to my family, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so did they appear so to you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so what--I mean did you have any thoughts about what might be the story, that they may be half or I don't know? I don't know-- Speaker 2: I just know that--I have a picture of my grandmother. She was very stately and--so I don't know whether she was half, or quarter, or--I just know what I've been told about her history, and my grandfather was a Portuguese fisherman and they met I think in New York. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you say Portuguese, do you mean that he actually was a Portuguese national? Speaker 2: He was a Portuguese national as far as I know. Speaker 1: Okay, and actually was a--okay, citizen of Portugal? Speaker 2: Citizen of Portugal, as far as I know. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he immigrant here and stay, or did he go back to Portugal? Speaker 2: No, immigrated here, stayed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had--my understanding is his family considered themselves white and so there's a whole 'nother side of my mother's family that I don't know. I never met. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had blue eyes and like a reddish-color hair. So my Uncle Joe looks a lot like him. And my mother's brothers and sisters were very fair. Speaker 1: Okay, but--okay, but I guess I'm trying to figure out if they, if they look like African Americans or did they (unclear)? Speaker 2: My grandfather didn't. Speaker 1: He didn't at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay but your, your grandmother-- Speaker 2: But my grandmother did to me, you know, so--I mean she didn't have a very straight nose or anything, so it could be that she's a mixture. I don't know. Speaker 1: I know there are a lot of stories of upstate New York of mixtures of American Indians and blacks and Irish that, you know, go back to the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they very well could have. Speaker 1: --1700s, you know-- Speaker 2: Very well could have. Speaker 1: In the Poconos [Pocono Mountains] and the, what are they called, those mountains off of--the Ramapo Mountains in New Jersey, right outside of New York, there's a colony of people. They're called the "Jackson Whites" and another group, you know, up there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But at any rate, that's a long story, but that's--there are people, you know, that have that kind of ancestry there. Story_ID: 174739 Speaker 1: Did your grandmother ever talk about any stories from that? Speaker 2: She just talked about being in convent schools and what that was like, how mean the nuns were, and things like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is up in upstate New York? Speaker 2: Yes. So here's the--this could be a myth in our family, but the story is, is that my grandmother also was fairly wealthy and she had a fabulous voice and studied at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York]. And our grandfather heard--saw her performing one night and went back stage to get her autograph. She was fairly young, and I guess they fell in love. Her father was really upset because this guy had no money, no status, no bearing, no ancestral line that anybody could find, and just kind of disinherited my grandmother. Speaker 1: So the great-grandfather then-- Speaker 2: Was just a fisherman. Speaker 1: I mean the grandfather was--this is your grandfather, who was a fisherman, right? And the great-grandfather is-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --the one that had money that disinherited her? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So do you have your, do you know your great-grandfather's name or what the name-- Speaker 2: I do not. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's-- Speaker 2: Jennings. Speaker 1: Okay, so he, you think he was a Jennings? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. And what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Mattie Mae Sylvia. Speaker 1: And then it would have been Jennings and then Sylvia was the last name? Speaker 2: No, her name was Mattie Mae Sylvia Jennings. Speaker 1: Okay. (Pause) All right, so, all right--so, now what was your grandfather's last name? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died way before I was born, and the grandfather that I know was my grandmother's second husband. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't really know much about my first grandfather. Speaker 1: So he--was he the Jennings or-- Speaker 2: No. The first grandfather was--Jennings is my grandmother's maiden name. Speaker 1: Family name, okay. Speaker 2: Family name, and so her last name was Thompson, I think 'cause my mother's last name was Thompson. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so the grandfather's last name was Thompson, you're saying? Speaker 2: That's, that's my understanding. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was suppose- he was in--okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Okay. So he was--was he from Portugal? That's the one from Portugal? Speaker 2: Portugal, but maybe he came to New York, you know, the history is really, could be really romanticized. I'm just telling you what I remember. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, okay, so are there any stories about--that are passed down, you know, about, you know, life in upstate New York or from Portugal or the-- Speaker 2: None that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, okay, so you knew your grandmother though and your grandfather? Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother and I knew my grandfather, Codwell [ph.]. His last name was Codwell. Speaker 1: That was the second hus-- Speaker 2: That was the second one, that's who I knew. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 174740 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] have any stories she shared about growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean I--my Aunt Sissy [ph.], her name is Fannie [ph.]. That's who I'm named after. I was kind of glad it wasn't Fannie when I was growing up, you know. But, now, I don't think I would mind being called Fannie. But anyway, I was Frances and Frances was bad enough really 'cause there were all kind of stories about, you know, Frances, the talking mule and just all kinds of stuff like that so. But my Aunt Sissy and my mom lived in Germantown in Philadelphia. And the story goes that my dad and my uncle, who were, also lived in Germantown, nice, upstanding families I guess, the word went out that there are two new girls who moved to Germantown, and they're really pretty and you should get to know them. And so my Uncle Al [ph.] was my dad's best friend, and so they both ended up marrying the two sisters. My dad married my mother--my father's name was William Henry Curtis and my uncle, Al, his name was Al Thomas [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gon' get to your father's history in a minute. Speaker 2: And they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just wanted to find out what your mother's perspective--what can you tell us about your mother? Did she go to high school? Did she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My mother went to high school. Speaker 1: What aspirations did she have? What was her story first growing up in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: My mother graduated from Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I think she wanted to be a singer. She had a wonderful voice, and she loved literature, read all the time, and could recite Paul Laurence Dunbar and Countee Cullen poetry in the vernacular and was just amazing. She married my dad when she was eighteen and was a homemaker for the majority of her life. I think for a while, she worked, maybe for a couple of years, but mostly a homemaker. Story_ID: 174741 Speaker 1: I used to, when, when--I guess when I went to Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and came back home, I would--and I was in the throes of feminism, you know. I was like, "What do you [Frazier's mother, Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] do all day? You know, what are you doing with your life?" And so I would spend days with her just kinda getting a sense of what her life was like, but my mother wrote poetry. She was a homemaker, raised her children, had incredibly high expectations, and there's a story that I tell girls about a time I had with my mother that I think might give you some insight about her. One day I was at the kitchen table writing, and probably was fifteen or sixteen maybe, and she said, "What do you plan to do with your life?" And I said, "I don't know, trying to get a date right now, you know, and that's about it." And so she said, "Well, you know, there are things I wanna talk to you about." She said, "I don't want you to blame me or your dad [William Henry Curtis] and the kind of life that we've had as a reason for you not having what you want." She said, "Maybe things didn't go the way we would have liked them to, but don't make that a reason why you don't have the life you want." She told me that it would be really good if I didn't have children right away, which is what she did. So she didn't get to maybe her dreams and aspirations for singing. She could have been a classical soprano. She had a beautiful voice. Speaker 2: 'Cause she was following in the footsteps of her mother [Mattie Mae Sylvia Jennings Thompson]. Speaker 1: Of her mother, right, but she didn't sing and that's why I used to wonder all the time, you know, what you are doing because whatever aspiration she had, she either felt she couldn't do it or wasn't allowed, so she stayed a homemaker and didn't pursue really other interests outside of that. Now, I think that when she was younger and married, she sang for the USO [United Service Organizations] and did all kinds of things like that. But I think once children started coming--'cause I come from a large family. There're eight of us. She just kind of put all those things aside and raised us. So she said, you know, "Don't have children right away, think about what it is that you want to do, and do that first so that when you have children, you would have had the life that you want, so you won't resent not having your own life." And then she said other things--my mother was very, very pretty and she said, "You know, you're an attractive girl. There may be people who may not like you because you're attractive and may try to get in your way. Don't let that be a reason." She said, "There will be white people who won't like you because you're brilliant." I got all A's. And she said, "So they may even try to get in the way of a black girl who is really smart". And she said, and "Then there will be days when you're going to be hungry, and you just need to know that there are things that are gonna come up, but don't let those things get in the way of whatever it is that you want for yourself." And at sixteen, really I didn't think I actually paid attention to that, but I really did. And I've kind of--some things I probably did longer, way longer than I should have, but I--I've kind of set my goals based on that kitchen-table conversation that I had with my mom. And so I think I've done--she had great, great expectations, great, great standards and sometimes they were really, really hard to achieve, or reach, or want to be. But I think it had something to do with how maybe her life was not all the things that she wanted, so she wanted to make sure that her daughters had it. Story_ID: 174742 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and get your father's full name. And can you spell that for us? What is your father's name? Speaker 2: William Henry Curtis. He was named after his father. Speaker 1: Okay, just the regular way you spell William Henry Curtis (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Same way. Speaker 1: Same way. Oh, William Henry Curtis, okay. And C-U-R-T-I-S? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 5th--I want to say 1911. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, same question, what do you know about his side of the family, and how far can you trace them back and to where? Speaker 2: Not much at all really and truly. I know that his dad was from Virginia and maybe Manassas, Virginia. I know, I know his mother, I think her name was Marie, very tall, very brown, very pretty, but, truthfully, that's about it. I know very little about my father's background. Speaker 1: So, as far as you know, did he grow up in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, grew up in Philadelphia. Probably dropped out in maybe the tenth grade. He was like a bad boy-- Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --smart but-- Speaker 1: So he dropped out of high school? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: In the tenth grade? Okay, did--now, did he participate in a war? Speaker 2: Did not. Speaker 1: Okay. It sounds like he might be in that age where he was just, he might have been too old when it started or--no, he wouldn't have been too old. Speaker 2: No, he wouldn't have been too old. Speaker 1: No, yeah--he was still--well, he'd been up there really for those--for the War [World War Two, WWII]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He would have been in his thirties around World War II. Speaker 2: Well, then, you know, I might have these dates wrong. Speaker 1: Okay, well, in what respect, I mean, you know? Speaker 2: Because I think that, so it could be that Speaker 1: I think they were taking them in their thirties, but my dad was born in 1918. We're about the same age. He was twenty-four when the war started (simultaneous). Speaker 2: So my dad, right, okay, so it was my dad that was born in 1917. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mom [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] was then was born-- Speaker 1: In the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: In the '20s [1920], like '22 [1922]. Speaker 1: That sounds like it might be. Speaker 2: About '22 [1922], '23 [1923]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so, but he wasn't drafted or anything for the war? Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. I was talking to my sister about this. And she said that my dad had--I can't remember, but I was thinking she told me that my dad had some kind of skill that they used, and that's why he didn't go, but I, I--it's really muddled for me. Speaker 1: Okay, what did he learn how to do occupation wise? Speaker 2: He was a shop manager and union steward for the Budd Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was like GM [General Motors]. But he also--oh, that's what it was she said--he had mechanical engineering skills but was not a mechanical engineer and built airplane engines, and that's what she was telling me that because he was so good at that, I guess, that he ended up working on those things. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had the skill but he didn't have a degree to go with it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but as often is the case sometimes in those days. Story_ID: 174743 Speaker 1: So, okay, we're talking about your father's [William Henry Curtis] side of the family. So there are no--just going back a minute, there are no stories that come down in your family on your father's side about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or how the family got to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: No, that would be lovely, but, no, none of those stories. Speaker 1: 'Cause there's been black folks in Philadelphia for a long time. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: But, you know, I don't know if there's a story about migration from Virginia to Philadelphia that happened or, but there's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, so your father worked for the Budd Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: All right, and, okay, now did he talk about what life was like in Philadelphia when he was growing up? Speaker 2: My father was a bad boy, so--got in trouble all the time. He didn't like to talk about that, so he didn't. Speaker 1: So did he have a record or-- Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, juvenile. And it really could have been because his mother [Marie Curtis] died real, real early in his childhood, but he didn't talk a lot about his childhood. Speaker 1: He grew up, I guess, during the age of Prohibition and all of that, you know. He would have been a teenager-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --during that period. Speaker 2: But he didn't talk about it. One thing I really remember--well, my, my father was really, really smart, so after he left the Budd Company, he worked with Philadelphia Housing Authority. And he--back then, he was responsible for, like the heating and cooling systems. And he kind of reconfigured all of that and changed things around and got a lot of recognition for his ideas. He really liked that work a lot. He really did. But one day my dad comes home and he says--he has me and my brothers around, and he says, "I want you to draw a box." So, you know, we draw a square 'cause that's what we considered to be a box. I was probably eight or nine, and he said, "No." And then he draws a two-dimensional box, and he says, "Now, this is a box." So then he goes on to talk about that it's real important that we really think things through. And so there is this joke in our family that if something doesn't go right, it's because you didn't think it through. My dad was this big--he was really big on thinking your own thoughts, having original thoughts. He used to say that, you know, the white man can take a lot of things from you, but he can't take away your ability to think your own thoughts, and so you have to be an original thinker. Really pushed that, very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I think real involved in the community and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, did he ever talk about--I wondered if, as a young man, getting in trouble and if he had, if there was a special mentor he had or somebody that explained to him to think things through before you do them and-- Speaker 2: He never shared that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a part of his background, we didn't know much about. Speaker 1: I'm sure there's probably a story there that we just don't know-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure there is. Speaker 1: --details about. Speaker 2: I'm sure there is. Speaker 1: Is there any--do you have any idea where he learned mechanical engineering? Speaker 2: I do not. Story_ID: 174744 Speaker 1: You already told the story of how they [Frazier's parents, Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis and William Henry Curtis] met 'cause that was my next question. Speaker 2: Oh, how they meet, yeah-- Speaker 1: I was going to ask how they meet after they get--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fell in love-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --became a maid and a butler for a rich white family. Speaker 1: Oh, they did? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They did this--okay. Speaker 2: Right after they got married. And the lady liked French cooking, and so my mother learned French cooking, and really learned--she learned to be an excellent cook. And then when my father got the job at Budd [Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], she came home. Speaker 1: Now, was this white family, did they live in, what they call, "The Mainland," in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I'm sure they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sure they did. Speaker 1: That's something I became familiar with about ten years ago (laughter). Speaker 2: Probably part of like Lincoln Parkway, I mean, just--probably way up there where you had to take--and I think they lived there with them if I'm not mistaken-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for a couple of years, maybe five years or something, and then my dad got the job. Speaker 1: Well, this speaks to, I mean being a butler speaks to a level of communication skills that is not usual, usually 'cause you don't have verb-busting butlers, you know. They're able to speak and, you know and take care of business. Speaker 2: My father was very articulate-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: And an immaculate dresser, oh my goodness, immaculate dresser. He would say all the time, you know, just because you have six children or seven children, doesn't mean your house can't be clean and orderly, and neat. And we were, and he was and so was the house. Nothing was ever out of place. Story_ID: 174745 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you some more about growing up, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I mean about what they were like growing up, but-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --when you think about your parents' talents, their dispositions, their personalities, their mannerisms, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: The most? It's interesting. I think my style and my lens, I think, that I see myself through is more like my father's [William Henry Curtis], but a lot of my skills, writing ability, my sensitivity to people and issue, my compassion, I get from my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis]. Story_ID: 174746 Speaker 1: Okay, so Boston Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Boston Street, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what side of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is that? Speaker 2: North Philly. Speaker 1: North Philly. Speaker 2: Boston Street intersects with 20th [Street], so kind of 20th and York [Street]. Anyway, Boston Street when I was really little was just the best place to live. Knew everybody. Everybody knew my name, my nickname. And-- Speaker 1: And what was your nickname? Can you tell-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I probably could, right? It was "Sugie," [ph.]. My Aunt Sissy [ph.] named me 'cause I was so sweet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But anyway, I could go to anybody's house and chat, talk, you know, see what people were doing. Somebody always had something for me to eat or chew on or whatever, but every summer Mr. Green [ph.] would make homemade ice cream. It was the best and we would--that would be when we would clean our block and, you know, the fire hydrant would be opened, and we'd clean our streets, and paint, paint the sidewalk and put little trees on the stoop, you know 'cause Boston Street were all row houses. And then once we cleaned the streets and everything, then we'd have ice cream and cookies. And it was just lovely. Everybody would be out, you know, sitting in their chairs for that kind of thing. It was just really great. So that's probably my earliest memory. It was just wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay, great neighborhood? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, is this the neighborhood that Bill Cosby writes about? Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: All right, I just wondered. Speaker 2: That kind of neighborhood, you know, where, literally, you could go into anybody's house and one year I went back. I was much, much older, and some of the women were still there. And they were all sitting around their stoops talking. It was like in a summer day. And I was coming up the street and Ms. Robinson [ph.] said, "Sugie, is that you?" I was probably in my thirties then, you know. And I said, "Yes, ma'am." And Ms. White [ph.] was there, Ms. Sawyer [ph.], Ms. Burges [ph.], Ms. Robinson. I know there was somebody else, and they were just all sitting around talking. And then started sharing all these "Sugie" stories of when I would come and visit. And Ms. Sawyer said I would--she'd offer me grapes and I would say, "You know, I only eat green grapes. I don't eat purple grapes," stuff like that. It was just really--it was so wonderful. It really was. I loved living on Boston Street. Story_ID: 174747 Speaker 1: What did people say about you growing up? What would characterize you I guess in terms of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Precocious, wanting to--feeling that I could just be wherever I wanted to be. I didn't get shy until I was in my teens, I like really withdrew then, but when I was growing up on Boston Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, five years old, six years old, seven years old, eight, nine, just had a sense of, you know, I could be anywhere and say anything, ask all kinds of questions, you know, like, so why you got those shoes on? You know, they don't look like they match your, you know, your pants or whatever. But would always be able to carry on a conversation with an adult. And, and just--I think I was, what's the word? I found life remarkable. Story_ID: 174748 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is full of smells. It really is. You could turn a corner and smell hoagies or steak sandwiches, lovely, and I loved the pretzels that you would get, you know. In fact when--sometimes I will reroute a plane so that it goes through Philadelphia if I'm traveling somewhere just so I can get one of those pretzels in the, in the airport. I love Philadelphia pretzels, so that kind of smell. When I was probably in the fourth or fifth grade, probably fifth grade, fifth or sixth grade, a group of us would go downtown on Saturdays to the penny arcade and eat hot dogs and go to the Liberty Bell. And I was one of those Philadelphia people that actually believed the hype about Philadelphia, so, you know, I went to all the sightseeing things and everything. It was, it was great. Now, I walked probably everywhere if I didn't take a bus. So I just--I looked at everything. I looked at the architecture. I looked at people's faces, you know. There is a, probably about a half a block from Boston Street, there's--used to be a railroad that didn't get used that much. And I would cross there to like to go to the rec [recreation] center or something. There would be these buttercups that were just beautiful 'cause you know in the city, you didn't see a lot of trees and, you know, or flowers, or that kind of thing unless somebody brought them and, you know, planted them in a little planter. So you didn't see a lot of green. But, for some reason, I loved these little buttercups, which were probably weeds but I didn't know that when I was growing up. So those kind of things I remember about just maybe finding beauty wherever I could. Story_ID: 174749 Speaker 1: Well, give us some information on the demographics of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when you were growing up. North Philly is a black community. Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: Pretty much. Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Except on Boston Street, we had Latino people, we had white people, and African Americans on our block. I'm not sure why but it really was just a mixed community. But North Philadelphia typically was poor and African American. Speaker 1: Okay, now, everybody else we've interviewed from Philadelphia starts naming an endless list of musicians and people that, famous people that grew up around them in Philadelphia. So I don't know, do you have any famous neighbors that you remember? Speaker 2: No, I do not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Memorable people, but no fam- I don't remember any famous people. Speaker 1: Okay, I guess it may depend on the profession 'cause the musicians start naming endless names of musicians. Speaker 2: Oh, I would imagine so. Speaker 1: Yeah, Marian Anderson from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, Clara Ward-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --lived around the corner. Speaker 1: Gospel singer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Ward sisters lived around the corner on Glenwood [Avenue], yeah, Glenwood. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know their family? Speaker 2: I went--because I invited myself to everybody's home when I was younger, I would go by there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was the Ward sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't know that they were-- Speaker 1: You didn't know they were big-- Speaker 2: I didn't know they were big until I was much older. Story_ID: 174750 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: St. Elizabeth's [Parochial School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Catholic. Speaker 1: Catholic school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So were your parents [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis and William Henry Curtis] Catholic? Speaker 2: No. My sister, Marjorie, decided after her first year at Pratt Arnold Elementary [later, Anna B Pratt School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--the story is she came home and told our mother that she didn't want to be in a public school anymore. This is after first grade. That she wanted to go to Catholic school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my mother put her in Catholic school. Speaker 1: And that was easy (laughter). So-- Speaker 2: And then we, we all went to Catholic school. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I have to go back and--like who are your brothers and sisters again--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gotcha. Speaker 1: --and give us the order and where you fit in. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so there's my brother, Donald. He is the son of my dad and Nana West [ph.], and then my sister, Vencina, and all the other children I'll mention are children of my mother and father, Patsy and Bill. So my sister, Vencina, my sister, Marjorie, then me, my brother, William, my brother, Charles, my brother, Joseph, and my brother, James. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then there was one more child, but he didn't live. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you grew up, your household consisted of then your mother and your father. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did any grandparents live with you? Speaker 2: No, they lived next door. Speaker 1: Okay, next door. Speaker 2: On Boston Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you had your--did your older brother live with you? Speaker 2: No, he lived in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the girls are--like my sister, Vencina, she's fourteen years older than me. So the girls--we're all seven years apart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the boys are--after me, are usually a year-and-a half to two years older-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of each other. Speaker 1: All right, so you basically grew up with your brothers. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And you were the eldest of that set in that household. Speaker 2: I was, in fact. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and by the time you, you know, got of any age, your sisters were gone. Speaker 2: They were. My oldest sister was married by then and then my sister, Marjorie, moved to New Jersey and lived with my brother, Donald. Speaker 1: Okay, so basically, so you're the--you kind of grow up as the eldest of the set--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --of children. Okay, now, that's a different picture than being the middle child, you know if you're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, exactly. Speaker 1: If we didn't know the ages, we would think that maybe you were just a middle child. Speaker 2: Right, I was not. Story_ID: 174751 Speaker 1: So your sister, Marjorie, started that trend a long time before you went to school-- Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: --going to Catholic school. Speaker 2: She didn't wanna be a public she said. Speaker 1: Well, it's thought, you know, in every community and every city pretty much that the Catholic education is superior to the public school education. So I guess that era is no different. And nowadays, you have charter schools competing with--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Comparable-- Speaker 1: Yeah, or competing-- Speaker 2: --maybe. Speaker 1: --with the public schools--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Public schools, right. Speaker 1: But, in those days, there was no charter schools as such. Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: Okay, so despite the fact you weren't Catholic, you end up going to-- Speaker 2: No, we became Catholic. Speaker 1: Oh, did you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. We--in fact, I have a picture of myself in my confirmation dress. So, yeah, we, baptized, had our holy communion, our first communion, our confirmation, everything. Speaker 1: Okay, so is your family really, you know, committed to Catholicism? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So tell us about St. Elizabeth's Catholic School [sic., St. Elizabeth's Parochial School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I take it that you like school being a precocious youth and all that. Speaker 2: I--St. Elizabeth's was really interesting. So, my first grade teacher was Sister St. Hugh [ph.]. And Sister St. Hugh and all of those nuns were Franciscans. St. Elizabeth's was on the corner of 23rd [Street] and Berks [Street], just like right in the heart of a black community, and all the nuns at that time were Irish. So there were a lot of first and second graders at St. Elizabeth's who had a Irish brogue too. So, oh, yeah, so when Sister St. Hugh would teach us songs, she sang in that Irish brogue that--'cause I think they had just come over from Ireland. Speaker 1: So could you--can you sing like an Irish nun now? Speaker 2: No. Well, probably, probably. Oh, this is gonna be so embarrassing, but she had us sing all the--especially like around St. Patrick's Day and stuff. You know, just all the--"Oh, my name is McNamara, the leader of the band." So you're six years old, you're singing just like she's singing. And it was just amazing really and truly. And I--you don't know that you're singing like that when you're six. You're just singing like Sister St. Hugh sings, but when you think about it when you're like older, it's like all these little black kids with these little Irish brogues walking around. It was really funny. St. Hugh was strict, oh my gosh. She was really strict. And my sister, Marjorie, and her friend, Miriam [ph.], they went to St. E's [St. Elizabeth's] too, and so, you know, they put the fear of God in you when they're taking you to school about how the nuns are gonna be, but I really liked school, loved learning, wrote my first poem in the second grade. Speaker 1: What was it about? Speaker 2: Thanksgiving. It was really-- Speaker 1: Do you still remember it? Speaker 2: Let me see--"Thank you, Jesus, for everything because thou art so good. Thou know'st Lord, I love you because I always should. Going to church in the morning, kneeling as I pray, thinking of you sweet Jesus on Thanksgiving Day." Speaker 1: That was pretty good. Speaker 2: My first poem (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, this is second grade, okay, all right. Speaker 2: It's amazing I actually remembered it. Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: English, writing. I actually, I love history, but English. Story_ID: 174752 Speaker 1: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is a city that is full of black history. So many early, black organizations were founded there, Black Convention Movement, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church all that. Did you have any sense of that growing up? Speaker 2: None. None. I was pretty much in my own little bubble, so, no, not, not a lot of that kind of history. I didn't. I left St. E's [St. Elizabeth's Parochial School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] after the sixth grade, and my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] moved us to a section of Philadelphia right before Germantown, called Nicetown. It's like in the Tioga area. Speaker 1: Okay, so the sixth grade--okay, you moved to Nicetown. Is there a story behind the name Nicetown? Speaker 2: You know, it probably is or was called Nicetown because it was a nice town, but I think it was just really a section of Tioga. Speaker 1: So it's near Germantown? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were the only black family in Nicetown at the time--well, no, that's not true. We were the only black family in our part of Nicetown because if you went across the bypass, there was a whole black community over there that typically I was always told not to go over there. Of course, I did, made friends over there with people. Speaker 1: Okay. So what year is this? Was it about 1961, '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Actually, it was '59 [1959]. No--yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you'd have been in sixth grade. That would have been, you would have been in sixth grade in 1960, I think. Speaker 2: I went to school--I went to high school in '62 [1962], so--and I went to St. Edward's, no, St. Francis of Assisi [Catholic School, later, The DePaul Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], seventh and eighth grade. I had just finished sixth grade at St. Elizabeth's, so it was seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then I--'cause then I went to Little Flower Catholic High School [for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in '62 [1962], graduated in '66 [1966]. Story_ID: 178929 Speaker 1: All right, so you're, you're in Nicetown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Nicetown. Speaker 1: And you're in the--starting the seventh grade. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did you start seventh grade at St.-- Speaker 2: St. Francis [of Assisi Catholic School, later, The DePaul Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: St. Francis, okay. Now, this is interesting. The Franciscans--your name is Frances. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Taught by the Franciscans at St. Elizabeth's [Parochial School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and now you're at St. Francis and-- Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: And okay. Speaker 2: But the nuns are St. Joseph's. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, it couldn't be perfect. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. So, St. Francis--is this St. Francis-- Speaker 2: --of Assisi. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is a--is this a middle school or is it-- Speaker 2: No, no. It's a--you know, Catholic schools didn't have middle schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They went from first to eighth grade and then you went right into high school after that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, did--when you look back at--now, were you--were you interested in basically the same things in school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pretty much-- Speaker 1: --history, literature and-- Speaker 2: Pretty much. You know, I didn't really like living in Nicetown only because it was such a big cultural shock. It was all white, and I said to my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis], I said, "You know, I'm getting ready to be a teenager. This is not the place for me to be. I want to date. Who am going to date? What kind of boyfriend am I gonna have?" Speaker 1: Now, this is, yeah, 'cause the way you describe North Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--I mean you would--it's such a open, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --friendly, old place. Speaker 2: Right, it was. Speaker 1: And then for you to go into Nicetown where they're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's all white. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't imagine you had the same kind of feeling in Nicetown. Speaker 2: No, all white, you know, all homeowners, no row houses, you know, not a lot of them, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So what was it there? I don't wanna-- (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My mother wanted us to move to a nicer neighborhood, move up, you know. You move from North Philly to Germantown to Mount Airy. You know, it's like the migration. And so she just wanted better. And she wanted to move us to Abington [Pennsylvania]. I'm really glad we didn't move to Abington, but Nicetown was fine. But it was just all white, Irish, Polish, Yugoslavian. And, but I met a great friend, her name was Joanne Zelinsky [ph.]. Yeah, we had a great time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did a lot of volunteer work when we lived on Cayuga Street because that's what the girls did. They volunteered on Saturdays-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --nursing homes, you know. I became a candy striper, things like that. But we were the only black students at St. Francis of Assisi. Speaker 1: Your family? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Me and my brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the nuns had a hard time at first trying to figure out if we learned the same way as everybody else did. It was interesting. Speaker 1: So it was a culture shock for the white kids too (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For them too, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And then that we were Catholic, you know, I think if we had been black Baptists, we might have had a different reception altogether. But we were black and Catholic, so we had the same values. We understood the same language, you know, religious language, that kind of thing. It really helped because all the kids in, where we lived all went to St. Francis. We all walked to school, all walked back, you know, all were involved in other kind of religious activity. Story_ID: 178930 Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to church at the same place [St. Francis of Assisi, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you didn't maintain a tie in North Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to church? Speaker 2: No. But I visited North Philly all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there any black clergy people in the, nuns or priests in the schools that you attended? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, no. No. Baltimore [Maryland], that's where they all were and maybe some in New York [New York], but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we've interviewed some of the ones in Baltimore (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't remember seeing any black nun or priest during that time--when I got older, of course, but when I was in elementary school or I think even in high school [at Little Flower Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I don't remember. But I wanted to become a nun and so they had--you could get books of the oblates, you know, all the orders of nuns. So you got to see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the ones in Baltimore, they're black oblates-- Speaker 2: Oblates, right, so then you got to see that there were black nuns. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, a lot of people we've talk to, when they're right on the verge of becoming a teenager, they wanna be a priest or a nun. Is this, I mean, how do you account for that-- Speaker 2: It's usually--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in your life, you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think that's usually when you start thinking about what I wanna be, you know, what I wanna do with myself, and I, I've always felt that I had that kind of calling on my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so these are the role models before you I guess in the school-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And so. Speaker 2: And, you know, and the people around you and, you know, people had influence on you. Story_ID: 178931 Speaker 1: Now, high school, you didn't go to Catholic high school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Little Flower [Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. Speaker 2: Catholic High School for Girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] decided that Little Flower made ladies, so that's where I was going. I wanted to go to John Hallahan [Catholic Girls' High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because that's where all of my friends from North Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] were going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I ended up going to Little Flower. Speaker 1: Was that in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Not particularly. Speaker 1: (Sneeze) Excuse me. That came on all of a sudden. Something must have got up there that--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: It's all right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Please continue. Speaker 1: So, yeah, so Little Flower was a school that I could've gone to, but I could have also gone to Hallahan, which was downtown Philadelphia, which was where I really wanted to go. But you almost had to take an SAT to get into Little Flower. So they didn't have very many black girls at all at Little Flower. It was predominantly white. Speaker 2: Now, you were an A student? Speaker 1: Pretty much. Speaker 2: An honor student, pretty much? Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty much, lots of A's. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Pressure to excel, to be a Curtis. Speaker 2: All right. Okay, so your brothers, I mean your sisters ahead of you, were they honor students? Did they set that standard? Speaker 1: I think my, I think both of my sisters did very well in school. Story_ID: 178932 Speaker 1: We've talked a lot about school, but now, in terms of popular culture, what did you like or what were you paying attention to in those days, movies, records, radio, TV, books (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Blue Monday' (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Blue Monday?' Speaker 2: 'Blue Monday' (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, what was-- Speaker 2: --with Jerry Blavat. Speaker 1: Now, what's 'Blue Monday?' Speaker 2: 'Blue Monday' and Jerry Blavat are Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Jerry Blavat played the best rock 'n' roll ever. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Blavat--B--I don't know. I think it's B-L-A-V-I-T-T [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and then there was Georgie Woods, WDAS [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, it's--Philadelphia is known for its music and its singers and Doo-wop. And I was very much into music. Speaker 1: Now, in those days, did you have a transistor radio? Speaker 2: Did in fact, in my room (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Those were the days. So you listened to a lot of music? Speaker 2: Listened to a lot of music. Didn't go to the movies that often. I went to parties. I had friends who were much more social than I was, but I hung with them 'cause they let me. Story_ID: 178933 Speaker 1: By then, I had become really quiet and shy. Speaker 2: Now, does this coincide with the move to Nicetown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 1: Kinda. Speaker 2: 'Cause a lot of things are going on, you're moving to Nicetown, and you're adoles- you're pre-adolescent or whatever-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --preteen. And then, you know. Speaker 1: Kind of. There were a lot of things going on in our home that just kind of made me go into a shell a lot. Speaker 2: So what was happening? Speaker 1: My mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] and father [William Henry Curtis] weren't getting along very well, and there was a lot of domestic violence, and then after I--after we--after I graduated from St. Francis of Assisi [Catholic School, later, The DePaul Catholic School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we moved to the projects at 10th [Street] and Cumberland [Street]. Speaker 2: Okay, now, so, so your parents, did they split up--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, so the-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: So whatever happened--so you were going to St. Francis of Assisi elementary school and you all were living in Nicetown-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then-- Speaker 2: --you only lived there for-- Speaker 1: A couple of years. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two or three. Speaker 2: Okay, and then--well, what happened? Did your father have an economic (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, my mother decided that she needed to find a place for us to be, to be safe-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so that if anything happened, at least, we'd have a place to be. Speaker 2: Okay, so it wasn't the whole family that moved? Speaker 1: Everybody moved. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My dad too. Speaker 2: Okay, so I'm trying to, let's see, so-- Speaker 1: My, my dad was really not acting well. And so my mother was concerned that there may end up not being enough money for us to stay in the house, so she decided that we were gonna move to a brand new housing development that had just opened up for families. So we were one of the first families to move there. Speaker 2: Now you say the projects, this is a federal-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --housing? Okay. Speaker 1: I can't remember the name of it. It had a name, but it was on the corner of 10th and Cumberland. Speaker 2: Now, these are the days--explain to whoever is listening to this, you know, what a project was like in those days. Speaker 1: Actually, it was for--you got--you had to be really--your credit had to be good. You got interviewed, and the families who moved in were all two-parent families. And for most of the families who lived there, it was like a stepping stone to the next place. So people didn't live there forever, and that was pretty much the understanding. Speaker 2: Okay, whereas today in 2012, as we--it's mostly the underclass that's in-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --one parent (unclear). Speaker 1: One parent, right. These were mostly--I think at that time, when we moved there 'cause it was brand new, everybody was two parent families and there was no stigma really, although, in my mind, it was a big stigma because-- Speaker 2: Even then? Speaker 1: For me, yes-- Speaker 2: All right 'cause you were used to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --'cause we had moved from a home and, you know, a whole nother kind of environment now to, in my mind, the projects. Story_ID: 178934 Speaker 1: Now, do you think--I'm trying to figure this out, but do you think that your mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] moved, part of the reason was, to surround herself with other people because of the domestic violence? Speaker 2: She could have, you know. Speaker 1: Because the tendency if you're in a house, I guess in a house in an all-white neighborhood [Nicetown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they're not gon' be coming over to see. Speaker 2: No, that's true. That's true. It could have been. It really could have been. I always thought it was, I think she felt that you wouldn't get put out so quickly, you know. There was-- Speaker 1: That's probably a factor too. Speaker 2: Right, I thought it was a safety factor. Speaker 1: In a lot of ways, probably, safety in a lot of different ways. Speaker 2: Right, that's what I thought. Speaker 1: She--it sounds to me she thought that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Thought it through, right. And it was also something that you didn't talk to your family or anything about. But you didn't--you weren't told--like we weren't told, "Don't talk about this." It just was never talked about. But I think my father [William Henry Curtis] moved because I guess he wasn't ready to let go. Speaker 1: Now, did--as a youth observing this domestic violence unfold, what were your observation in terms of how the police reacted and the community people reacted to this? Speaker 2: There weren't no police that came to our home. Nobody called. You wouldn't, you wouldn't have known at all. Speaker 1: Was this something that was unique to your family in those days? Speaker 2: Well, maybe it was and maybe it wasn't because you didn't talk about it, so you didn't know. It could've been going on in other places, but I didn't know. Speaker 1: Okay. And these are the days when it wasn't discussed that much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Nobody talked about it, period. Speaker 1: Okay, so this, you're saying this affected your personality? Speaker 2: It did. It really, really did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: More quiet, introverted, shy, more, more introspective. Story_ID: 178935 Speaker 1: So you're in, so what--well, in school, like what did you get involved in in school when you were at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At Little Flower [Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, I was in the Spanish Club. I wrote short stories for anthologies, things like that. Speaker 1: Now, did you--I know in the--okay, I see. Now, you were in high school, I guess when [President] John [F.] Kennedy was killed, right? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --I was in biology class. Speaker 1: That whole summer of '63 [1963], was, so many things happened, Medgar Evers killed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did your father [William Henry Curtis]--he was in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you said, pretty active? Speaker 2: Yes, but by then, he was pretty much in the throes of alcoholism. So I'm not sure he was that involved. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had some kind of a relapse or something into what he used to do before he got married and-- Speaker 2: Probably. I mean he was functioning. He worked two jobs. He was a weekend person who drank. Speaker 1: Okay, and the drinking would lead to violence? Speaker 2: Sometimes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay, so did you--now, were you reading about, I guess, did you read about the situation? You know, knowing your person--well, what you're into now, I just wondered like what you were--did you try to read about what was going on in your own life in the--'cause I know in those days, you know, talk shows were emerging on TV and other--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did not. Speaker 1: --and people started to talk about it and write about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Did not. Speaker 1: --all those kind of issues in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you ever have counseling with any of your-- Speaker 2: Probably-- Speaker 1: --anybody at school? Speaker 2: No, no, never. I mean it wasn't--you didn't talk about it. I mean it wasn't--it was just what was going on, period. You just worked harder in school. You know, you got good grades. You--our mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] found a way--I'm not sure how she did this. But she found a way for us to--you saw, you saw it, but it didn't touch you. So it's like putting on really expensive rose-colored glasses. Now, it didn't mean you didn't internalize it, but it was happening, but, you know, you had stuff to do. You had A's to get, you had things to complete, you know, you just did your life. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you and your brothers talk about it? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 178936 Speaker 1: So at school, you were doing some writing, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and what did you write about? Speaker 2: Oh, lots of short stories, lots of creative writing, animals that didn't wake up on time on a farm, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that could cost a lot, you know, a paycheck (laughter). Speaker 2: Exactly, there you go. Speaker 1: All right, so--but that's interesting though. You're writing short stories. I mean a lot of kids don't write short stories in school. And, you know, so did you have anything published? Speaker 2: I was writing for--I think I was in eleventh grade and I was writing for an anthology. And it was a story about a chanticleer who didn't wake up on time and so the cows didn't get milk, the farmer didn't wake up, you know, that kind of thing. And the eleventh grade nun said that my story was written too well for it to have been actually written by me, so it didn't get into the anthology. And I--and I stopped writing for maybe twenty years. Speaker 1: Now, this is the kind of story I've heard too. I mean, it happened to me. You know, you write something and the teacher says, "I don't believe you did it." Speaker 2: Right, and I said, "I really did," and my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] wrote a letter and, 'cause I wrote the story in front of my mother 'cause I would ask her different things as I was writing the story. But, yeah, so that kind of like set me back, so I stopped writing for a long time 'cause by then, I was writing plays, short stories just for my own, you know, enjoyment. Story_ID: 178937 Speaker 1: Now, I was asking before about [President] John [F.] Kennedy's assassination, and do you remember the March on Washington? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Did any of the members of your family go? Speaker 2: My sister went. My mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] wouldn't allow me to go. Speaker 1: Okay. So I guess, did you watch it on TV? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. What kind of impression did it make on you? Speaker 2: I think the desire to contribute probably started there really strong. I was already volunteering in my neighborhood, tutoring that kind of thing. But I think that the desire to give back, to not necessarily help somebody, but to contribute probably started there because when I--right before I graduated from Little Flower [Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I applied to become a VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA]. And VISTA was brand new, Volunteers in Service to America. And, you know, part of that great American society thing. So it, it just seemed like the right thing to do. I was--I think my parents thought I was going to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: So it was taken for granted that you were gonna go to college? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes. My aunt was the director of student nursing at UP [University of Pennsylvania] at that time, and so it was just assumed I was gonna get a scholarship and go. Speaker 1: So your aunt was the director of student nursing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at university-- Speaker 2: For nursing, uh-huh at UP. Speaker 1: At--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: University of Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: That's Penn in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a pretty good position. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. She was great. Speaker 1: Yeah, Penn is, I think a lot of people get Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] mixed up with Penn and Penn is an Ivy League school. Speaker 2: Right, University of Penn. Speaker 1: So, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so the assumption was that's where I was going. But I knew I wasn't ready to go to school. I didn't know anything about--I felt like I didn't know anything about life. I felt that I was--my father [William Henry Curtis] was very controlling, so, you know, you didn't go a lot of places, and, you know, there was just so much tension in the house, and just stuff. I needed to like see what life was like out there before I went to school, or at least that's how I felt. Story_ID: 178938 Speaker 1: I was supposed to get engaged. I was marrying this incredible guy. Speaker 2: So you had a boyfriend in high school [at Little Flower Catholic High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Big--he had a wonderful family and, you know, they were more well off than we were, I mean, a whole lot. And I had picked out a really beautiful diamond ring. And so the night I told him I had de- I was gonna join VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA] was the night he was gonna ask me to marry him. And so I told him I was joining VISTA. I got to speak first, so he didn't say anything about the ring. Speaker 2: So--so I take it you didn't get married. Speaker 1: No! No, went to VISTA. Speaker 2: How did you find out about VISTA? Did it come through--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was on TV. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was on TV. I was watching TV one afternoon and, literally, I had a visceral experience that said to me this is where you're going. And so I didn't question it, took down the information, sent away for the application. But I wasn't gonna be eighteen until May, and I graduated from high school in June. So once you became eighteen, you didn't have to have your parents' signature, so. Speaker 2: So, okay, all right, so this is interesting. So, yeah, VISTA is the domestic Peace Corps--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was established in those days 'cause they started Peace Corps first, then VISTA. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it's been said that VISTA was started in reaction to all the college students who volunteered for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and this way the government could control what you volunteered for rather than-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --go down south and, you know, agitate. Speaker 1: Exactly, create revolution. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 178981 Speaker 1: All right, VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA]. Speaker 2: VISTA. Speaker 1: So what happened to your boyfriend--I mean your fiance? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Did he just, I mean-- Speaker 2: He went to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was already at Florida A&M. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was already away? Speaker 2: Yeah, captain of the football team, president of student government, you know. And so I told my parents--well, anyway, so my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] comes downstairs the next day and she says, "Show me, show me" 'cause she knew about the ring. Speaker 1: She didn't mean the VISTA papers? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, she meant the two karat diamond. And I said, "What are you talking about?" She was really hot with me 'cause my sister had married a heart surgeon or, you know, a doctor, and, you know, high standing, and, you know, fellowships to Europe, you know all of that. So, you know, I was, I was supposed to follow in those kind of footsteps, criteria. She was really hot with me, very. And so then I told them that I was joining VISTA. And I don't think they talked to me for like six months after I left. Speaker 1: So now VISTA was, did you have to actually go to another place to serve? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. This was--it's not the VISTA of 2012-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in no way. I went to live in a convent in Baltimore [Maryland], which is really ironic, but it was a kind of broke down convent the Catholic Church wasn't using, and so VISTA used it as a training site and a living site. So I studied at John Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], maternal deprivation babies, and I worked with young mothers who came to John Hopkins for services. Speaker 1: So this is 1966--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Six [1966]. Speaker 1: --summer of '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Summer of '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Right after graduation from high school [Little Flower Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was like--that was really--it was new, you know. I, truthfully, I felt like I kinda blossomed into myself during that year or so with VISTA and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What was the training like? What was VISTA training like then? I know-- Speaker 2: It was like being in college. It was understanding poverty, understanding people who live in poverty, systems, resources, what life is like and how people saw themselves. And they really hyped you up, you know, that you are giving up your time and your life to help change America. You know, I bought into all of that. I was like, "I can do this. I'm eighteen." And I was probably the youngest person in my group 'cause everybody else--there were people from UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. They were from everywhere, mostly college students in their twenties. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I was eighteen, out of high school. Speaker 1: I think typically they recruit, yeah, college students who had just graduated between undergrad and grad school. Speaker 2: Right. But, but here I was, excited, young, stupid (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, what was the racial mix in VISTA (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I think 'cause I might have been in that third group, I know I was in like one of the newest groups that were formed--they were forming. There weren't that many, maybe, I don't know. I don't remember many African Americans. Speaker 1: Out of--what was your training group like one hundred, two hundred (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember it being that large. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then maybe, I'd say sixty, but maybe there were other training sites in Baltimore. But there were probably just about sixty, and maybe there were two black guys, I think, and me. Story_ID: 178982 Speaker 1: So that year, you really got a chance to do something [with the VISTA program] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. And then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Where did you live during--in the same place? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the same place, in this convent-school place [in Baltimore, Maryland]. We all lived there. It was all broken down. It was, you know, cots and stuff, you know. It was not even a good Holiday Inn back then. And--and before I left, my parents [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis and William Henry Curtis] were like, ooh. They brought in every family member, you know, like, "Talk to her. She doesn't know what she's getting into. She's giving up college, and, you know, we don't even know what this thing is." It didn't matter. I was going. So then after the training and everything, Marcia Megase [ph.] and me--Marcia was from Cleveland Heights [Ohio] maybe in Ohio and me. We're both eighteen, know nothing about nothing, and we got sent to Mount Hermon, which is a community in Portsmouth, Virginia. And Mount Hermon was really country. It isn't now, but it was then, a lot of farmland. I taught peanut farmers how to read and write. We got to know our community. Marcia worked at some kind of health clinic for pregnant moms, teen moms, and I worked at--with a principal, African American principal. I think his name is John Haw [ph.] at Moffett Elementary [School, later, Moffett Place School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. And it was really a culture shock for me. Speaker 1: In what sense? Speaker 2: Well, food, I didn't eat any of the food. You know, my mother didn't fix greens and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Grits and-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Southern cooking? Speaker 2: No. We had spinach. It was spinach souffle` with an egg topping, you know. That's-- Speaker 1: Well, she had been a French maid. Speaker 2: Yeah, there you go. Speaker 1: French cookery. Speaker 2: Right, so we ate very, very well. So there were a lot of things that I didn't eat that I learned how to eat. I think I gained like twenty pounds when I was in VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA]. It was really funny--just a whole new way of life, but we used to get shot at by the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] a lot. Speaker 1: Actually shot at? Speaker 2: Oh, right, we (laughter), we lived in this house that cost forty-four dollars a month. We made $177 every two weeks when we were in VISTA. And so we ate something, Marcia called, "Puerto Rican bread" most of the time. So it was just flour, water, fried with honey or syrup on top unless our neighbors fed us. And the house, (laughter) be like one slat and then there'd be like air, then another slat, and then air. It was a poorly constructed house I will say. We saw--I had never seen a fly--I had seen roaches 'cause I lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but I had never seen a flying roach before, big wings [buzz sound]. Big wings. It was just, but you're eighteen and nineteen, you know, so it's kind of all amazing. But I didn't write home for a good while 'cause I knew that if my mother knew where I was living and what I was experiencing, you know, they'd be trying to get me to come home. So for a long time, I didn't. But then they had a little VISTA newsletter or something, so I sent that home to them and then after a while, you know, they kinda "okay." But I never told them about being shot at by the Klan. Story_ID: 178983 Speaker 1: Now, tell us that story now about the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] shooting at you. There's gotta be a whole story to that. Speaker 2: It was. Well, they didn't necessarily want us in this community [Mount Hermon, Portsmouth, Virginia]. And we were at a--we were doing our shopping like at a Kroger, but it wasn't as sophisticated as a Kroger but, and a group of Klan members started walking around the--inside the parking lot. Speaker 1: Now, how did you know they were Klan members? Speaker 2: Because they were dressed in white. Speaker 1: With the hoods? Speaker 2: With the hoods. Speaker 1: That's a good-- Speaker 2: It's a good way to know. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So I just happened to look out there, and I said, "Marcia [ph.], look." So we both look out, and we see these guys walking around in the parking center. (Laughter) And we didn't take our groceries out of the shopping cart. We just paid and drove the shopping cart home. And we peed in our pants all the way home. We were scared to death. We pulled the blinds and the shades and stuff down, just really scared. So we called--I even remember this woman's name, but I won't call it. But she was with VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA]. She was like our VISTA contact. So we called her and said, "You know, the Klan's in our neighborhood and just need to know what to do." And we didn't get--I can't remember what she said, "Don't leave your community. Stay with your community." And so we're thinking, it might not be good to stay with our community because we had really gotten to know these people. And we felt that they could burn their houses down. You know, I knew they were coming to burn our house down. They could burn them or they could really harm the people. If they were looking for us, then it might be better if we left our neighborhood. So we--you know, when I think about it now, it's like, was this real? But anyway, we put scarves on our heads. We tried to disguise ourselves and you had, then, you had to take a ferry from Portsmouth [Virginia] to Norfolk [Virginia]. So that's what we did. And there were VISTAS in Norfolk, so we stayed with them. And the Feds caught a carload of these Klan members and they had Molotov cocktails. They had guns. They were really gonna try to kill us. So then this woman, who is our rep [representative], comes to Norfolk to see us. And like, she's like, "You should not have left your community. Stay in your community." And we're like, "We're nineteen years old now," you know? "We're doing the best we can. We're scared to death," and we didn't want our commun- we didn't want people in our community to--I mean they could've bombed, you could have blown our house down with a good wind. So we just didn't wanna jeopardize, jeopardize our community. So eventually we went back and opened up a little daycare center for our community. And I continued working with peanut farmers, and we had our graduation. But then I was ready to go to college then. Story_ID: 178984 Speaker 1: Okay, now, so how many years were you in VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA]? Speaker 2: About a year and a half-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the training and then a year commitment. Speaker 1: Okay, so they trained you for half a year? Speaker 2: I think so, about six months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: I know it's different today. Speaker 2: That was a while back--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The training is three days. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, right, yeah, really? Speaker 1: Yeah, three days and then--well, three days in the--for the PSO [Pre-Service Orientation], they call it--that's the regional training from the VISTA regional staff. Then the organization you're assigned to has an orientation that can last from one to two weeks and then you're ready. Speaker 2: No. It was a couple of months and then we went to Mount Hermon-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Portsmouth [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm just thinking like the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK]--now, this goes back to what I discovered when I was a VISTA coordinator that VISTA had a origin in the government's attempt to regulate volunteers, I guess, after SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all the other students had gone south to volunteer with SNCC and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And I guess the Klan felt the same way. They felt that you all were doing something that was quite like-- Speaker 2: Radical. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, radical that we were gonna get people to riot and to fight, and that kind of thing. We really weren't. Speaker 1: Even read or vote. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: That's probably what they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --we were teaching--I was teaching them to read. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, of course, they would be able to vote. Speaker 1: Yeah, that probably was as dramatic as rioting (laughter) in those days. Speaker 2: It is. And, you know, a lot of peanut farmers, they just made X's on their checks. And I got taught in the Frank Laubach method. It was a missionary method of teaching English, and that's what I used with the peanut farmers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was amazing. Speaker 1: So you had thorough training-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --in terms of what you were doing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, this was real VISTA, you know. It was just amazing. Story_ID: 178985 Speaker 1: Then the principal at Moffett Elementary [School, later, Moffett Place School, Portsmouth, Virginia], I told him I was ready to go to college now. I'd had all the harrowing experiences I wanted to have right now. And he introduced me to Dr. Ruth Winstead Diggs at Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Dr. Diggs was the chair of special education at Norfolk State. And they had--Norfolk State had a program for students who were either honors or had done exceptionally well in high school, and it was part of some government experiment to see how well students might do if money was not a deterrent for academic excellence. It was called "The Thirteen-College Curriculum Program" [TCCP]. Speaker 2: Now, let me you ask this too, was college tuition reimbursed on the part of VISTA's [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA] contract in those days? Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. Speaker 2: I know it is now. They pay you the stipend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They give you, at the end, they give you four thousand dollars towards college tuition, you know, if you wanna go on to go graduate school or go on to college at the end of VISTA service. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: So it wasn't part of it then? Speaker 1: Un-un. Speaker 2: All right, so you just got the stipend. Speaker 1: You got the $177.00 every two weeks. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, okay, so this was "The Thirteen-College" what was it called (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Curriculum Program. Speaker 2: Curriculum Program. Speaker 1: And anyway, that's how I got into Norfolk State. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And it was all accelerated courses, took field trips, went to plays in New York [New York]. It was incredible. Speaker 2: Okay, now, who was the president of Norfolk State when you were there? Speaker 1: Lyman Brooks. Speaker 2: Okay, I think he was there for years (unclear). Speaker 1: Years and years and years. He was president before it actually became a college. It used to be univer- Virginia State Norfolk Division [sic., Norfolk Unit, Virginia Union University], and then it became Norfolk State College, and now it's Norfolk State University. Speaker 2: And traditionally, it was conceived as the colored and the black-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --college, undergraduate school for-- Speaker 1: For blacks-- Speaker 2: --for blacks, okay, in Virginia or one of them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of them. Speaker 2: 'Cause they had Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Seem like there's another one too, but I know Virginia State is a black school. Speaker 1: Well, we were Virginia State Norfolk Division [sic.]. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Right, so a spinoff of Virginia State. Speaker 1: Right, it was just like--probably not like--well, it was a four-year school, so it wasn't like a community college, but it wasn't its own college yet. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: But then Dr. Brooks, you know, he was president of the Norfolk Division and then Norfolk State College-- Story_ID: 178986 Speaker 1: Were there any people who were leaders at VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA], or administrators, or trainers that you looked up to as influential or as mentors in the VISTA experience? Speaker 2: I don't remember them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really don't. I'm sure there were, but I don't remember them. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, okay, at--oh, same thing at Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Now, who were the people--were there any special teachers or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Dr. [Ruth Winstead] Diggs, Greg Setsor [ph.]. Why can't I remember her name? The teacher that put me out of her car because I had an Afro. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, wait a minute. Now, here's a story here we haven't covered. Now, this is--you come out in 1966. It was like '65 [1965] the Afro started becoming popular-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in, you know, in the country. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --tell us about how you got an Afro. Speaker 2: (Laughter) How did I get an Afro? Well, I was at Norfolk State. It was, it was the time, you know. Speaker 1: But you didn't have one before the time you got there, or did you? Speaker 2: No, no, long-pressed hair. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this is something dramatic for black women to get their hair natural in those days. I know what was, you know, what people were talking about-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and thinking about. This was-- Speaker 2: It was just part of the time, you know. It was--I felt like I was a revolutionary, you know. I'd had this VISTA experience, had the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] experience. Now, I was in college, I was, you know, getting my mind expanded. So here's what happened. So I decide I'm gonna wear an Afro. And I used a fork as a pick for a long (laughter), for a long time. And I have a huge Afro because my hair was long--huge Afro. And so my--the end of my first year at Norfolk State, I go home, but I called my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] first. My mother has very long straight hair that needs no heat. My father [William Henry Curtis] has hair that needs no heat. My brothers have hair that need no heat. Speaker 1: To straighten out? Speaker 2: My sisters have hair that don't need heat. I'm the only person who had hair that needed heat that had to have something, hot comb, something because it was just too much of it, not necessarily kinky, but just too much hair, too much hair. So I called my mother up and I say, "I'm coming home, but you need to know I have an Afro." "Then don't come." Said, "I'm coming home." "Don't come with an Afro." She was really conservative or maybe just afraid of riots, and afraid of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and his rabblerousing she called it, all of that. So-- Speaker 1: Did your father feel the same way about Martin Luther King? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. So, so I come home. Now, you remember when I left, I had rebelled against authority and went to VISTA. But before that, I was on my way to becoming a nun 'cause I was immersed in Catholicism. So when I--now I'm coming home, my brother, (laughter), my brother, Terry, opens the cab door and he hollers, "Mom, she got an Afro. She's not wearing a bra, oh my goodness." It was too funny. (Laugher) So anyways, my mother is--she can't the Fro, can't stand it, can't stand the no-bra, you know, just, "What is happening at this school, that you, you're just, you've gone to the dogs here." But my dad is like, "This is what they do in college. This is the sixties [1960s] now." You know, blah, blah. So I figure since I have him on my side, I pull out these cigarettes. I'm smoking Tareyton 100s and my mother just got up. She was--it was terrible, really, really was. So I said something like, "Well, you might as well know I'm smoking now," you know. And my brothers were like, "Okay, we're getting up from the table 'cause we know it's gonna be fireworks now from my mother." And it was. I didn't smoke in the house or anything. But I was definitely different. And I had real opinions about everything by then. Story_ID: 178987 Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you still a devout Catholic at that point? Speaker 2: Nope, wasn't going to church. I was reading all kinds of Socialist material, reading [W.E.B.] Du Bois, you know, reading--"The Great Debate" between him and Booker T. Washington and, you know, just everything black I could get my hands on, everything, having huge philosophical discussions in the middle of the night, you know, all of those kinds of things. Life was good at Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. And, and then part of, you know, taking over the, the union, and, you know, all of that. Speaker 1: So you all did that at Norfolk State? Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the issue at hand? Speaker 2: I have no idea. It could've been Black Studies. Could've been sympathetic to what was going on in the South. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this. Now, Norfolk State I know in those days, there's a real difference between the white colleges, even the state colleges and black schools (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --ODU [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: The black schools tend to be more conservative, old school, take your hat off in class and that sort of thing, which was, you know, how--the model that they were created in. Did you, I mean was Norfolk State--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Girls could not wear pants until after six o'clock. You had to wear a dress or a skirt. Speaker 1: Did you have like strict rules in the girls' dormitory? Speaker 2: Well, see, we didn't have dorms until maybe my junior year maybe. We lived with families. And historically, students had lived with families because Norfolk State didn't have dorms. But the families we lived with were very, very strict. You know, you had to be in by eight [o'clock], you know, stuff like that. You couldn't date. You know, you couldn't have young men at the house unless you really were chaperoned, all of that. You had to introduce whoever you were dating to the family you were living with, but normally they didn't have any of those kind of things. They were really, really strict. Speaker 1: Okay, so there're no dorms there when you started-- Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: -- at Norfolk State? It's more a commuter school for that area? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there were people from, you know, there were students from all over the country at Norfolk State. We just lived with families. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think my sophomore year, I lived with Coach Ernie Fears and his wife, and he was basketball coach then, [Richard] "Pee Wee" Kirkland, [Charles] "Napoleon" Bonaparte. We were, we were NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] champions [sic., Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association (CIAA) champions]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the best time to be at Norfolk State. Story_ID: 174770 Speaker 1: Finally come across a Earl "The Pearl" [Monroe] story here (laughter). So Earl, "The Pearl," was in your all--in the league. Speaker 2: He was, he was in the league, yeah. It was an incredible time [at Norfolk State College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: It really was. Speaker 1: You said you knew him, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure did. Speaker 1: And you dated Ray Scott, who was another-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --NBA [National Basketball Association] player. Speaker 2: He was, um-hum, with the Virginia Squires. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: And then I think with the Detroit Pistons. Speaker 1: So he was in the ABA [American Basketball Association] first-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and the ABA going on as a rival to the NBA-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at one time. I suppose the black college players had more of a chance in the ABA probably--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think they did. Speaker 1: --in the beginning. Speaker 2: Right, in the beginning. Now, of course, they dominate-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --NBA. Story_ID: 174771 Speaker 1: So you said it's a good time to be at Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Absolutely. It was really good. Speaker 1: So despite some of the restrictions that were kind of 19th century in some ways, the--there was more freedom because it wasn't a fully established--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: --campus? Speaker 2: No, no. Teachers really, they really cared. You know what I mean? They--you went home to eat at their homes, Dr. [Marion] Caps, Dr. Duke [ph.], Dr. Smith [ph.]--I mean these were--they, you know, they wanted students to learn, and you wanted to learn. They really did. Speaker 1: Now, were they teaching left wing politics at-- Speaker 2: No. (Laughter) No. Speaker 1: 'Cause I wondered where you were picking that up. Speaker 2: No, other students, of course, reading. But I will tell you this, that my first two to three years, I was indoctrinated with critical thinking skills. We studied Frantz Fanon. I mean we studied major thinkers. Speaker 1: At Norfolk State? Speaker 2: At Norfolk State. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: And especially in the program that I was in. Speaker 1: Now, that's pretty, yeah, that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we got an opportunity to really debate, to really like delve into philosophers, and, and philosophers that had an impact on black consciousness and black thinking. So it was--that was very powerful. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm trying to think, in those days, Paulo Freire was, he was one of them. Speaker 2: Absolutely, but we got a chance to really read, and discuss, and debate, and--we had classes in the evenings, you know. It, it was--this training that we had was really designed to make you--to really make you conscious of who you are as an African American, what your contribution ought to be, to be academically sound, and to really be a critical thinker, so it was pretty powerful. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, was there a lecture series, a convocation or something? Speaker 2: It was a lecture series. Our classes were usually doubled, like maybe two hours, and then there were discussion groups, small group discussions in the evenings. And then they took us around the country to visit other groups and to have that cultural experience. Speaker 1: For instance, what kind of group would you visit? Speaker 2: Well, other--you know, we went to the Smithsonian, we went to [Washington] D.C., we went to New York [New York], met with other instructors, became a part of different learning communities. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered like who did they bring to campus then to talk. I mean did they bring any national figures to speak to the students or people in the news or-- Speaker 2: You know, I'm sure they did. I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, I know [HM] Dick Gregory was popular. Speaker 2: Oh, Dick Gregory was definitely at Norfolk State. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael was at Norfolk State. Speaker 1: Okay. There you go. I'm just trying to find out who. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Women, any women? Speaker 2: I don't--you know what? I'm sure there were. Speaker 1: I'm thinking of Flo, what's her, [Florynce] Flo Kennedy--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Flo Kennedy. Speaker 1: Did she come (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't think so. Story_ID: 174772 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were also, you were there when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated. Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Were you in--you must have been in school [at Norfolk State College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], I guess during that period of--that day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: It was a weekday. Speaker 2: A lot of marches. Speaker 1: So what--do you remember specifically what you were doing when you found out? Speaker 2: I don't. Isn't that funny? (Pause) I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Did the school do anything special to commemorate? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm--there were a lot of vigils, a lot of people just gathering, impromptu gatherings, speakers coming in, but mostly just from the Norfolk [Virginia] area. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay-- Speaker 2: I'm thinking though I may have been home, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] during that time. My mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] got sick, and my family asked me to come home to look after my mother for a good while. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I'm thinking I may have been home then. Speaker 1: This is April 4th '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I may have been home. Story_ID: 174773 Speaker 1: Any other stories from Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]? Now, you majored in? What was your major? Speaker 2: Special ed [special education]. Speaker 1: Special education. Speaker 2: Stories, I'm sure there were plenty. I spent most of my time--I read the, one of the black newspapers in Norfolk [Virginia] and read about a nun, a white nun, who had started a, like a settlement house in Ghent [Norfolk, Virginia], G-H-E-N-T, which was a black neighborhood, and she was looking for volunteers. And her name was Sister Frances Damien [ph.]. And I went to volunteer, and I ended up becoming her volunteer director or volunteer coordinator. It was just me. And she told me that she wanted me to go and knock on doors and introduce myself to the neighbors and the kids, and invite them to come over to the center. (Laughter) So I had a very strong East Coast accent. And I think that first day, I looked like--or that first weekend, I looked like a social worker with a East Coast accent. So I told Sister that nobody would open their door to me, or they wouldn't talk to me, and I didn't think I was cut out, you know, to be this volunteer person. And she said, "Well, go home and change your clothes. Put on your blue jeans and a sweatshirt, and then go back out." So that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay, you were, basically you looked too professional for-- Speaker 2: I looked too professional. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So I took off the knits I was wearing and put on some blue jeans. And I--truthfully, I didn't wear blue jeans. I stayed kinda--at Norfolk State, you dressed 95 percent of the time, like dressed. Speaker 1: Dressed up. Speaker 2: You were dressed up. It wasn't until much later that, you know, clothing got really relaxed. But she was like, you know, "Put on a pair of blue jeans. Put on a pair of pants, and, you know, a t-shirt, just don't be so dressed up." Speaker 1: Yeah, that's typical of that era when you see the films of the sit-ins even. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, pearls on (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, and gloves, the women have gloves. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And fellows had suits-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Continental suits with the little (unclear) on it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Well, Norfolk State was typical. So, so I dressed way down and went back. And the Williams [ph.] family let me in. There were about eight or nine of them. And (laughter) when I went to visit them, they had one of those heaters like right in the, in the middle of the room, you know, where you cooked, you did everything like right there. And it was really funny. I was sitting in a chair. And they had lots of little critters and things in their house. And so I watched this roach, like maybe it was over there in the corner, and I just watched him like beeline up to me and come up my chair. And in my head--'cause I know they're watching everything, right? And I'm saying to myself, "What am I going to do about this roach?" It was big, like a water bug. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is a big black water bug. Speaker 2: Right, water bug? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I'm sitting there, and I'm kind of trying to position myself, you know. So I--somebody said something, and I decided it was gonna be funny. And I said, "Hah, hah, hah", killed that roach (laughter) and then went back on to, you know, talking, whatever. And then they told me later, "You know what really made us want to like be with you and work with you and you can be in my house was when you killed that roach 'cause we watched you? We kept saying, 'Wonder what this lady gonna do when this roach comes all the way up to her.'" I got to know that family in such a special way and all the kids in that neighborhood. So I spent most of my Norfolk State after hours volunteering in Ghent with Sister Frances. Story_ID: 174774 Speaker 1: It's interesting you developed a sense of volunteering in the Catholic schools. Speaker 2: Social justice. Speaker 1: And, I don't know. It makes me think in our public schools, we don't have, you know, that being taught in our communities-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --communities that need it more than any place else. Speaker 2: Very true. Yeah, so that was, that was it. I graduated six months early and I got--Dr. Caps called me one night. She was the director of testing and all other kinds of things. She was very, very powerful. Dr. Marion Caps. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How do you spell her name? Speaker 2: C-A-P-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And anybody who went to Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] would know Dr. Caps. She was very brusque, very matter of fact, and scared you half the time, I mean literally. So she called me up, "Caps, here." I was like, oh, my God, "Hello, Dr. Caps." And OSU [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] had just started this black visitation program. Dr. Frank Hale had started it to get more minorities at OSU. And one of the students--they had invited like the top ten in a number of different black colleges to come for visitation day, and I had never even heard of The Ohio State University and had never heard of even Columbus, Ohio. But I think Tillary Corpru [ph.] who was in special ed [special education]. She was like a 3.9. She was so brilliant. Tillary couldn't go, so Dr. Caps called me and asked me if I wanted to go. So I took her place. I went. I applied and got a master/doctoral fellowship to Ohio State and that's how I got to Columbus. Speaker 1: Now this is, let's see, what year would this be? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy two [1972], 1972. Okay. So Columbus, Ohio 1972. This is when Columbus was considered an ordinary town, not the boom town it is now? Speaker 2: No, no. It was considered a cow town. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's what they called it, but I really liked Columbus. I loved the open streets. It wasn't congested like Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And truthfully, I wasn't even gonna come, but my mom [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] and my Aunt Sissy [ph.] were like, "Are you crazy. You're going to do this." I said, "I don't even know anything about this." "You'll find out when you get there." So that's how I got here. I had--Dr. [Ruth Winstead] Diggs had given me a two thousand dollar scholarship right at the end of the school year, and I bought a Volkswagen, a yellow Volkswagen for $2,400. So two thousand [dollars] of my scholarship money went to buy a car, so I could drive myself to Columbus, Ohio. And a friend of mine, Al Green [ph.], who taught at Norfolk State in the business department had a friend here who was on the school board who had an apartment. And I moved into that apartment. It was furnished. It was an attic and it was sixty-nine dollars a month. So that's where I lived on Parkwood Avenue and went to Norfolk, I mean went to Ohio State. Story_ID: 174775 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about Dr. Frank Hale. He's a celebrated figure here in Columbus [Ohio] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness! Speaker 1: But tell us about him. I think you'll be the first person to actually talk about Frank Hale. Speaker 2: Just an incredible educator and advocate for black students, a warrior, if you will, for black students, an inclusion, very, very distinguished, very well thought of. And Frank, in fact, the cultural center at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] is named after Dr. Hale, The Frank W. Hale Center [Frank W. Hale, Jr. Black Cultural Center], masterful, learned, distinguished, no nonsense. Speaker 1: What was Dr. Hale's specialty? What was his field? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I really thought it was our culture that he was so learned in from an academic frame of reference. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering 'cause there were no degrees in that in those days. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But he, so was he there--was he a sociologist? Speaker 2: I think so, I think he was a sociologist--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's my sense, but I'm not sure. Speaker 2: But, but then, just making waves, and so I was in that first black visitation day. And, and it was, you know, he would say, "You're the cream of the cream of the top. You know, you, you can come here free and just apply yourselves." And it was, it was pretty heady. It really was. I certainly never thought that I was like some of these students, you know, who were just--because you got--there were a hundred of us, so they--everybody got introduced and, you know, you heard about their grade point average and, you know, the scholarly work. And I just never saw myself in that, that prestigious group. Speaker 1: So this is something that he did annually? Speaker 2: Yes, annually. Speaker 1: A hundred black college-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --graduates to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --to apply and come--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Apply to graduate schools (simultaneous). Speaker 2: But they were like the top ten of their graduating class. I was not at the top ten. I guess I was close. Speaker 1: So he had arranged for Ohio State to offer full scholarships to these students? Speaker 2: Yes, master/doctoral fellowships, a five-year free ride. Story_ID: 174776 Speaker 1: So you were there to accept this (laughter) position, right, and so what was life like at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Was Ohio State--how was it different from Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and-- Speaker 2: You, if you saw a black person on campus, you ran up to them and hugged 'em, whether you even knew them or not, or you'd see them across The Oval and you'd say, "Hi, how are you?" you know, because you just didn't see that many black people. Speaker 1: Now, this is--now, we can go all the way back to Jesse Owens and other black people that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I've interviewed that, who received degrees from Ohio State, so they were really isolated. Speaker 2: Yes, they really, really were. So you'd, you'd find your little niche of friends, and, you know, you'd study together, you ate together, you did everything together. But it was very isolating, very. Speaker 1: And this is just to remind anybody watching this that Ohio State was then and still is the largest university in the United States-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --or second, sometimes, it's second, but-- Speaker 2: Right, but only by a few thousand. Speaker 1: It's a big place. Speaker 2: It's huge. It was huge then--scary. You didn't get the attention that you would get at a school like Norfolk State. I mean eventually, you got to know your professors but not the kind of intimate teaching and relationships. You know, you had to prove yourself. I remember Dr. Stevens saying to me, "Everything you've ever learned about special ed [special education], I just want you to forget it because we're going to teach you what is really true." It's like, I don't think Dr. [Ruth Winstead] Diggs is gonna like that, you know. But I, I became a behaviorist under Dr. Thomas Stevens [ph.]. He was the chair of the department at that time. He taught Skinnerian theory. Speaker 1: This is B. H. Skinner [sic., B.F. Skinner]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: This is Dr. Thomas-- Speaker 2: Stevens. Speaker 1: Thomas Stevens, okay. Now, this is a white professor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they all were. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they all were. Speaker 1: Okay, in 19--so really all the professors you had were white? Speaker 2: At Norfolk State, I mean at OSU? Speaker 1: At Ohio State (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know there were some black ones in the system by then but very few as you, you know. Speaker 2: There weren't in this field. Speaker 1: Not in that field at all, okay. Speaker 2: No, learning disabilities and behavioral disorders. Story_ID: 174777 Speaker 1: Okay, and you called him a Skinnorian [ph.]? Speaker 2: Skinnerian. Speaker 1: Skinnerian, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm glad that B. H. Skinner [sic., B.F. Skinner], I mean Skinner is associated with this 'cause it would sound like it's a cross between a skin head and an Aryan. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so--all right, well, tell us what you learned and how you applied it. Speaker 2: I--it was great. The theories on reinforcement really resonated with me, how to change behavior, how to shape behavior, especially with children with learning and behavioral disorders. So I really felt that I was taught by the best people in that field at that time. And I student-taught at Upham Hall [formerly at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. They had a school there for students who had serious behavioral disorders or psychological disorders, attempted suicides to fascination with fire and burning barns down with people in it--that kind of thing. And I taught language arts. And it was pretty amazing. I loved the field, and so I was very creative in how I taught them. And sometimes I would bring some of the students home with me 'cause they hardly ever got out. And in my scrapbook that I showed you earlier, there is a couple of writings by some of those students that I kept. They were all middle and high school students, mostly white, a few black. Some of them bordered on genius. So one time I got this play about spring--I love spring--and I used it. Dr. [Ruth Winstead] Diggs would tell us that there were going to be times when you're teaching special ed [special education] where there would not be a budget because special ed was still new then, that you would have to create everything, all your props, all your teaching instruments, all your tools, everything and to teach from a core concept. So you would take one thing and you would teach everything from that. And I--and it worked for the kind of students I was teaching. So I taught language arts from a play. They had to learn the lines, dissect the lines, know what a noun, a pronoun, an adjective, a verb was, all of that. And then at the end, they had to put the play on. We had finally gotten down to it was now time to perform the play. There had never been a play by students at Upham Hall. And so maybe an hour before the play, the students told me they weren't going to do it, they were too scared. And so I finally, anyway I finally got them to do the play. And so, how do I say this nicely? The students were fabulous, but the way you knew--the audience let you know that we were at Upham Hall because they were just (laughter) they, they just couldn't believe seeing their peers on stage performing. And it was--I mean it was so incredible. I mean some people had to be taken out because they got too excited and, you know, the audience, you know, they just got too excited or they started hyperventilating or--I mean just, all kinds of--a lot of the reasons why they may have been there for their psychological disorders, you started seeing them. They were just like--they got too excited. So I had this joke with the students. I said, "You know, even though Upham Hall is a psychiatric hospital, the only way you knew we were in a psychiatric hospital was the audience. It wasn't the, it wasn't the characters in the play." They were fabulous. They did really, really well. So when I--I got my master's [degree] in a year, decided that I wasn't sure what I wanted to get a doctorate in, so Dr. [Frank] Hale was really hot with me, but I didn't get the doctorate. Speaker 1: So why not? Why did you-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: It was something going on socially in your life again, maybe-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What did you want to do? Speaker 2: I had no idea. I think that had I had better guidance and counseling, I probably would have stayed. I would have had my doctorate by the time I was--oh, I don't know, twenty-five, twenty-six, which would have been very young. Speaker 1: But were you just tired of school or something at that point or what? Speaker 2: I could have used a break 'cause I got my master's [degree] in a year instead of a year and a half to two years. But probably if I had had better counseling I think, I maybe would have been convinced to stay, but I didn't-- Story_ID: 174778 Speaker 1: Okay, now, so this is in '73 [1973] then-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --that you decide not to finish the Ph.D.--did you decide really not to finish the Ph.D. or not--just not to do it at that time? Speaker 2: I think I started out just won't do it period. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And you don't know why? Speaker 2: No, not really--I could've been intimidated. I don't know really. I--you know, I don't know. I thought it was just amazing that I had even gone to college. I had no sense of none of this really. I was like in a bubble. And, you know, so to actually get to go to college I find out, you know, it's a whole process of self-discovery. And then and it's not that I didn't have ambitions. I always wanted to be a teacher. Story_ID: 174779 Speaker 1: So well what did you do after school [at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: After the master's [degree]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I got a job teaching at Buckeye Boys Ranch [later, The Buckeye Ranch]. It was a school for kids with behavioral disorders, all boys. And at that time, I was their first teacher--first female teacher. And because I had been trained in Skinnerian theory, I took a piece of masking tape on my wrist and checked the number of times I got felt up within a half an hour of me being in the classroom. Felt up-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --by the boys. Speaker 1: So the boys were actually feeling? Speaker 2: "Hey, hey Ms. Curtis," you know just, so after about, about a couple of hours, I said, "Look, I've counted twenty-four times where you all have either brushed up against me, touched me, touched my face, come around my desk so you could smell my perfume, and I need for you to get over it. I'm gonna be wearing dresses. I'm gonna wear perfume. I'm gonna wear lipstick and so you're gonna have to learn how to be in the company of a lady." And so that's how we got started. So I had a great time. These boys--some of them were very, very disturbed. Speaker 1: Well how old were they? Speaker 2: Middle school. Speaker 1: Middle schoolers. Speaker 2: So between eleven and fourteen maybe. They'd get mad, they'd turn my desk over. And then I would threaten to go to their room and turn their stuff over because part of their therapy was reality therapy. Speaker 1: Okay, so they had their own room. They lived there. This is (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yes, this was a residential--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --you could actually go to their room--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I literally could go to their room-- Speaker 1: --and tear it up--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and tear it up so that they get a sense of what that felt like, what disorder was like. I used to have a wall that I covered in butcher paper because the boys cursed a lot, and so my rule is you have five minutes and I'd put a timer on. You can write anything you want to write on that wall or you can dance, jump, do anything physical that you want other than turn your desk over for five minutes 'cause I need for you get to it out of your system, so that I can teach. And if we need ten minutes, we'll do ten minutes, but I will not be interrupting my class to correct you, just won't do it. And if you think you can't handle that, then you might need to leave. So that's how I'd shake their behavior, so that I could get the kind of classroom that I wanted. Now, the principal would come in and he was always bringing people in, contributors, you know, and he'd say, "Could you take that wall down before Mr. so and so comes in?" And I'd say, "Well, I don't know if I can or not, you know, it's their wall, and maybe these people should see what's on the minds of the boys." So sometimes I would, sometimes I wouldn't. But I just found ways of shaping their behavior so that I could get the behavior that I needed, the attention that I needed for them to learn. So I did that. It was exhausting, exhausting. So I taught there for about a year. I also taught a Introduction to Learning Disabilities and Behavioral Disorders for Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] for a while 'cause they really wanted me to be there, so I did that. And then I taught special ed [special education] at Columbus City schools. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when was that? Speaker 2: Eighty six [1986]. Eighty five [1985], '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: So were you at Buckeyes Boys Ranch until that time? Speaker 2: For a while. And I'm trying to think, what did I do in between there? Oh, I got married. Story_ID: 174780 Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet your husband? Now, this is Mr. Curtis? Speaker 2: No, it's Frazier. Speaker 1: I mean--I meant to say Mr. Frazier, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was introduced through a friend, and we kinda hit it off right away. But we were only together for like maybe a year and a half, two years 'cause he got killed in a car accident. So then after that, I went home for a little while, worked home for a while. And then-- Speaker 1: To? Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Philadelphia, okay. Speaker 2: And then decided that I really liked Columbus [Ohio]. We had made friends with a number of people. And so I decided to come back to Columbus and live. So I started teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let's see, so that would've been around '77 [1977], '78 [1978] I came back. Speaker 1: Seventy seven [1977], '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in--around that time, I had a spiritual experience, and it pretty much shaped everything I do, and think, and believe today. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're back in Columbus--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --back in Columbus. Speaker 1: --in '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What was this experience? How did it happen? Speaker 2: I was really distraught about Ron's death, and I wasn't in church but I still believed in God and because I was having such a rough time, I asked God to help me, and, in fact, I was in Norfolk [Virginia]. I had just received the first Ruth W. Diggs scholar award. Dr. [Ruth Winstead] Diggs and I were very, very close and most of the teachers felt I was her pet. But she was just an incredible person and was really in my corner many times when I really needed someone. So when she retired, she created this--or I think maybe it was created for her, this foundation, and so I became the first Ruth W. Diggs scholar, and so I was there to speak, but I was also really sad. And wasn't sure what I wanted to do with my life, and so I asked for help. And I, I had this experience of just feeling warmth all over me. I don't know how to describe it. And so after I gave the speech--I spent a good deal of time with a friend who I went to Norfolk State [College, later Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] with. Her name was Lucille Gibbs [ph.]. And she was also in that program, ISE, Institute for Science and Education, and we met. And--there was a whole group of us. So anyway, Lucille was with me, and just helping to talk things out and everything. She was just a really great friend. She died several years ago, but I just felt something. So I went back home. Speaker 1: So did you feel this when you were speaking or when you were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, when I was talking to Lucille. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was right after I had asked for help, like seconds, just in my head. She and I were in my hotel room, and we were talking, and I was sad, and talking, and we had a little break or something, and I just right then and there said, "You know, God, you're gonna have to help me." And it was like right after that. I just felt different. So I came home and my friends noticed the difference. I had stopped talking about Ron, and death, and all of that, and they thought maybe I'd had a breakdown while I was in Norfolk and told me I should go home. So I went home. Story_ID: 174781 Speaker 1: My home was now with--I've skipped big chunks of my life with my parents, but my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] had gotten very sick, and was in a nursing home. And there was a period in my life where, before my mother got sick, that she was not available to me and my best friend's stepmother became a surrogate mom for me. So when I went home, after I had this experience, the home I went to was my stepmother--my best friend's stepmother's home. Speaker 2: So before your mother got sick, what was the reason that you couldn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We just came-- Speaker 2: --was it a philosophical one? Speaker 1: We came to a parting of the ways. But eventually I went back and took care of her and it was around '68 [1968], '69 [1969] that I took care of her. But anyway, so when I went back home, Dorothy Craft [ph.] is the woman that I'm calling "mom" now. And she looks at me and she says, "You look okay." She says, "You're acting a little strange, but you look okay. It doesn't look like you had a breakdown or anything." And I said, "No, I didn't have a breakdown." I said, "But I just feel different about myself." So one day I am--I started a meditation class, starting reading Unity literature, and starting to have another kind of relationship with God that is very internal, and--but I don't understand it. You know, it's just I can tell my behavior is different. I can even tell my thinking is different, but I don't understand what's happening. So I call my sister, Margie [Marjorie Curtis], up who is living in Boston [Massachusetts], and I say to her--I'm crying by this time 'cause I feel like something is really happening, but I don't know what it is. I don't have a name for it. I don't have a framework for it. And she said to me, "Listen, about six months ago, didn't you tell me that you prayed to God, and asked God to help you?" And I said, "Yeah." She said, "Well, I think that's what's happening. He's just letting himself be known to you." And that's really what it was. So I didn't become--what do I want to say? I didn't become fanatical, but I became very spiritual, and my lens on the world just became very different. Story_ID: 174782 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what does that mean in terms of how you saw the world? Speaker 2: So I asked God, I said, "Well, is there something that you want me to do? Is that why you're so real to me now?" And intuitively I felt that I was to do something with women. I wasn't sure exactly, but I felt something like that. Now, you have to remember that I had told you that I had gotten really, really shy, and so I was not a public person. Even when I was married, I was very reserved, very quiet, and Ron Frazier was very, very outgoing, and he was probably a feminist. I was not. I was very parochial. And, but he was the one that used to say to me all the time, "You're going to do great things. You don't even know it yet, but you're going to do great things." And, "You should keep your name Curtis, you know. You shouldn't have--just be Fran Frazier, you should be Frances Curtis Frazier," and but I was still really very reserved, and so when I felt that I was being asked to do something really public, I said, "I wasn't going to do it" because I just did not feel comfortable being out front or speaking. The other thing was I was going to have to speak, and I didn't feel like I could do any of that. But eventually, I didn't know that you couldn't bargain with God, so I said, "I'll do this women's work that I think you're asking me to do, but only if you put women in my way who will help me." And so I started meeting the same women in different places. I'd go somewhere and I'd run into the same woman that I ran into over here, and so eventually, I ran into several women and asked them if they would help me do this women's work that I felt called to do, and they said yes, and so I started a women's group called, A Quality of Sharing. And it was based on--are you familiar with 'Enemies: The Clash of Races' by [HM] Haki Madhubuti? Speaker 1: Right, yes. Speaker 2: Well, I had been reading a lot of Haki's work and had met Haki because a lot of the people that I had begun to associate with were artists, and writers and so Bob Stowe [ph.] and Betty Stowe [ph.)]knew Haki, so that's how I met Haki. Bob Stowe [ph.] was the first black chair of fine arts at Ohio State University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So anyway I was reading 'Enemies: The Clash of Races,' and he had this article entitled "A Quality of Sharing" [sic., "The Quality of Sharing" from 'Enemies: The Clash of Races']. And it was about man-sharing as a way to help women in our communities and that man wouldn't necessarily be a sexual partner, but would be like a second husband for women who did not have husbands. Story_ID: 174783 Speaker 1: Now explain to us what the crisis was where this would be necessary. Speaker 2: Well, it was after Vietnam [War]. A lot of our men who were in college or who might have been considerable desirable mates, most of them had been killed in the Vietnam War, or when they had come back, they were suffering terribly from posttraumatic stress syndrome, or were now on heavy drugs. And it was just--our community had been decimated by the Vietnam War. And life for African American women during this time was awful. And Haki's [HM Haki Madhubuti] theory was that women are the light of the world and if women were not healthy mentally, emotionally, physically and spiritually that neither would communities and neither would children, and eventually it would be our destruction. And he felt that our men, who were healthy, who were able-bodied, who were whole needed to step up and be those second husbands. Well, and June Jordan had subsequently had written about this as well. I read the article. I read the book. And I was kind of fixated on the article and I said to myself, "This won't happen." But I knew it was happening, and it was happening more than we knew in many places. And I think certainly man-sharing was happening even if it wasn't approved. But if I looked at it as a, as a potential possibility that might help our community, I wasn't sure it would be sanctioned by our community. Maybe a great idea, but not wholeheartedly approved of because I knew women would have a rough time with that, especially if you had a really great man who now felt that he should help two or three of the other women in the neighborhood with their children or with anything that a man might be needed for to help stabilize a family. So what I thought about was if women could learn how to really be friends with each other, actually learn how to love each other and care for each other, and create real sisterhood, that maybe that might help in stabilizing our communities and so A Quality of Sharing was our attempt at helping black women to learn how to love themselves, so that they would be comfortable enough to learn how to really create friendship and bonds of sisterhood with other women to get work done, to literally become change agents right in our own communities, so that became my work. Story_ID: 174784 Speaker 1: Okay, so then the name of the group again was? Speaker 2: A Quality of Sharing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Haki's [HM Haki Madhubuti] article was called "The Quality of Sharing" [from 'Enemies: The Clash of Races']. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you get this group started? I can imagine that women who did not have men flocked probably to the idea, but women that did was--I don't know. Speaker 2: It was not even about having a man. It was really about how could women learn to love themselves and be open to friendships and sisterhood with other women, so that women could become change agents whether they had husbands or not. The majority of the women who first started out with me all had husbands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: So, what was the organizing platform? Was it a church, or a school-- Speaker 2: We met (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --or cultural center? Speaker 2: A recreation center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Betty Stowe [ph.] was the director of Barack [Community] Recreation Center on the south side of Columbus [Ohio], and we held our meetings there Monday nights once a week from seven to nine. But we started out by having a community forum. And I think the community forum was called, "The Needs of Black Women." That's how we started and we invited--this was in 1979. We invited women from our communities all over the city, black women, and had a panel discussion. So somebody talked about religion; somebody talked about taking care of the family, husbands, lives, careers, that kind of thing, looking after children. And it was just for a couple of hours. And we had it at the Model Neighborhood Facility building, 1393 E. Broad Street [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: I have great pictures. Speaker 1: Is model neighborhood out of the Model Cities program? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was great, just conversation. But the idea was and my idea was that women have the power and the grace to change everything if we make our minds up and if we can connect with other women who feel the same way, we could change anything. So that was the premise. Now, before that, I had been reading lots of women's literature because I felt like if God was calling me to do this, then I had to get myself ready. So I had just finished reading a book by Alice Walker, 'In Search of our Mothers' Gardens.' And there was an article about a 19th century African American woman by the name of Rebecca Cox Jackson. Rebecca Cox Jackson was a member of Mother Bethel A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church in Boston [Massachusetts]--in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Richard Allen was the pastor. It was the first church--first A.M.E. church. Anyway, Alice talked about a relationship that Rebecca Cox Jackson had with another woman by the name of Rebecca Jackson [sic., Rebecca Perot]. And in the literature and in the feminist literature, it had been written that the two women were lesbians, and Alice was refuting that, saying that these women were not lesbians, but because they had the same ideals, the same dreams for other black women that they became very close, and they worked together on raising the level of intelligence and economics for black women in the City of Philadelphia. And she and--Rebecca Cox Jackson and this other Rebecca created homes for black women and their children. Rebecca eventually became a Shaker eldress and joined the Shakers in Watervliet, Connecticut [sic., Watervliet, New York]. So the essay was really about the change that women can make when they come together and are joined by the same ideals and the same kind of consciousness. Story_ID: 174785 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure, it's Frances Ellena Curtis Frazier. F-R-A-N-C-E-S, E-L-L-E-N-A, C-U-R-T-I-S, F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 19th, it's coming up, 1948, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I guess I would call myself a national dialogue facilitator and educational consultant. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: May 9th--no, 10th, 2013 [May 10, 2013]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: In my home in Columbus, Ohio. Story_ID: 174786 Speaker 1: I was talking about this women's group that I felt called to gather up. And we called it A Quality of Sharing. And I think the last time we also talked about the fact that I had thought about that name from [HM] Haki Madhubuti's article in his book, 'Enemies: The Clash of Races.' Speaker 2: And this is--just to be clear, it's called, The Quality of Sharing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: --Quality of Sharing. Speaker 1: Right, and his article--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not equality of sharing. Speaker 1: No, not equality. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And not what was the title of the article in Haki's book, A Quality of Sharing 'cause his book really talked about actual sharing of husbandry since our community does not, has not had an equal number of men to support the lives of women and children in any neighborhood. And so his idea was that men could be shared, not necessarily sexually, but as husbands. And I think June Jordan, a sociologist, in [Washington] D.C. had tried an experiment of that. And I think, you know, we know it goes on, but usually without the permission of women. Haki was trying to establish something in the African American community, where women might find sharing a husband or a man serving in a capacity of a husband as a way to ensure the emotional, mental and physical quality of life in a community. I didn't think that would be possible. But I did think that if African American women could come together and learn how to be a community with each other that we might be able to share the resources that we bring together. So it was like any kind of Afro-centric collaborative or collective except with women. And the idea around A Quality of Sharing was that women would learn how--would work on how to become friends with each other since, historically, it appears as if we don't always like each other, or we have a difficult time actually being together more than a few women just being friends. But to think about the opportunity for African American women to be actual change agents in their own communities, to be the change that we really want as [Mahatma] Gandhi would have said, "If you want change, be that change" [sic., "Be the change you wish to see in the world."]. So I--I think we also talked about the fact that the men in our community got really frightened. Well, of course, this was in 1979 and African American women weren't coming together for really anything politically. Story_ID: 174787 Speaker 1: I think the last time women politically came together was around Nannie Burroughs' time, you know what I mean, in, in [Washington] D.C. That's-- Speaker 2: Nannie Burroughs formed the, what was it, the National Organization of Black Women [sic., National Trade and Professional School for Women and Girls]. Speaker 1: Right, and she was an educator, and, you know, women felt that race call. And I don't think we've done anything like that since then or have anything like it now actually. But the idea was if we could come together, we could maybe begin to change some of the systemic things that are going on that, truthfully, we are co-conspirators with. So we started workshops, retreats. But the idea was just for us to figure out how do I see you as my sister for real? How do I learn to love a woman who looks like me but maybe has it going on better than I do, and how can I be okay with that and be okay with how I feel about myself as well? So we had retreats, we had workshops, we did all kinds of things together. And truthfully, this was very frightening to a lot of the so-called male leaders in our city [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Now, how did that manifest itself? I'm interested in how that manifested itself. Speaker 1: People taking me out to lunch and saying, "You know, I just wanna have lunch with you, Fran. How are things going?" You know, that kind of thing, "How's the work going?" And then they'd say, "So what you doing with them women?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I would say, "Nothing, I'm not doing anything with the women. We're just meeting, we're talking, we're getting to know each other." "So why you wanna do that?" "Because if we get to know each other, we might be able to do some change in our community." "So how many women you got?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I'd say, "Well, we started out with seven and we're now probably around 250 women who come in and out of our events." "So, what y'all gonna do?" "Nothing, we aren't getting--we're not gonna be political." "However, gathering seems to be very political." So it was like that. Speaker 2: So these are--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, these are the community people. These are our "leaders." Speaker 2: So these are ministers, politicians? Speaker 1: Ministers, politicians-- Speaker 2: City leaders--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --elected officials, informal leaders, husbands. Now my advocate was Amos Lynch. He was the editor in chief of the Call and Post newspaper. So Amos loved my work, and (laughter) let me write about it every week. He'd give me as much copy as I wanted. But I will tell you this, it was--let's see when, when was--remember the boys were--our boys were being--missing, our young boys in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the '80s [1980s], yeah, early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s,], right like '81 [1981], '82 [1982] somewhere around there? Speaker 2: Nah, I think it went to about '85 [1985] or so. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]? Speaker 2: I mean I think the span of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The span of it, right. Speaker 2: --about four years or five years. Speaker 1: But when it first happened, a number of the women in A Quality of Sharing were teachers, and they were talking about kids were coming to school having dreams about this guy coming to Columbus [Ohio]. And so the boys in a lot of their classes were becoming afraid. So I decided that maybe we should do something in the community to tell our children that they are loved and protected. So I went to Mr. Lynch to talk about this 'cause he was really my strongest advocate. He thought what we were doing was wonderful, and because he had a newspaper, it allowed me to, you know, of course, really talk about the stuff that was important to me. So I went to him and I said, "Mr. Lynch, I wanna do this black youth week for our kids in the community, and what do you think?" He said, "Well, you know, visit some of the youth community leaders and, you know, see what they have to say". So I did. And one pastor--I won't mention the church. His parishioners might see this one day, said to me that I was emotionally disturbed if I thought that God was calling me to do this work, and that really what I needed was shepardizing [ph.]. Have you ever heard of that word before? Speaker 2: Shepardizing. Speaker 1: Shepardizing. Speaker 2: That means subjecting yourself to the-- Speaker 1: A shepherd (laughter). Speaker 2: --guidance of the shepherd--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --like a little sheep or a lamb--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Exactly--a lost sheep actually--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --a lost lamb or a lost sheep. Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Yeah, I needed shepardizing. Speaker 2: It's depicted on many church walls with Jesus, with holding the little lamb. Speaker 1: There you go. So I needed to--I was lost and needed to be in a church. Story_ID: 174788 Speaker 1: And, you know, at that time, what was I doing? Mostly meditating at that time. I don't even think I was in a church. Speaker 2: Now, this is for--I mean in the last--I think we had talked about--I think your husband [Ron Frazier] had passed just before. Speaker 1: Oh, right, exactly. Speaker 2: And so there was period of time, I don't know if you were working, or you were trying to recover from it. Speaker 1: Actually, you know, we were talking, I was trying to think what was I doing back then I mean for income? I don't have a clue. I think--well, I--okay, I know where I was. I was with the Ohio Association for Retarded Citizens and I was traveling the, right, I was traveling the State of Ohio, training around deinstitutionalization. That's what I was doing. But the--as I was saying to you earlier, the work that I did in the community was like really what I felt I was really supposed to be doing. So the professional work was almost incidental. However, I was having a huge impact around the State of Ohio for the work I was doing in the deinstitutionalization field around mental retardation. I mean and I'm still finding out how huge that impact was. Story_ID: 174789 Speaker 1: Anyway, so I, so I started going around the community, talking to these community leaders, and, truthfully, I don't know maybe they, maybe they were used to white women, you know, wanting to do things in the black community. I don't think they were used to black women back then wanting to do things in the black community for free. And so I was just getting fluffed off left and right. So I went back to Mr. [Amos] Lynch, and I said, "Okay, you're gonna have to help me out." So he told me to go see Clifford Tyree. Cliff Tyree was the director of community services for the City of Columbus [Ohio]. And I think back then, the mayor was Mayor Tom Moody--I'm almost sure of it. And the mayor was a pretty decent guy. So Clifford and I worked together and for one year, we had Black Youth Week. And it went very well. Speaker 2: So this would be in '80 [1980] or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, this was still in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: About 1980? This is in the '80s [1980s], okay. Speaker 1: Like maybe '82 [1982]. Speaker 2: Okay, so 1982. Speaker 1: Right, right around '82 [1982]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Black Youth Week. Speaker 1: Black Youth Week, and so it was from a Sunday to a Sunday. So we got black businesses, black franchise owners of Wendy's and McDonald's to put signs up in their marquee, you know, Black Youth Week. And so if you came into a black business, and you brought your son, or your daughter, or your cousin, or your niece, or nephew, you would get half off of whatever you purchased. And we'd bring in keynote speakers to talk to youth. It was wonderful. It really was and the churches would talk about black youth on Sunday and it would be in June, so that it would end on Father's Day. So whatever that week was, it would start on Sunday and it would end on that Sunday, which would be Father's Day. And so we would celebrate African American men and their children. And during the week, we would highlight families who had done great things. So that went really well. So then the next year, we started Black Family Week, so not just for the youth, but we would include the entire family. And on--was it Thursday? On Thursday's, Thursday of that week, Mr. Lynch--we would ask families to send in pictures and stories about themselves. And we also had--we also highlighted an adoptive black family and a foster care black family. And the whole newspaper [Call and Post, Columbus, Ohio] had its own pull out section on black families. It was fabulous. Every year, we did that. And then the Ohio Department of Human Services [later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services]-- Speaker 2: So how many years you think (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Oh, ten at least. Speaker 2: Okay, ten years? Speaker 1: At least, every year. Speaker 2: So this is '82 [1982] through '92 [1992]? Speaker 1: At least. Speaker 2: At least, okay. It was a regular-- Speaker 1: It was a regular annual event that was just incredible. And Clifford would always find young people who were doing great things to be keynote speakers. And we would invite them to a church or to a school and they would speak, and then we had the pull-out section in the Call and Post on black families. We'd have one evening--one day where we would encourage families to do things together, have dinner together, go on an outing together. We had workshops during the week. It was wonderful. Story_ID: 174790 Speaker 1: And, at the same time, I was still--so this was all volunteer. You know, I was--I really feel like that was just a mission of who I was from my family 'cause my older brothers and sisters, they were very, very active and involved in their communities as well. They did all kind of things too. So let's see--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, this is--did the ministers eventually get on board-- Speaker 1: Eventually got on board-- Speaker 2: --to. Speaker 1: Right, because it wasn't me organizing women. You know, so they got on board with Black Family Week. Meanwhile, they were still calling me into their offices. So, I won't, I won't mention Pastor [Charles] Booth, but--(laughter) anyway, he, he is an incredible preacher, just incredible. And I joined his church [Mount Olivet Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio] for a while, not to be baptized--not to be a Baptist but to just be a part of that church community because it was incredible, that church community. It really was. Speaker 2: Was this a large Columbus [Ohio] church? Speaker 1: Yeah, but it wasn't a mega church. But it was large. Speaker 2: What was the name--may as well get the name of it? Speaker 1: Might as well, Mount Olivet Baptist. Speaker 2: Okay, Mouth Olivet, okay. Speaker 1: Reverend Charles--well Reverend Dr. Charles Booth. So, and because it has such a wonderful story, I really wanted to kind of acknowledge him. But at first, he wasn't too happy with me because he, he invited me to tell me that I was taking women from his church. But really what I think was happening was that they were trying to figure out who was gonna talk to me 'cause I tended to be too independent, I wasn't married; I was on the--I had a radio show every Sunday, saying exactly what I wanted to talk about. Speaker 2: Now, what was your radio? Speaker 1: It was called, Focus on the Family. Speaker 2: Okay, and it was on? Speaker 1: It was on WVKO, which was our black radio station back then. Speaker 2: Is this FM? Speaker 1: No, AM, 1580 on your radio dial. Speaker 2: W--I'm sorry? Speaker 1: WVKO. Speaker 2: --VKO, okay. Speaker 1: And, at first, James Evans, he was the station manager. He had me--and then Bob Cunningham--I was on WCOL for a while and then Bob went over to WVKO. And it was called, Focus on the Family, and it was me for about a minute and a half every Sunday. Speaker 2: Okay, so just a minute and a half? Speaker 1: Just a minute and a half. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I would just do vignettes on black, on black family issues. They were spiritual, they were emotional. Or if there was something going on in the black community that I felt needed to be addressed, I did that, but consistently, as a volunteer, every Sunday for a long time, eight, nine, ten years. It was wonderful-- Story_ID: 174791 Speaker 1: So, I just remembered something. So, anyway, so I'm driving down the street and, you know, like I said, I have a heavy foot, and this policeman stopped me. And he said, "Ma'am, you know, show me your driver's license." So I showed him the driver's license. He said, "Fran Frazier, Focus on the Family, WVKO, Fran Frazier?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Just, just be careful, Ms. Frazier, the next time." (Laughter) So the show was--in fact, I can tell you two weeks ago, I was at a friend's graduation. She just got her master's, Lynette [ph.], and her cousin was in the house. And Lynette was introducing me around to her family and her cousin said--Kelly [ph.], said, "Fran Frazier, used to be on the radio?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "Oh, my God." So she went, she said, "I'm gonna go wash my hands." So she went and washed her hands and came back and shook my hand. She said, I just--she said, "Thank you so much." So I guess these shows were really important to the community 'cause I always ran--and I used to end the show with "We can make a difference, love and light." (Laughter) It was a tag line. But, anyway, I loved doing them. And so, anyway, I talked about everything. I really did. People really loved them. Speaker 2: Okay. This is how long--did the show last for ten-- Speaker 1: Yeah, 10 years. Speaker 2: Ten years, okay. Speaker 1: Went through, we went through a lot of changes, so maybe I would be off for a couple of months and, you know, then come back. We had to convince people why it was such a great thing to keep on. And it wasn't--it didn't have a sponsor. You know, it wasn't like Focus on the Family is brought to you by, you know, Crowe and Associates. It was just, here's Focus on the Family with Fran Frazier. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so this is, so every Sunday-- (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Every Sunday on Gospel Caravan. Speaker 2: On Gospel Caravan, okay. Speaker 1: Right, with Bob Cunningham and then with Alvis Moore 'cause Bob was on the radio for a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah, these kind of shows are in every city pretty much. Speaker 1: Right, exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: Sunday morning gospel shows-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --as people eat their breakfast when they get up to go to church. Speaker 1: That's right. From six to noon, six hours--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Six to noon. Yeah, that's the--so you were on once during that six hours--(simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: No, no, he would, he would play it a couple times, but sometimes I would go to the studio and do it right then, or he would tape it, and then just air it like maybe at six [o'clock], at nine [o'clock], you know, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 174792 Speaker 1: You were saying before we came in--and we may have even discussed it the last time, that volunteer life eclipses sometimes the work life-- Speaker 2: Oh my goodness! Speaker 1: -- because of-- Speaker 2: Because that's where the passion was, that's where the call was. Although the work I did was also passion. I think by '85 [1985]--oh, I know, between '81 [1981] and '85 [1985], I worked for the Child Abuse Prevention Program [sic., Child Assault Prevention Project]. Sally Cooper was the director, CAP, that's right, Child Abuse Prevention. And actually, I found the job in the Call and Post. They were looking for a part-time writer to develop a curriculum for special needs kids on child abuse prevention. And they hired me because my--you know, I have a undergraduate degree from Norfolk State [College, later, Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] in special ed [special education] and a master's from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in learning disabilities and behavioral disorders. So it looked like I was good. Speaker 1: But you were hired basically as a publicist for them, I mean to write content (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No, I actually wrote the curriculum. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so you wrote, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I actually wrote the curriculum. Speaker 1: So you wrote a curriculum, okay. Speaker 2: Right, and then we tested it out on special needs kids and, what's the word--refined it. And then I think it was used around the country for quite some time. But Sally Cooper was, is, still, an incredible women, but she was well, she was politically connected. And she was good friends with the governor's wife at that time. The governor was Richard Celeste, Democrat, and his wife, Dagmar Celeste, who was an incredible feminist. And so Sally was always doing stuff with Dagmar. So I-- Speaker 1: Now, Sally, African American? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Truthfully, a lot of--I would say my feminist peers were white women. I was real active in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. And there weren't many black women active in our YWCA at the time. Story_ID: 174793 Speaker 1: Okay, you had mentioned the YWCA's [Young Women's Christian Association]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I know you've been really active with the YWCA. Speaker 2: I was, I was really active with the YWCA. And--let's see, I'm trying to get my dates correct here. Grace Williams, [HM] Dorothy Height and several other women were "Y" women, and actually it was Grace and Dorothy--I shouldn't call Mrs. Height, Dorothy, just out of respect, shouldn't do it, Dr. Height, I can call Grace, Grace though, but Grace Williams and Dr. Height were two of a very few African American women in the YW movement at that time, who pushed for the direction of the "Y" now, which is the elimination of racism by any means necessary. So Grace and Dr. Height were really responsible for that particular focus of the "Y." So I just wanted to say that because I think it's important. Speaker 1: So it wasn't just the largesse of the white women? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, this was a big push by the African American women, who were very active in the "Y" and had voice in the "Y." Speaker 1: But, but when they called for it, the membership heeded the call. Speaker 2: Membership, exactly, exactly because I think that when Grace and Dr. Height, and all these--and the other African American women, at that time, you know, it was late '50s [1950s], going into the '60s [1960s], and so this was a time when the civil rights of African Americans needed organizations like the "Y" to step up, the YW to step up. So I think that's where that push came from. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: But anyway, so I was saying that a lot of my peers at that time, feminist peers, were white women, not that I didn't have many African American women around me because I did because A Quality of Sharing was still going on. And so we were still--I mean all these things are happening simultaneously. Story_ID: 174794 Speaker 1: Now, I've interviewed a number of black women, who are womanist, and different other, I mean spin-offs of a feminist--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, and do you consider yourself--what do you think about the labels-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, I think that I am probably more of a womanist than I am a feminist, but, in that time, we didn't have--well, actually we did have Alice Walker back then, probably in the middle '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was emerging as--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, in the middle '80s [1980s] because she had written 'In Search of our Mothers' Gardens.' And it's in that book that she coins the phrase, the term womanist, because womanist was--oh, let me see if I can remember. So a womanist was somebody she said that would, would say, you know, "I care about women, but I also need to go back and get the men and the children, and I'm taking them to Canada, and I'll do whatever I need to do, and your mother says, 'Well, I just--I ain't surprised at that. You know, you do what you have to do.'" And so a womanist was that person who literally cared for women and what was happening to women and wanting to move them out of any kind of second-class citizenship but also cared for her family as well and would move everybody to a new place. So, so I would definitely be a womanist. But at that time in the "Y" [Young Women's Christian Association, YWCA] white women were certainly not calling themselves womanist, they were calling themselves feminist. So anyway, I was--got really involved with them. I lived down the street from the governor's mansion in Bexley [Ohio] in an apartment complex, actually called Bexley Plaza. And so Dagmar [Celeste], the governor's wife, actually lived about maybe four or five blocks from where I lived and she started a, a feminist theological study group, and--which I became a member of. And that's how I kind of got to know women who were thinking about feminist and womanist theology. And then I--oh, '85 [1985], so I, I was also learning more and more about the self-agency of a woman who begins to feel her own power about how she can create change. And so I think these discussions and the work with A Quality of Sharing just kinda gave me more energy, more, a sense of my own--I can--a sense of my own womanist power that, not single-handedly, I don't think you can do anything by yourself, but if you have the vision and the energy, you can make it contagious enough that other women will want to join you in creating change. And so I think I was coming into my own sense of power about that. Speaker 1: Now, the word power is a scary concept to a lot of people. They don't--you know, they have different definitions of it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But what do you mean when you say power? Speaker 2: Energy--I got excited. I get excited about what--when you live in the hood, you know [siren in background] (laughter). Speaker 1: Sirens. Speaker 2: Yeah, you get sirens, everything. I got excited about what could happen and so it fueled me. It, it gave me energy. I was always thinking about what we could do and what women could do, what we could say. So, you know, I'm on the radio, I'm--we're gathering up women and we're having these weekly meetings, you know, I'm doing Black Family Week, and now Clifford [Tyree] and I had gotten a contract with the state. So we were starting Black Family Week organizations in twelve cities. So I mean I was just excited about my life, I think. Story_ID: 174795 Speaker 1: And I'm learning more and more about--I'm reading. I'm gobbling up all this information about 19th century African American women, who feel like they have been called by God to speak to black women about liberation through the spirit of God. I mean it's just--it's heady and it's exciting. Speaker 2: Just give us some names of some of those 19th century women--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --'cause this is important history. Speaker 1: Rebecca Cox Jackson, Amanda Berry Smith, and I think Amanda was with A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]. Rebecca Cox Jackson, you know, was a member of Mother Bethel A.M.E. [Church] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with Richard Allen. Speaker 2: I think we mentioned them last time. Speaker 1: We did. Speaker 2: We need to go on and, yeah, Rebecca Cox Jackson. Speaker 1: Right, Regina--Jarena Lee. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, Maria W. Stewart, we certainly can't forget her. She was phenomenal. And Mariah was the first woman, white or black, to actually have her speeches published. And they were published by--who was the big abolitionist back in the-- Speaker 2: Garrison. Speaker 1: Well, Garrison. Speaker 2: Or you mean the white abolitionist? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was William Lloyd Garrison. Speaker 1: William Lloyd Garrison and she was big friends with David Walker, who wrote '[David] Walker's Appeal.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So definitely Maria W. Stewart--in fact, Maria W. Stewart was such a spiritual mentor for me that when I was asked to speak at conferences and women's groups, I would read her speeches from the, from the late 1800s, 1832. In fact, her speech on the Afric-Female--to the Afric-Female Intelligence Society [African American Female Intelligence Society of Boston], 1890 [sic., 1832]-- Speaker 2: --I love that name. Speaker 1: --oh, my God, it was--her speech was incredible. So I would read her speeches. She would say, "Black women, awake and arise. Now, is the time for you to stand up." I mean they were incredible speeches. Speaker 2: So these, these are being made you know around--in the late 1820s, 1830s? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, 1830s. So, so those were the women that really--let me see who else I can think of, oh, Fannie Barrier Williams, oh my goodness. Let's see, Nannie Burroughs, you know. She was incredible. You know, she wrote something that was like "Kill the Uncle Toms" [sic., "Unload Your Uncle Toms" speech]. She was, oh, she was--she had no patience for people who were not gonna be race people. I think that's about all I can remember. Speaker 2: Ida B. Wells was-- (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, well, Ida B. Wells, of course, yeah, yeah, very well known--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --but she-- Speaker 1: But these are women that you hadn't heard of before. Speaker 2: Callie House, did you discuss her? Speaker 1: No, I didn't. Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll talk about her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She formed a reparations group-- Speaker 1: Oh, really. Speaker 2: --a national reparations group after, during Reconstruction. Speaker 1: During Reconstruction, really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And there was another woman, I can't call her name, created a secret society of women in Norfolk, Virginia because when I went to, when I went back to Norfolk, I went back to this, it was, abandoned place now where these women used to meet. And I cannot think of her or her name but I do remember the work. Speaker 2: Now it was like, would it be like a Masonic organization? Speaker 1: It was similar to a Masonic but it wasn't the Eastern Stars or anything like that but similar to that kind of organization. Story_ID: 174796 Speaker 1: So you're recouping this history-- Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: --and rescuing and reconstructing this history of African American women doing organizing-- Speaker 2: Organizing-- Speaker 1: --for social change. Speaker 2: --for social change. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it was just exciting. So my dear friend, Gwen Gardner, was traveling to Africa quite a bit, and she'd heard about this End of the Decade World Conference for Women [sic., Third World Conference on Women], and NGO conference, nongovernmental organizations, in Nairobi, Kenya. [President] Ronald Reagan was president then. And the only reason why I remember that is because when we got ready to go to Nairobi, they, the hotel we were gonna stay at, Ronald Reagan's daughter was staying at a hotel close by, so they closed down all the hotels and nobody could get in right away. It took us a week. But let me tell you how I got there. So anyway, so Gwen was telling me about going to Nairobi, and you had to come up with at least $2,500. It's like, "I don't have that kind of money. Where am I gonna get that kind of money?" So a friend of mine was president of city council then, but he was, he was on city council for a long time and then became president of city council. And I'm not sure, he--I guess he was--his name is Jerry Hammond, one of the most well-loved, African American men in this city [Columbus, Ohio]. He loved black people, and he made things happen for black people. And he did not--he was not afraid of opening his mouth. He was great. So I saw him some place. And I said, "Jerry, I want city council to give me $2,500 and send me to Nairobi, Kenya." He said, "What, Frazier?" I said, "I want city council to give me $2,500 so I can go to Nairobi, Kenya." He said, "City council hasn't sent a black woman around the corner, and you want us to send you to--." I said, "I certainly do." And I said, "If you don't," I said, "you know I know a lot of women, you know, and you're going to be running soon." So, he knew I was joking. He said, "Okay, I'll try to figure this out." So he went to the mayor, who was Buck Rinehart at that time, Richard Rinehart [sic., Dana Rinehart], and said, "I want to send Fran to Nairobi, Kenya." So I know the mayor laughed, I know he did. And so the thing was, "Fran, we just can't send a citizen of the city to Nairobi, Kenya who has no relationship at all with the city, is not an employee." So they had to send somebody from the city to Nairobi, Kenya and then they would figure out how I would go. Jerry found the money, and so I agreed that when I came back, I would do a community-wide slide presentation, talk about what we did, and I would do it at the "Y" [Young Women's Christian Association, YWCA]. So that was the agreement. So the mayor sent Marie Hardy, no Marie Harden [ph.] and myself to represent the City of Columbus, Ohio at the End of the Decade World Conference for Women in Nairobi, Kenya. And it was absolutely the most mind-changing experience of my life. Twenty-two days in Africa--I had never been to Africa. This was my first time, and I felt like I was from Nairobi, Kenya. I felt like I had gone home. It was amazing. I did not feel foreign. I did not feel like I was a black woman going home, you know. I just felt like this is where I belonged. I met the most incredible women, market women, bank presidents. Story_ID: 174797 Speaker 1: We--and I don't know how this all happened because you were kind of like on your own in Nairobi, Kenya, but I met a, like a media person--maybe somebody like Bradley, Bradley--what's his first name? Speaker 2: Ed Bradley? Speaker 1: Ed Bradley, somebody like Ed Bradley in Nairobi, and he took tons of pictures of me and the women I was with [at the Third World Conference on Women]. And he got us into all kinds of receptions with the president, the president's wife. We went to, oh, we went to many receptions that probably would have never gotten into 'cause, you know, we were just women going to the conference. Speaker 2: Now, who was the president then (unclear)? Speaker 1: Oh, I do not remember. I don't. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of it myself and I can't--I'm drawing a blank here. Speaker 1: But his wife was very active in the women's community, and so it was just wonderful. Speaker 2: Now, was Wangari Maathai involved? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, but I didn't know her then. You know, I was just, I was just awestruck. Speaker 2: Did you hear her speak or anything or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did hear her speak, yes-- Speaker 2: --find out what she was doing? Speaker 1: --yes, knew what she was doing. Speaker 2: She organized women and just, you know. Speaker 1: Right, but this was, so this was in '85 [1985]. So, she was just early starting out. But one of the things that happened maybe that first four or five days, even if you couldn't speak each other's language--'cause there were like fifteen thousand women from around the world, I mean literally around the world. No matter where you were from, there were certain things about you being a woman that you could share with a woman from anywhere, from Bangladesh, from Sweden, from Canada, from a small village, from Ghana, I mean just everywhere, small island off the, off the coast of South America. No matter where you were from, it was like--it was like all the men of the world had gone some place, agreed how they were gonna treat women, and then went back home because no matter where this woman was from, we all had the same stories about childbirth. We all had the same menstruation stories. We had all the same horrible stories about how we were treated in every place. You know, women were raped in every place, they were beat up in every place; they, they, women talked about their stories of misogyny, they talked about their rights of passage stories that were awful, just--and then somehow this gloriousness of being a woman and finding your own voice, and your own sense of agency, and not wanting to lose that. It was, it was miraculous. I came back home, and I was, I was so fired up. And what I said to my friends is, "When these--when I meet with these white women and we start talking about policy--" because at that time in Columbus [Ohio], the white women were starting to galvanize around women's health issues. And I was right there at the table, sometimes one of maybe two black women or sometimes the only black woman. And so one of the things that I said was-- Story_ID: 174798 Speaker 1: Okay, you said in Columbus [Ohio] white women were organizing around health issues (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were organizing around health issues. That, that was one of the really big issues in our state. And Judi Moseley, white woman, was working for the Ohio Department of Health and she was the director of women's health for the State of Ohio. And so she was bringing women together just to talk about the disparity in women's health and the kind of things we could do. Riverside [Methodist] Hospital [Columbus, Ohio] was beginning to conceptualize the Elizabeth Blackwell Center. And Elizabeth Blackwell was one of the first doctors either, I think in the country, first woman doctor in the country, but certainly here. And Annie Argo, whose husband was the founder of Argo and Lehne Jewelers was the chair of this women's health initiative because she was gonna be the first director of the Elizabeth Blackwell Center at Riverside Hospital. So she was pulling all these women together. We were talking about health disparities, blah, blah, blah. So I was part of that already. So when I got back from Kenya [after attending the Third World Conference on Women], I was like, okay, I'm not being a member of anything unless I'm gonna be a policy member. I was very clear about that. I was not gonna be invited to be a token or anything. Now, I wasn't, but, you know, I just--I came back militant, you know like, you know, I'm putting down exactly what my standards are gonna be and you know, what I'm gonna be doing, and they were like, okay, you know, whatever you want. We love you. Story_ID: 174799 Speaker 1: So then about two years after Kenya, '87 [1987], I had an opportunity to go to Moscow, Russia [sic., Soviet Union] and I was--actually I was getting ready to get into a Ph.D. program at the Union Institute [& University] in Cincinnati [Ohio], but the trip to Moscow was at the same time of that first week of school. Speaker 2: This is 1987, right? Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this, the dean there wouldn't--I don't know what she thought. I guess people still had strong feelings about communism and socialism, and so she wasn't happy about me not going to that first week of school, and told me that if I went to Moscow, I couldn't come that year. So. Speaker 2: This was still Cold War period in some ways. Speaker 1: Well, it is. Speaker 2: --in some ways, 'cause, though--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's true. Speaker 2: Soviet Union was still-- Speaker 1: Yeah, [Mikhail] Gorbachev was still--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --considered the enemy. Speaker 1: Exactly. However, they invited several hundred women to come to Moscow in '87 [1987]. So I--I went to my friends at the "Y" [Young Women's Christian Association, YWCA], went to my women friends, and I mean the money they gave me was just incredible, really and truly. I felt like Ida B. Wells when after these white men had burned down her newspaper office, and the women's groups from New York and New Jersey raised all of this money to send her to England so that she could tell her story there and let people in London [England] know what was going on around lynching of black men. So my journey, of course, was not that deep. I didn't see it like that, but just the fact that women just, you know, came together. They had this big reception. I remember it so clearly. I had on this (laughter) yellow, yellow dress. I was standing up, telling them about what, how amazing it would be for me to go and the kind of things that I would do when I got, get back and share with them. And I think at that one meeting in '87 [1987], I must have--they must have given me two thousand dollars right there. It was amazing. So I went to Moscow, saw The Bolshoi [Ballet]. It was incredible, absolutely incredible. Jesse Jackson's [HM Reverend Jesse Jackson] wife, Jackie [Jacqueline Lavinia Brown], was, was in that group as well. And we learned so much about women and the role of women and women's communities then. We were there for, I don't know, seven to ten days, I think. It was just amazing. So all of this was feeding my desire to move women, and in particular African American women, to like the next step. And I was working for the Ohio Department of Human Services [later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services] by then. I was the director of prevention initiatives, and then I moved up and became the director of cultural initiatives. And then--I was there for eleven years. And then by, by '92 [1992] or '3 [1993], I was the administrator, state administrator for cultural initiatives and reported directly to the state director. And my job then--so you see how this all kind of just fit in? So my job was to help our state department become more culturally competent in its regulatory approaches and policies to Appalachian, African American, Hispanic and Native American families and children. So it was incredible work. And actually the state diversity committee that I started with twenty-two county agencies now has over--I mean we're talking twenty some years now, now has over forty-five county agencies out of eighty-eight, still doing diversity work. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 174800 Speaker 1: Okay, so from 1990, I guess to 2001, you're working for the Ohio, State of Ohio, correct? Speaker 2: I am. Well, I--let's see from '87 [1987] to '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm working for them [Ohio Department of Human Services, later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services] as an employee as the administrator for cultural initiatives. So by '98 [1998], I've got this feeling, this intuition that it's time for me to go. And truthfully, I'm a little nervous about this feeling, and the state director that I'd been working with, the administration had changed, so he was leaving. We were literally in the middle of welfare reform. And at that time, I was working specifically with the faith-based community statewide, getting churches and church--religious-related organizations involved in empowering families and children who had been on assistance. I loved that work and I was really good at it, and so I was meeting new sets of people all over the state. But about two years of being into the work by then--maybe three, I don't know--I kept getting this spiritual nudge to leave. And I was making great money. I was a state employee, great benefits, but I had this feeling, it was--I had to go. Now, at the same time, I was in a master's-level program to become a spiritual director in the legacy of spiritual directors within the Catholic Church. I had, I had started going back to the Catholic Church because, you know, my roots are in Catholicism--went to private schools for twelve years, entered the convent my, my first year--my first or second year at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], but only stayed for a year, but always had this calling, if you will. So probably around '96 [1996], I was in--I was probably really in this master's-level training on the art of giving spiritual direction and spiritual formation. It was pretty intense training for almost, almost two-and-a-half years. Story_ID: 174801 Speaker 1: So what would you be? Some sort of a lay counselor in the Catholic church or something or a role--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, actually a spiritual director and within--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Is that actually a paid position or is that a volunteer position or what? Speaker 2: No, well, it's--let's see, people pay you for spiritual direction. So it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: As a consultant or-- Speaker 2: Well, as a--you're not a counselor, but you are someone within the Catholic Church, and now it's actually very ecumenical. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you are a person who helps someone in their--well, actually you don't even help. You facilitate their journey towards God. Speaker 1: So is this a diocesan position? Is it within the diocese? Speaker 2: No, no. No, no, it's--there are have spiritual directors for over two thousand years. Speaker 1: Okay, so they're not a part of necessarily a church, or are they? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You are--for the longest time, spiritual directors were usually priests or nuns. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I would think, you know, cause I--I know the Catholic Church is hierarchical. It's hard for me to understand them having, letting someone else be a spiritual director. You know, so I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, well, things have changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And actually things started changing right after Vatican II [Second Vatican Council, 1962 - 1965]. And lay people began to have more of a role in the church because lay people are the church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the--Shalem Institute [for Spiritual Formation] out of Washington, D.C. is one of the foremost spiritual formation training institutes for spiritual directors, and so our training here is Shalem Institute training. So you are a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How do you spell their name? Speaker 2: Shalem, uh-huh, S-H-A-L-E-M. Speaker 1: Shalem. Okay. It's like Salem or Salaam or peace? Speaker 2: S-H-A-. Speaker 1: S-H-A-- Speaker 2: Like peace. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a spiritual director is someone who journeys with you as you, as you explore your life with God. I have a spiritual director now. And I am spiritual director to--but you have to be trained, I mean it's, it's--you're getting a master's in-- Speaker 1: So this is a lay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --spiritual formation. Speaker 1: --institution that's part, it's Catholic, but it's not of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it's not Catholic anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: But it's an institution of professional people who are trained in spiritual formation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, it's like getting a master's in spiritual formation. It's getting a master's in, a master's degree in how God moves in the lives of people. So you are trained in theology, you are trained in listening, you are trained in the power of silence. You are trained in the enneagram, you are trained in dreams. You are trained in all the ways in which there are prayer. And you take all of that information, all of that training, all of that within your own self and within--it's how you open yourself up to the voice of God, so that you can help someone else also hear the voice of God and see God in their lives. So it's not for everybody, but it is an incredible journey because you have to do all this yourself for yourself before you can ever do it for anyone else. And so, and there are all kinds of certifications, as a retreat director and, you know, that kind of thing. But, so anyway, so that's what I was working on, taking classes. I mean, it's very intense. Story_ID: 174802 Speaker 1: And so I felt that that's what I wanted to be doing [working as a spiritual director], but it just felt like it was time for me leave there [Ohio Department of Human Services, later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services], but I had no job to go to. I hadn't saved up any money, and people were saying, "Oh, I know you've saved up at least a year's worth of money." (Shakes head no). Speaker 2: You were distracted and-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: You were distracted from what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, I wasn't. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, no, I wasn't distracted. It was just time to move on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But didn't know how to move on. So, you know, so my prayer was, "All right, God, if you really want me to do this, you gotta give me some sign. I just don't wanna be stepping out and I'm just out there." So, and so I can't, I can't give you a logical reason for why I would leave a high-paying job and step out on nothing, but that's what I felt, and so I had to trust that. I had been trusting it for a couple decades by then, so I might as well trust it now. But I kept getting these signs that it was gonna be okay, but not like, signs like, "Fran, don't worry about it." You know, not those kind of signs. So I went to work the next day and I said, I said, you know, last night, I talked to my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis]. I said, "You all know that I'm in this master's training program, so I'm gonna--my--," this was October. I said, "I'm leaving in November," and so the new state director was like, "what?" And I said, "I'm leaving--I'm gonna give you a month's notice so you can find somebody, but I'm leaving." "Leaving to do what?" "Well, I just wanna do some women's work." "Ah, you cannot go." So here's the thing. They were afraid that the pastors and the religious community that I was working with--'cause I literally was bringing faith-based community into welfare reform. They were so afraid that the pastors were gonna think that they had gotten rid of me because there was a new governor and a new director. Speaker 2: Who was the governor then? This is-- Speaker 1: [George] Voinovich. Speaker 2: So [Richard "Dick"] Celeste left-- Speaker 1: And Voinovich was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Voinovich-- Speaker 1: Voinovich was already there. Speaker 2: Now, Voinovich is a Republican? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and Celeste was a Democrat? Speaker 1: Right, and the director at that time was a black Republican from [Washington] D.C., Arnold Tompkins, fabulous man. He had such a vision for poor people and people of color. It was incredible. But anyway he was leaving. Voinovich was putting somebody else in there and the guy who was the interim was like, "Fran, you cannot leave." I said, "Well, I--but I'm leaving." So here's what they did. (Laughter) So the Christian people would say, "This is exactly how God works." They made me a consultant. They gave me the same amount of money that I was making before, gave me extra money so I could pay for my health benefits, let me have my same huge office that overlooked the state house, and gave me all the resources and all the secretaries I needed as a consultant. It was incredible, so I did that. So after two years, I was getting kinda happy doing it like that and, but I felt God saying, "Okay, you know, you gotta go." So I left, still with no job. But I tell you, three months later, work just started coming. Story_ID: 174803 Speaker 1: People started calling--oh, I know what happened 'cause this is how I got into girls' work. I--two things were happening by then, two big things. Speaker 2: So this is, now, we're in 2000 now, I guess? Speaker 1: No, we're in '98 [1998], '96 [1996], '98 [1998] when I left [Ohio Department of Human Services, later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services]. Speaker 2: You left in '98 [1998] and then--? Speaker 1: Right, so then now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So two years later-- Speaker 1: --I'm around 2000. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm-- Speaker 1: Right, around 2000. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But between '96 [1996] and 2000, two things happened. All right one, master's-level training in spiritual direction, and I had started with Charlene Morgan a Women's Day of Prayer. Charlene and I were--Charlene was the president of the Columbus School Board and all of her sisters, all nine of them, I think one brother, were incredibly active in Columbus [Ohio]. And their mother was one of the first women preachers, nondenominational women preachers in the city. So the whole family was an activist family. Well, Charlene and I were really close, really liked each other. And by that time, I had also co-founded the, a chapter of the National Black Women's Health Project [later, Black Women's Health Imperative]. So I was working with Byllye Avery and [HM] Angela Davis, and just a--Loretta Ross, just a host of activist women. And so Charlene was also a part of all of the work I was doing around black women's health here in the city and in the state. But anyway, we were talking about pregnancy our girls becoming pregnant, and what to do, all these services and still girls weren't availing themselves of it and what could we do about it. And we decided we could pray, so we had a, such an informal kinda thing. We invited women to meet us in Franklin Park [Conservatory, Columbus, Ohio] to pray one day. Story_ID: 174804 Speaker 1: Oh, and also by this time, I was a member of Second Baptist Church [Columbus, Ohio]. Reverend Dr. Leon Troy was the pastor. Pastor Troy was also an activist. He was on the school board. His sons, all the Troy men have made their mark on the city, the state and the country. They are incredible men, and their mother, Bernice Troy, is just a wonderful, wonderful woman. Speaker 2: So were they doing similar, same sort of work or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no. They were--Pastor Troy was an incredible politician in the city. So he was one of those pastors that people went to, to get permission to do stuff, to get him involved 'cause if he sanctioned it was, it was a wonderful thing. And pastor also knew how to stand up for his people and make things happen for his people. But the reason why I joined (laughter), the reason why I joined Second Baptist--also Second Baptist was--do you know like the church where all the black who's-who would go to? That was pretty much Second Baptist. That was [HM] Ray Miller's church. It was a ton of people's church, all the activists. If you wanted to make something happen, then Second Baptist was probably the church you belonged to. But at that time, between '96 [1996] and say 2000, I was like in and out of church, but not like, you know. And even when I was going through the spiritual formation thing, I wasn't totally back in the Catholic church yet. Story_ID: 174805 Speaker 1: But anyway, Charlene [Morgan] and I invited these women to have prayer in the park, but we were just having prayer in the park [Franklin Park Conservatory, Columbus, Ohio]. Pastor [Leon] Troy came to see what we were doing, and got the city to open up one of the buildings in the park because it started to rain. I came to Pastor Troy because he had been talking to Amos Lynch, the managing editor of the black newspaper here, the Call and Post. And they had decided that since I didn't have a husband and since I was out here just doing my own thing with no man's permission, absolutely--that--well, you know, back then black women weren't just doing their own thing. And so I needed some kind of protector. So if I--if people like got mad at me, they could go to a man and say, "Hey, get her in line." Like at this point--right--at this point, there was no man they could go to 'cause I didn't even have a boyfriend then. Speaker 2: So this is 2000? Speaker 1: Yeah, this is in '96 [1996], 2000. Speaker 2: Okay, this is '96 [1996] to 2000. Speaker 1: Yeah, during this time (laughter). So they decided that I would be under Pastor Troy. So Pastor Troy came to me and he said, "I want you to join my church 'cause you need a covering." I said, "A what?" "A covering." So I joined Pastor Troy's church. So now if I did something and somebody wanted to say something about it, they had to go to Pastor Troy. Speaker 2: Or if they wanted to stop you from doing something, they could go to him and say, "Stop her." Speaker 1: Right, but Pastor Troy didn't--he would say, "Now, daughter, you know, you may have to watch that language a little bit" or, you know, something like that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Around--I don't know--2000, 2003, 2004, somewhere around there, a little black girl was riding her bike, and two boys, two blacks boys, one nine, one eleven, threw her off her bike and beat her up. I was outraged. And I was meeting with a group of pastors for something. Oh, I know, I was pushing them to get more involved with domestic violence. Speaker 2: Now, this is still before 2000? This is-- Speaker 1: It's all around. Speaker 2: While you're--okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, so, so maybe by now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --by now we're into 2000, 2005, 2000, somewhere around there. We're in the 2000s. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so in 2000s. So this, so you're actually--you have completed the training [at Shalem Institute in Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 1: Com--oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Completed the training, being a spiritual director for some people. Speaker 2: Now, how did--well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: How did Pastor Troy feel about you being a spiritual director? Was that okay, or did he even have an opinion (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't think he had a feel for it. And it wasn't something I was-- Speaker 2: It wasn't a formal sort of--? Speaker 1: I wasn't advertising--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, we had, oh, yeah, we had a ceremony and everything. But I was the only African American women in that group. We started out with twenty-some people and ended up with maybe sixteen, seventeen. Speaker 2: These are men and women? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, um-hum, all white from various religions. So, you know, this, you don't put a shingle out, you know. So, and this is my own personal kinda--this is what I needed to do. Pastor Troy knew very much that I am a deeply spiritual woman and that I was not bound by dogma. I just needed a covering, so pastor is your covering. If I had a husband, they would have just went to him. Speaker 2: Now, I think, this seems to me--now, I don't know, I'm just listening to you, of course, I'm interviewing you. But it seems to me that it's different from just having a husband. If you had a husband that had no institutional affiliation-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you would be just as much out there as if you didn't. Speaker 1: Oh, I would have been, but they would have gone to him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They would have approached him. Speaker 2: But I think they were trying to give you the protection of the community--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: At the same time. Speaker 2: Yeah, and maybe in terms of the, you know-- Speaker 1: I like that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --a man is trying to control you or whatever, but I think it's like more--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, I like that. Speaker 2: --that they're trying to surround you with the community. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, that's exactly right. In the beginning, it wasn't like that, but you're right. By the time, we get to pastor Troy, it's, "Okay, she's gonna be out there. She gonna be saying stuff." Speaker 2: Yeah, it just seems like they're with you at this point (simultaneous). Speaker 1: They're, they're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They're not threatened by you. Speaker 1: Oh, no, not at all, not at all because by this time, they kinda know where I'm going, that I'm not, I'm not radicalizing women, you know, I'm not asking women to burn bras, nothing like that. I think if I was, that would be a little bit different. Story_ID: 174806 Speaker 1: But I wasn't doing that kind of thing. I wasn't telling 'em how to vote, you know, not that, politics, small "p." Speaker 2: Yeah, organizing is threatening to people for that political reason. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: They think you're galvanizing votes. Speaker 1: Right, because--and that's why they kept saying "What are you doing with these women?" You know, and I did have husbands who literally would grab my collar if I was out somewhere. Oh, yeah, I was in McDonald's one day, and this husband grabbed my collar and he said, "What the blank are you doing with my wife?" And I, I said--I mean literally backed me up and grabbed my collar. I said, "Nothing." "Oh, no. Yes, the blank you are. She's decided now she's going back to school. You know, she's not home all the time." I mean he's just listing stuff. And I said, "You know, I can't help it if your wife has decided that she wants to do a few more things with her life." "Talking back to me, telling me what she's doing." And that scared me to death. And then another husband I ran into, his wife had sat everybody down to dinner and said, "From now on, I'm not doing blank, blank, blank, blank. Now, you're gonna have to do this. Now, you got to do that now." And he said, "What are you saying to these women?" I, and I said, "Just, you know, how to be, how to get rid of that inner garbage that gets in the way of limiting who you are, finding out that you really do have power to create the kind of world that you want, that you don't have to be a victim of anything"--'cause I, you know, when we talked earlier, I told you about all my victimizations. So it, that, that was scaring people, the fact that women were literally changing their own lens of how they saw themselves. That was scaring people more than anything, I think. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But there was nothing I could do about that, but it was scaring me. Story_ID: 174807 Speaker 1: Okay, so back to this incident where this little girl is beaten up by these two boys (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, so I wrote an article in the Call and Post about the fact that I did not hear one black man say anything to these boys or to have a community discussion about their own outrage of what two boys would do to a girl who looked like them. And I was hot, and you could tell I was really angry in the article. And I had men stopping me everywhere. And a really good friend who said that he was coming to me on behalf of other men to tell me that I could not write angry articles. Now, my thing is if Amos Lynch didn't care and it was his newspaper that I didn't care what other men thought. And I told him, I said, "I can't believe you're coming to me and saying this." "Well, Fran, you know that women really, you know, they follow you, and we can't be having no angry, black women in our city." Can you believe that? So that's when I decided that I needed to have a national conference on awakened women. Story_ID: 174808 Speaker 1: So, you know, so that whole, you can't be angry, you know, what are you saying, you know. And so it was like, so men were like, "You're just beating up us--beating us up everywhere." I said, "I am not beating up on you." "Oh, yes, you are." I said, "No, I'm not." "Well, then maybe you need beating up." So they really didn't like that. So that's when I said, okay, I'm gonna have a national conference right here in Columbus, Ohio. And we're gonna--we're gonna invite women who are awakened. So it was called this, Conference for the Awakened Woman. Speaker 2: Now, this is in what year? Conference for-- Speaker 1: Early 2000s. Speaker 2: It's early 2000? 2000? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, Conference for the Awakened Woman. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is the new millennium and all that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Did they have a-- Speaker 1: Yes, and, you know, get our voices stronger, you know, and really begin to see that black women can create great change if they put their minds to it. And so you gotta remember now since the early '80s [1980s] we've been working on women getting rid of that, whatever that stuff is that stops you from liking another sister or talking about her or--I mean we have been really working on that, so that women could figure out, we can work together, you know. And if your eyelashes are long, you can tell me how you got long eyelashes, you know, that kinda thing 'cause we can get real petty. And we don't, you know, if you want to change what's going on in your community, we don't have time for pettiness or you belong to one group, but you can't belong to that group, you know, all that kind of stuff. Or you get your clothes from Nordstrom's, I get my clothes from, back then, it could have been Lerner's [later, New York & Company] or, you know, whatever. We had to get rid of all of that and we had to figure out how are we going to get rid of that junk that gets in the way of us beginning to make our families and children the real deal. We're working, you know-- Story_ID: 174809 Speaker 1: Women's, women's liberation did absolutely awful things for black women, I believe, but that's a whole nother [ph.] story, but-- Speaker 2: Let me, well, can you just hit on it in brief? Women's liberation did bad things for black women? Speaker 1: Oh, I think so, I really think so. Speaker 2: In what sense (unclear)? Speaker 1: In the sense that black women were--well, first of all, the Women's Movement was specifically in its origin and in its focus for middle class, upper middle class, rich and wealthy white women. It was not for the working white woman who was working anyway. It was not for the black woman, regardless of her income, who wasn't working anyway. They decided they didn't like their men, so they started wearing men's clothes, you know. They were wearing suits, men's looking suits, they were wearing ties, they--you know, they were wearing shirts. And the glory, the honor, the beauty of being female got thrown out with them wanting to be their oppressor. So they were wearing their oppressor's clothes. Black women weren't gonna be wearing no men suits. But we bought into it and our men bought into it because they never asked us if we were part of that or not. So, you know, brothers who were opening doors and helping you off with your coat, they got, you know, woo, good reason not to do that no more. And it literally--well, the fallout of the white Women's Movement is that it literally destroyed their families. And it weakened ours, and ours was already weak because we bought into being liberated--we were already liberated. We already knew how to put our hands on our hips and tell our community what to do. We already knew how to tell our men what to do. We already knew to tell our children, "Look, I might be sick right now but tomorrow I'm gonna be up and you better have the house done." Story_ID: 174810 Speaker 1: Now, didn't, now, I think maybe, I'm thinking like how do you feel about--I think maybe in one area especially, black, the Women's Movement helped black women. Speaker 2: How? Speaker 1: Maybe I'm getting it wrong, but tell me if I am. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: In the area of domestic violence. White women organized around that issue and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here's what happened-- Speaker 1: --and it filtered to us. Speaker 2: When the white Women's Movement began, lesbian women and women who had been real victims of men started joining the movement and really and truthfully, it was not even women who were real victims. I take that back. When lesbian women joined the movement, their issues of, and issues of child abuse came out. Before then, those wealthy, white women were looking at economics solely. Lesbian women joined, issues of gender discrimination really came up, but also issues of child abuse, molestation, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, domestic violence, rape. All those issues really began to surface, and you are right for many black, activist women, domestic violence came up as a big issue. Child sexual abuse, incest, all of those issues really came up, and, truthfully, it was the Women's Movement and the voice of lesbian women that created children's rights. We didn't have real children's rights back then, and that's when children's rights had--so if there, if there was a huge contribution then, of course, it was the fact that the rights of children was born as a result of that Women's Movement. But, you know, there are a lot of thinkers, especially thinkers of color and women thinkers of color, who believe that the Women's Movement and the white Women's Movement was a--was--what's the word I want to use? It circumvented the rest of the Civil Rights Movement because the Civil Rights Movement was really perceived as being a black movement for the most part. And in our community, black men were like lifted up. They got the jobs. They found their voice. They found their place, short-lived, but, in fact, did. I believe had we been politically allowed to continue, even after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, if we had begun to continue to take that force and continue the work, we would have heard the voice of black women in a way we would have never have heard it. And it wouldn't have been just singular black women like [HM] Angela Davis. There were a number--C. Delores Tucker. There were a number of women but singular in their voice. I believe that we would have heard the collective voice. You'd have seen more sisters in the streets, not rioting but reclaiming our families and members of our families. We would have had a great voice, and I just think it was political. This is just my own exp- you know, sometimes I'm a conspiracy theorist. I just believe that our movement was circumvented by the white Women's Movement. I believe that. Speaker 1: Do you think it siphoned off energy from black women that they would have used had the issue still been civil rights? Speaker 2: I think it was a political maneuver. That's what I think because had the voice, collective voice of black women been allowed, politically, to rise up, we would have brought the other sisters of color with us, and it would not have become a white Women's Movement after that. Story_ID: 174811 Speaker 1: But the conference we were talking about-- Speaker 2: Right. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000] okay, the conference for the awakening (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, so the conference of spiritually awakened women. Speaker 1: Was it spiritually awakened women? Speaker 2: Well, that was underlying thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was the Conference for Awakened Women. Well, we started planning that. We were in Essence magazine. I had gotten to know [HM] Susan Taylor. We had brought her here for stuff. By then, I had gotten--I had met many nationally known women at--result of my work with the National Black Women's Health Project [later, Black Women's Health Imperative] and Byllye Avery. So started having our meetings. And I noticed that we started--it seemed like every time we had a meeting, there was always some kind of upset, and normally that was not our meetings at all. Started getting argumentative and just really kind of strange. So then one day, I'm hanging out, I go to my car, and the files for the awakened women's conference are in my car, gone, just my files. Then I go home and other stuff is gone, all related to the conference. TV is still there. Speaker 1: So, you know, you live in a neighborhood, as you were saying before, and people break in, they usually don't take your files? Do they? Speaker 2: No, they don't. Speaker 1: They take the TV and-- Speaker 2: They take the TV. Speaker 1: --whatever jewelry or watches and they get on out of there. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. So I went to a friend, who said that she knew a undercover guy. So I met with the undercover guy undercover. And he told me that they had plants at our meetings. The police department wanted to know what I was doing, why I was doing it, and who was I really, all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Columbus Police Department [Columbus, Ohio] was involved in doing this? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, did they have something--I know in Chicago [Illinois], they had something the Red Squad years ago that spied on everybody's meetings. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: If you had the Society for Stolen Puppies, they would be there at the meeting, you know, taking names, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. I don't know, but what I do know is that there was a woman who was supposed to send out our mailing. None of our stuff ever got mailed out, and we end up not having a conference. We end up having like twenty women. Speaker 1: Was this like a mail service downtown Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, no, these are women who said, oh, you know, "We'll get the mailing out." Speaker 1: Who were in the group? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes, stuff never got mailed out, so we end up having like twenty women. I was devastated by then. Speaker 1: This is a national conference too. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was devastated. We had to tell women, you know, we weren't gonna have it, couldn't get any money. It was awful. So-- Speaker 1: Did you, did any of the politically connected people like the reverend [Reverend Dr. Leon Troy] or the politicians, or the editor of the paper [Amos Lynch, Call and Post newspaper] have any idea what was going on? Speaker 2: No, they didn't know what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If they did, they weren't, you know, they weren't telling. Story_ID: 174812 Speaker 1: So I took a break and moved away from A Quality of Sharing altogether, moved away from doing all the workshops and stuff and created--what did I create after that? I created the--oh, yeah, 'cause back, in that time too, I had started a group called, Ministering to the Needs of Black Women. And this was a group of like nine women. We went around the college campuses, talking to black women about healing. And by this time, I am consulting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I had written a curriculum for girls called, The Angel in You. And it is a program that teaches our girls how to trust their intuition and how to build community with each other because by now, professionally--this is maybe 2004 now, I am doing a lot of work in school systems around relational aggression in girls. I've moved away from women. I think women had given me a headache. Speaker 2: So you're working on aggression in girls. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What was going on then? Speaker 1: Fighting, lots of girl fighting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Bullying. Somali girls and African American girls fighting in schools. Speaker 2: Now, this is, for the record, Columbus [Ohio] has a lot of Somalis, I mean proportionately, I guess, to other cities. Speaker 1: No, we are--we have the highest number of Somali families, I think outside of Minnesota. Well, right now we may have the largest in the country. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I've heard this in Dayton [Ohio], and I've, I met some Somali students at Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio] when I came back to Dayton. And I've heard that, again that in--I've heard again and again that Somalis are--I mean African Americans don't like the Somalis or they have a problem with them. I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know what it is--and I found this out maybe about nine, ten years ago, the word in the African American community was, is that these Somali people were coming, these Somali people were coming. And they were getting all kind of benefits, getting on welfare. They was giving 'em homes, giving 'em cars. Now, none of that was true, but that's what it looked like. And so they were also putting, placing Somali people because, you know, Ohio is a refugee state and Columbus gets a lot of refugee money. So they would be putting-- Speaker 2: Now, where does that money come from? Speaker 1: The feds. Speaker 2: So the federal government has refugee settlement money-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that's, you know--okay. Speaker 1: Gives to the state, so--and I don't know how a state becomes a re-settlement place, but it does, and it, maybe it's--because when I worked for the Ohio Department of Human Services [later, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services], we had a refugee services department with a director in staff and everything. Speaker 2: Okay. And what does that--there's so much talk in the black community, I know, everywhere, Detroit [Michigan], and here and in Chicago [Illinois], that this is a, like a popular notion that when Arabs, especially, come over, they are given every--given a store and given everything, it's just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Collect their money, open up these stores, you know. Speaker 2: So is this actually--does make any sense to you? Speaker 1: Every corner. Speaker 2: I mean does this make any sense? Does that scenario make some sense that they're set up by the federal government? Speaker 1: That's what people think. Speaker 2: That's what people say, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what people say. I don't know. Speaker 2: I've never heard anyone site the agency that would pay for this. Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no. Now, the federal government doesn't give money to the states to set people up in business. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't think so. That's why I'm asking you. Speaker 1: No, they give money to place people in housing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And to help them get services so that they can live here. But, normally, what happens is even in Asian communities or Latino communities, you know, you have, you could have five or six families living together. They put their money together. They--and I would imagine maybe Arabs, money gets sent to them, you know, I'm showing my ignorance now. But the government doesn't set people up. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I would imagine--but, you know, people are always saying, "Well, if they can get property and get carry-outs, how is it that black people can't get carry-outs in their own community?" I have no idea. Story_ID: 174813 Speaker 1: Do you suspect it's a cultural phenomenon one of trust and, I guess, business acumen accrued over years of doing busi- I mean a lot of the Arabs--when I was in Egypt, an Egyptian told me his family had been in business for seven hundred years. Speaker 2: See, I think that marketplaces, regardless of how they might look, are what most immigrant communities are used to. So that's one of the first things you establish, you find something to sell because that's where your income is coming from, you know. In many, many countries, you know, you, you don't--you may not have the education or the connections to get a real job, and the real jobs might be all government jobs. So you gotta figure out what do I have that I can sell? Where's my talents? Where's my skills? And so is it sewing? Is it dressmaking? Is it whatever? Then that's what I'm gonna set up a booth and do. Speaker 1: Okay, but I just wanted to establish that that's, you know, since you raised that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, but, no, no, it really is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The federal government doesn't give anything other than housing, and is that like a, is that like a--is that time sensitive that they give housing for a certain amount of time or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I think what they do is they give money to places like Jewish Refugees Services [sic., HIAS, formerly, Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society]. Speaker 1: Okay or Catholic Charities or something. Speaker 2: Catholic Charities and you move in and then people kind of help you get acclimated, might get you furniture, you know, might--like when the Somali Bantus came to Columbus [Ohio]. They are a clan of people that were not--here's what's interesting about the Somali Bantu people. They are Somalis, they are Muslim, they are from Somalia, but they are darker and look very different than the three major clans of Somali. In fact, they--some people say they look more Nigerian. They were pushed because of how they looked and culturally, perhaps, how they were, pushed all the way into the bush of Somalia, no water, no run- you know, they got to go to the wells to get their water, no electricity, no sanitation, had to cook their own food, you know, out in the open. And so when they came here to Columbus, there was big concern about whether the clans of Somalis who were here would not be clashing with the Somali Bantus because of how they had been treated for centuries. Now, Somali Bantus came here, and they needed help in how to live in an environment that had a door, how to put a diaper on your baby 'cause those babies didn't use diapers, how to use running water, how to use a toilet, I mean just really simple--how to cook on a stove. So refugee services funds help immigrants and refugees get their lives back together, but not to set them up. Story_ID: 174814 Speaker 1: --Now you were saying there are conflicts--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I was saying is, is that-- Speaker 1: --among girls around-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --various things. Speaker 2: The school superintendent called me one day in December and said, "I want you at this school in January, and I need for you to go over there and find out what's going on because right before winter break, an African American girl had pulled the hijab of a Somali girl." Speaker 1: That's the head, the cloth head covering? Speaker 2: It's the head covering. And the Somali girl really beat the black girl up badly, and then came to school the next day with a bunch of Somali girls. And it was near riot. And, you know, but here's the piece though. First of all, when they were, when the Somalis came into the school system, there was no real orientation. And so if you lived in a refugee camp in Kenya all your life, and you have to literally fight for everything, somebody that invades your private space, the girl is not gonna say, "Don't do that," you know, 'cause that's not in her to say that. What's in her is to like, I'm going to have to get rid of you 'cause, you know, you can't do that to me. So I went--I end up being in that school for six months almost every day. Speaker 1: Now, what school was this? Speaker 2: Mifflin High School [Columbus, Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which has totally changed now and after nine years of lots of supportive services and great principals is in a pretty much remarkable school now. But then, nine years ago, that's pretty much what I did. Speaker 1: So 2004, was that the height of the crisis over there? Speaker 2: No, that was the beginning. Speaker 1: Beginning, okay. Speaker 2: That was the beginning. And so I just started working with girls and I had developed The Angel in You program, so I was also in school systems around the--I started doing The Angel in You in '98 [1998], field testing it. And so by 2004, I was in St. Louis [Missouri], Atlanta [Georgia], Detroit [Michigan], South Carolina and pretty much around Ohio working with girls and learning the stories of girls, and understanding the role of trauma and victimization of our girls. And so that--I became a very knowledgeable person in relational aggression and the effects of aggression on the emotional, social, academic, mental behavior of African American girls. Story_ID: 178946 Speaker 1: So now you've been serving I guess since the late '90s [1990s] as what you call an educational climate consultant. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and it's really been interesting because I've been working as a consultant since '98 [1998] all by word-of-mouth. I haven't had to look for one contract. But, you know, like the life of a consultant, you do have months where maybe you're not working as much. Speaker 1: Yeah, but you built a broad network of associates over the years, just hearing your story. I mean you've--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have. Speaker 1: --met people in churches all over the State of Ohio, and schools, and community organizations, and, you know, so a long list of associates and people that you can only, I mean that you formed actual relationships with. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's the difficult thing to do. That's, you know, people--those just don't happen overnight, right? Speaker 2: No, they don't. Speaker 1: So these are--if you're gonna be a consultant, you better have that kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you gotta have that kind of network. It's true. That's true. Speaker 1: Unless you know the guy that has the contract and just giving them out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: They're just handing it out, that's right. But, you know, I, I don't know if I was mindful that that's what I was doing, like I don't--I know I'm a consultant, but I think I just live my life. Speaker 1: Yeah, but you--would you say because I've heard the rest of your story, would you say you live your life as an organizer in a lot of ways? I mean you seem to live your life as an organizer which means that you develop these relationships as a matter of course. Speaker 2: As a matter of course, you're absolutely right. That's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean and it's something--and being an organizer, I think we covered before. Something that's--there's a formal training for it. It's a mindset for it. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Then there're activities that are incorporated into your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's true, but probably didn't know that that's what I am. I don't think I would ever call myself an organizer. I really wouldn't. I probably could, especially because of the work I'm doing now. I don't think I ever thought about myself as an organizer. Truthfully, I don't know what to call myself. Speaker 1: An organizer (laughter). Story_ID: 178947 Speaker 1: Now, did your work, I guess, in the schools, as a schools climate consultant lead to, and correct me if I'm wrong, it must have led to Rise Sister Rise? Speaker 2: It did, it did. I love talking about Rise Sister Rise. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is-- Speaker 2: This is the time, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's 2011, you started this, but you were leading, building up to it. Speaker 2: Building up to it. Okay, so you remember me telling you that--so once I started doing this girls' work and studying about relational aggression and bullying, and so I always tell this story that I was at, I was at Walnut Ridge High School [Columbus, Ohio] and the assistant principal and the principal--the principal's name was Tim Carpenter, and the assistant principal's name was Sharon Washington, two of the best people ever. So, and Mr. Carpenter was from New Jersey, so we always had this East Coast thing going. They were having a lot of girl stuff going on, so I was doing girls' groups. I was doing all kinds of stuff over there around girls, and so I had a girls' group last period of the day. And one of the girls and because I do The Angel in You program, I always have girls sit in a circle. I just believe a circle is a woman's shape, and, you know, the moon is circle, we're governed by the moon. The sun is round. But anyway, so we're in a circle, and one of the girls comes in and she says, "I've been cursing teachers out and slamming doors, and if I'm not careful, I'm gonna get suspended." So one of the things that I've learned as well is you never ask a girl why she did what she did. You don't even ask a young boy that because we know that brains aren't developed, you know, until they're like twenty-two, twenty-four. So you, you have to say, "What's going on?" You can't say, why because they'll tell you, "I don't know." So I asked her, I said, "Well, what's going on in your life that could be making you angry?" And she said, "Well, October, my uncle died--my best uncle died"--or, yeah, no, "uncle committed suicide, grandfather died in November, mom is a chronic diabetic and, you know, obesely overweight. We don't know what we're going to do, and then my cousin gets hit by a drive-by shooting." So I said, "Well, there you go, that's why you're mad. Four people that you care about, two have left, one you're really concerned about, your mom, and then your cousin gets hit by a drive-by and you can't do anything about any of this. That's why you're angry, so you need to keep telling the story, so that you can begin to lessen its power and control and have it get out of your body." So I started really thinking about what else is going on in girls' lives that's contributing to their behavior. Story_ID: 178948 Speaker 1: I had already conducted research on 276 girls in three high schools. Walnut Ridge [High School, Columbus, Ohio] was one of them, East High [School, Columbus, Ohio] and I think Beechcroft High School [Columbus, Ohio] just to see what girl world looked like in high schools. And I asked girls questions like, "If your girlfriend got into a fight, would you join it? Do you have girlfriends? If you don't, why not?" And they, you know, they would say stuff like high drama, you know, yeah, I'd help, you know. Do you diss girls on a regular basis? How often do you diss girls, every day, every week, every month, once a month, once a year? Have you ever been bullied? You know, do you bully? Stuff like that. And it really gave me a great picture of what girl world is for our girls, and then that started me thinking about you just don't go to school and say, "I can't wait for somebody to bump into me and not have a reason for it." And that's what girls would say to me. "Sometimes, Sister Fran, I go to school and I can't wait for somebody to bump into me, just so I can punch their lights out." And so I started collecting these stories of what life is like for many of our girls, and it didn't matter whether the girls came from two-parent families or whether they were in foster care, or whether the families were middle class, or the girls were on assistance. It didn't seem to matter whether they were really bright or whether they were struggling academically. And I knew that our girls' stories had not been heard and that there is, other than what we've done, there is very little data on black girls period, unless they're part of some kinda control group and then you only have a little bit of voice. So I wanted to have an opportunity to kinda go much deeper into this, but didn't really know how to do that. And so I was just doing The Angel in You because that was a way for me to be with girls, and The Angel in You is almost like a rites of passage program. So one day I get a call from Leslie Brower. Leslie is--Leslie was working on a transformation grant at the Ohio Department of Mental Health [& Addiction Services], called me up out of the blue, but again, you know, nothing is out of the blue, but called me up out of the blue and said, "Are you still working with girls, Fran?" And I said, "Yep." And she says, "Well, I have a little bit of money left out of a federal grant, and I was wondering if you wanted to use it in a community of color. We are having a rough time doing any kind of mental health work in a community of color." And I said, "Well, you know, that's because we don't talk about mental health in the black community at least." And she said so if you're still working with girls, think about what you might want to do with them and we'll work with you. So that's what happened-- Story_ID: 178949 Speaker 1: So this is an interesting point 'cause when [HM] David Satcher, I know, was the-- Speaker 2: Attor--[United States] Surgeon General? Speaker 1: Surgeon general, his message to black communities when he would speak was about mental health for people. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Always. Speaker 2: Always. Speaker 1: Yeah, so we don't consult with anyone, we don't talk about what's wrong. Speaker 2: No. We don't, and like when women, black women get depressed, we don't say we're depressed, we just say we're tired, we got a headache, you know, "People getting on my nerves" or, you know, "I slept two days in a row. Wonder what that's about?" But would never say, "I'm depressed and I need to go see somebody." That's not what we do. So Leslie [Brower] said--so I went up to meet with her and their research department, and so did, you know, did you think of something you want to look at? And I said, "You know, I do. I wanna look at what's behind the relational aggression I'm seeing in black girls." So we talked and talked and talked about what that might look like, and I did lots and lots of reading and decided that what I really wanted to look at was trauma and resiliency in black girls. Then we had to go through a discussion about, you know, it's not gonna be real research if we don't have control groups, and so you're gonna need to get like a comparative group of white girls, maybe Latino girls, and I told them that I wasn't going to do that. I said, "Black girls' stories haven't been told and so, I--I'm not doing other people. I'm just gonna do black girls. So I didn't have the money before, so if you don't wanna do just black girls, then, you know, it's fine with me." So then, so then they had to call people around the country, and would this be valid research? You know, my thing is you do four hundred white girls, nobody calls it invalid, so why can't we do black girls and call it valid? So they agreed. So we spent--I started this in 2009, just doing all the prep work; took us two years to do the prep work. So we had to figure out what the process was gonna to look like, we had to look at instruments. I found out about the--I was on a White House call on women and girls, and somebody mentioned the American Women's Institute or something like that, and I had never heard of them. So I Googled them and when I Googled them, I found out that they had funded the New York Black Girls Study, and their report was on strength and resiliency. Speaker 1: Now, this is the American what? Speaker 2: I think it's the American Women's Research Institute [sic., study funded by Black Women for Black Girls giving circle, BWBGgc]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hope that's it, but anyway they had funded a group of black women in New York and these women had created a giving circle, Black Women for Black Girls giving circle, and they had decided that they would create a survey to look at strength and resiliency in black girls in five boroughs in New York [New York]. So I called their office on a Friday afternoon at three o'clock and Angela Hollis answered the telephone and she was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And we--I'm from Philadelphia, and we laughed and connected right there over the phone. It was absolutely amazing and so they gave us permission to use some of the items from their survey for our Rise Sister Rise survey. It was fabulous. I've gone to New York to meet with them and it's a great relationship. It really is. So, anyway it took us about six or nine months to construct the survey we wanted to use. And then the director at that time, Sandy Stephenson, she was like really gung ho for this. She thought this was fabulous. Story_ID: 178950 Speaker 1: We had to think about--she [Sandy Stephenson] wanted us to go to three major cities in Ohio and one small city that had a large black population, so we agreed on Columbus [Ohio], Akron [Ohio], Dayton [Ohio] and Lima [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Now, I have a question because when I was looking over the material, there was some information about Cincinnati [Ohio]. And I said, well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What happened to Cincinnati (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: How did Cincinnati get in if there's only four? Speaker 1: Cincinnati heard about it after it was over. Cynthia Smith in Cincinnati, who I knew, she came to the data sharing that we had, where we shared all the data, and so now actually we are getting ready to do Rise Sister Rise in Cincinnati so I know you're happy. Speaker 2: Okay, right. That solves a mystery 'cause I-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --I read four cities and then down below, it's Cincinnati, Rise Sister Rise. I said, what-- Speaker 1: Right, what happened in Cincinnati? Speaker 2: I went back and counted them. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, yeah, so, actually, hopefully, before the end of this year, we'll be in Cincinnati. Speaker 2: So Akron, Dayton about the same size, roughly. Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: Columbus, the largest city in Ohio. Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: Population wise. Speaker 1: Population wise. Speaker 2: It doesn't seem as urban, but it is. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And Lima is the small city. Speaker 1: Small city. So I did not want to go through the public school system because I just wanted to do black girls. And I know that school systems can't segregate out like that. So I went through networks--'cause remember now everything I've been doing since most of my professional life has been statewide, so I know people everywhere. I know networks everywhere. So I went to women that I personally knew in each of those cities and asked them--told them what I was doing, asked them if they would get women together, asked them if they would find girls for me for me for focus groups, and if they could find 150 girls to take the survey in each of the cities, long, arduous task, but it got done. So we were able to survey 74 girls in Lima, 101 in Columbus, 109 in Dayton, 126 in Akron, so 409 [sic., 410] altogether I think that adds up to. Story_ID: 178951 Speaker 1: What were the, I guess, what were your findings? Speaker 2: Ooh. Speaker 1: That's the best general way to put it? (Laughter) And what were the differences in the cities? I'm kind of interested in like what would the--differences would be between say Akron [Ohio] and Dayton [Ohio], or Lima [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: The--clinically, the Akron girls were a lot more depressed than any other city, somewhere between 46 and 55 percent of the girls had slapped, hit or beat someone. No surprise that at least 46 percent, somewhere between 46 and 52 percent of the girls relied on their best friends for advice, which is why I am wanting to create a best friends institute. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, this isn't good, is it? Teenagers who rely on their best friends for advice? Speaker 2: For advice, no, and that's why I'm gonna get sidetracked if I start talking about the best friends institute. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But that's why we need to figure out how we train best friends. And, let's say here in Columbus, 46 percent of the girls relied on their best friends, but only 24 percent relied on their moms for advice. But those numbers were small in every city. Speaker 1: So best friends trumped the mom (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All the time. Speaker 1: What about dad, is he even in the picture? Speaker 2: I'm telling you dad, in the focus groups, dads very rarely came up. And in the data, dads were like, if you went to anybody for advice, your best friend, your mom, your pastor was low. School teachers were kind of low, dad was low. Boyfriend, grandparents were some of the higher ones. Now, the number for--but one of the questions we asked the girls was, who's your greatest influence on your behavior? And moms were always high. Moms were always high. Speaker 1: But she has the influence but they don't ask her. Speaker 2: No, but here's the thing, influence really shapes the lens, perception and even behavior of girls. So I'm watching what my mom does. I'm probably role modeling or mimicking a lot of her behaviors, but maybe what I see isn't that great, so that's why I don't go to her for advice. Speaker 1: Okay, so they're watching mom, but not necessarily listening to mom. Speaker 2: Well, watching mom, maybe even listening, but not getting advice 'cause if your life isn't like hooked up, why would I come to you for advice? If as the girls in Detroit [Michigan] said to me, "If your mom is dating a guy really young, buying him Nikes and we haven't eaten and you're crying 'cause this other guy you're seeing hasn't called you in a long time, why would I go to you for advice?" Right? Right. So, but you know, if your mom got it going on, then you're more likely to ask her. Speaker 1: And I guess what you're also saying is that if mom did something right, it would have a big impact on-- Speaker 2: It would have a huge impact. Speaker 1: Whatever mom is doing, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Whatever mom is doing. Speaker 1: --has a huge--yeah, but if she was doing something stupid, could it be equally as devastating if mom is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's awful--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --if her influence is great and she's actually misbehaving, is that-- Speaker 2: Right, then it's shaping me. I'm thinking, you know, I gotta get somebody to buy me something. If you can't buy me something, then you ain't my boyfriend. You need to be taking me out to dinner. You need to be buying me a pocketbook or, you know, doing something for me, as opposed to we're just gonna be companions. You know, you got to have an economic function. That's influence if that's what you're seeing, if that's what you're hearing. Story_ID: 178952 Speaker 1: (Phone ringing) So there's always this conversation I have to have with girls about be careful that you're not selling yourself for what you want, and make sure that the guy is worthy to be in your company, and having some standards. Most girls, their standards for choosing are primarily economic standards. He got to be able to take me out. He got to be able to buy me things. You know, he got to be able to do this, got to be able to have a car. He got to be able to dress, he got to be able to have money in his pocket. So then I would say, "Well, what about, does he have to have good grades? Does he have to respect his mother? Does he have to respect you? You know, does he have to have any goals and dreams that he's working on?" They'd be like, "Yeah, but he need to be able to, you know, take me out." So you have to think about where are you being influenced to think that that's the function or the role of a boy or boyfriend or husband. Well, husband is different I think 'cause that's definitely part of husbandry, but, you know, just somebody you're dating, that kind of criteria. So then my thing always is, "Well, then if he's doing all this, what are you putting at the table? And it can't be your body, so what else do you have? You know, if you're the inspiration, what are you inspiring?" And so they never could answer that because they don't really know. So parental influence and mom influence is huge. So we ask questions about--we gave them the search institute survey on adolescent attitudes and behaviors, when did you first smoke? Do you do your homework? How much do you watch TV? And a significant number of our girls, over in maybe high 50 percent or more, 64 percent watched three or more hours of TV a day. That's a lot of TV because the other things that they do as a hobby is also sedentary, "I'm on the computer. I'm doing video games or I may be reading," but it's, it's all sedentary, not a lot of movement. Although, our girls had a lot of hobbies from swimming to golfing to fishing to playing instruments. A good number of our girls played instruments as well. In terms of the [Search Institute] 40 Developmental Assets, the majority of our girls were between twenty-eight and--well, some of our girls only had ten developmental assets. Story_ID: 178953 Speaker 1: Okay, the [Search Institute] 40 Developmental Assets. Speaker 2: Right, so the Search Institute surveyed about fifteen thousand adolescents and discovered that there're probably about twenty internal assets that a youth needs and twenty external assets that a youth needs to have a healthy quality of life. So externally, your neighbors care about you, you feel like you're being cared for by your community, you feel that the community values you as a youth, that you are able to resist--well, let me stay with the external ones, that, that your school cares about you, your neighborhood cares about you, and you do your homework, you read, that--so the internal ones, you read for pleasure, you like being around people who are ethnically, culturally, racially diverse. You know how to manage conflict resolution, you have resistance skills. You can delay gratification. You don't drink and smoke. You feel valued, and you feel like you are able to have what you need to live a good life. So what Search [Institute] says, if you have thirty-one to forty of these, you are really good to go; one to ten, you are more likely to get pregnant early. You are more likely to do drugs, smoke cigarettes and more than likely, your life is--your life--you're being shortcut by the life you have. Twenty-one to thirty means that you still need a lot of support, and if you don't get that intervention, then there's a likelihood that you may not have a really good life. And I'm really paraphrasing and doing this pretty succinctly. Speaker 1: So most of the--you were saying that the girls were mature--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of our girls were between that twenty-one and-- Speaker 1: Thirty, yeah-- Speaker 2: And thirty-- Speaker 1: Is there a lot of about-- Speaker 2: Twenty-eight-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Which means that our girls--now, we did have some girls, but not many, thirty-one to forty. Story_ID: 178954 Speaker 1: Now, were these girls selected--were they selected in any special way or were they just randomly selected [for the Rise Sister Rise research study]? Speaker 2: They were randomly selected. I asked each network of women in each city to select a group of girls that would be representative of the face of black girls in their city. So you had a very mixed range and the girls we're looking at are between eleven and eighteen. So we had National Merit Scholars and girls on the honor roll to girls who literally needed a little bit of help reading the survey, so a great mix. Speaker 1: Now, were they--did you have like, the Somali girls involved in this too, as well as the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --African American? Speaker 2: African American girls, whose history was chattel slavery in the United States. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so continental Africans were not included. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Specifically African American girls. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And because we had a conversation about that because, you know, there are--technically people from Africa who live here now are considered African Americans. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so we--not we--I was very clear about the population of girls I was talking about. Speaker 1: Okay, so you made a distinction based on historical experience and situation, you know, historical--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Historical experience. Speaker 1: --identity. Speaker 2: Right, and the fact that the trauma that we're seeing actually comes from that historical experience. Story_ID: 178955 Speaker 1: So we survey the girls [in the Rise Sister Rise research study]. We conduct a focus group with the girls. We had resiliency conferences for them and the model that we developed, I call collective work and responsibility because this is participatory action research. This is research where the community is involved in the beginning, in the middle, and ultimately responsible for what action needs to happen to address some of the concerns that came out of the data. In fact, tomorrow, I am going to Dayton [Ohio]. We are having a community dialogue in North Riverdale [Dayton, Ohio] community on how to keep black communities safe for black girls. You know, what does violence look like in North Riverdale? What does it look like for black girls and their families? Speaker 2: Now, this is the area around North Main Street in Dayton, I guess, right? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Yeah, which has become, since I've come back, is really the toughest part of Dayton. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Absolutely. We are partnering with the police department, Girl Scouts, YW [Young Women's Christian Association, YWCA], juvenile court, children services, mental health board and the Office of Family and Children First [Ohio Family and Children First], and then just community groups and churches, Omega Baptist [Church, Dayton, Ohio] as well. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And a couple of other churches, recreation center and the school system. I mean it's an incredible collective of communities who have--organizations that have come together to work with us on Rise Sister Rise in the City of Dayton. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we're having a all-day dialogue with the goal of actually having the community to leave with at least two-action steps that they're gonna work on to help ameliorate some of the violence against women and girls, but specifically black girls in that community. Speaker 2: Now, do you still have activities going on in all of the four cities [Akron, Ohio; Columbus, Ohio; Dayton, Ohio; and Lima, Ohio]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And now including Cincinnati [Ohio] too, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So that's five cities in Ohio-- Story_ID: 178956 Speaker 1: Has the concept spread to other states? Speaker 2: Not yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not yet. One of the things that we haven't done--we've been so busy taking the data back to the communities and doing data sharings with churches and mental health agencies and women's groups and just everybody that we haven't even begun to write a paper yet. And we need to do that. Now, I will be presenting at the National Women's Studies Association Conference, which is gonna be held in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And it's a panel of us talking about black girls. Now, I've been doing a lot of speaking about Rise Sister Rise, but we're hoping within the next six to nine months to begin writing. Speaker 1: Okay, so is the data being utilized--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, all over the place, yes. Speaker 1: --to inform-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --programs in these cities. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, one of the foundations in Akron [Ohio] has said to me, the director said to me, "Whenever you're ready, I'm ready. You know, come to us for money," because what, what we've been saying to policymakers in each city, decision-makers, funders, let this be the data you use. When somebody comes to you and says, we wanna do something for black girls, it's the Rise Sister Rise data because it is the most current data--as far as we know, we are ground-breaking because there's no other data, compilation of data of these many girls ever in the country. So this is rich and we've just really begun to even mine it. So, but this is what we're saying now--mental health war---if somebody comes to--you let out an RFP [request for proposals]. If somebody comes to you and says they wanna do something with black girls around trauma, or resiliency, or helping communities to be more responsive to the needs of black girls, this is the data that they should be using. And so that's what's happening. Story_ID: 178957 Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you have a staff here in Columbus [Ohio], right or-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: She's laughing, and--I mean I thought I read on the literature that you-- Speaker 2: We don't have any staff. These are all volunteers. Speaker 1: Oh, they're all volunteers. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not even getting paid. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) We spent that money two years ago. Speaker 1: So, oh, all right. So, okay. Speaker 2: I'm doing it because it still has to be done. Speaker 1: And I read a list of the partners. In every city, there's maybe ten different-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --partner organizations from-- Speaker 2: And these partner organizations-- Speaker 1: --the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] to the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes! They have, they're all--they all have identified-- Speaker 1: --community health groups, everybody. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. They have all identified a particular person to be on that committee. Speaker 1: These are all black women professionals that work for these-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right and some white people-- Speaker 1: --social services. Speaker 2: --some white women. Speaker 1: So this is, okay, all right, I can tell from the names--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Some of the ones in Dayton [Ohio], I knew their names--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know. But, so is it hard to get funding to do this? Speaker 2: Truthfully? Speaker 1: 'Cause I know it should be easier with funding. Speaker 2: We are, you know, you have to be clear about what you want the funding for. And we are positioning ourselves to go after serious funding. I want funding for three to five years 'cause you can't do year funding or six-month funding. I do have a grant from the Ohio Department of Youth Services for Dayton. It's a very small grant. And I will probably end up volunteering most of that time, but what I'm interested now in doing is making sure that each community has saturated its community with the data. Then each community will think about out of the data points, what do we wanna really focus on here, and spend our time on to make great change. And so that's what's happening now. I mean it's taken a year and a half just to share the data. Story_ID: 178958 Speaker 1: Now, just off the top, just listening to this, I mean I was noticing some of the statistics of activities that some of the girls are involved in. And I saw a third of 'em had, you know, used drugs at some recent time, which kind of alarmed me, but I'm thinking that the greatest need they probably have is just for advice on some things. Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, I mean 'cause it seems as though, they-- Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: --they don't really get good advice. Speaker 2: They don't and you have to remember that there were times when, like when I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you sat on your stoop, you know, Miss Pearl [ph.] was next door with her snuff can and quilting--she was quilting right there on the stoop, and somebody was scratching your hair, you know, 'cause women used to always scratch the dandruff in their hair, or somebody was braiding. So you were sharing a lot of information. And you--it was always intergenerational. Speaker 1: And in those days, it was--it cut across class distinctions too. Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Speaker 1: And professionals would live next door--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --to somebody working in a factory. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So we don't have any of that anymore. So we have to find ways of getting that information out to girls. So one of the things that we have created within Rise Sister Rise is something called REAL Women, and it's--REAL is an acronym for very long, Reaching out to Elevate and Advocate for Love of Self Among African American Girls. These REAL women provide foundational funds so that we can have girl conferences, so that we can take girls places, and so that these women can have lunch with these girls and talk and send little notes, and be a visible or even a invisible presence in these girls' lives. We are creating--we're gonna create black-girl think tanks. We are--which is a way for us to hear what the issues are with girls, and we're gonna create opportunities through the media about how to give this advice that you're talking about. And it's--we have to be careful about how we give the advice because they have mothers, they have adult women in their lives. Now, I may give advice that may be counterproductive to what her mother, or grandmother, or aunt is saying to her. So we, and we have to be careful about even religious advice or spiritual advice, or how do you see yourself in the world. So one of the things that we are going to do, at some point, is do a lot more mother-daughter work. That's some of what we're gonna do in Dayton [Ohio]. So Dayton is like a prototype for some of the activities we wanna be able to share in the other cities. But right now we're just trying to get the data out, get women informed, get sororities to think about how can we use this data with the girls that we're working with because every sorority has a group of girls that they work with. Most social women's groups have a group of girls they work with. Churches have girls that they work with. So we're trying to say--we're trying to have--we're not trying. We're having as many events as possible to share the data, and say, "Let's talk about this data, let's talk about what it means in our community, and then let's talk about how you're gonna use it in the work you're doing with girls." So that's, that's pretty much where we are now. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you--now, this is exciting it seems to me, that you're able to conceive of, you know, what you wanna do and then, you know, make it manifest itself in the world. Speaker 2: I know, I know (whispering). Story_ID: 178959 Speaker 1: --So, but is there any other project that you would like to do if you had your--if you could make anything happen you wanted to? Speaker 2: Yes. I would like to (laughter), I would like to host a state-wide conversation with black women about their trauma and specifically trauma around missing fathers because it is becoming increasingly clear to me that we may have fathers, but there aren't, not that many daddies. And we have women my age and older, who still miss their daddy or never had a daddy and that--you know, girls are imprinted by the time they're eight or nine with whoever that male, visible male presence is. If it's drunk and a batterer, then I'm growing up with another kind of lens about me and who I am even if he never touched me. If it's a strong guy, like my friend Joanna [ph.], dad worked every day, good, solid, church-going guy, you got a whole nother lens about how you see yourself, and how you see yourself with men. I'm counseling a young lady right now, a young girl, whose dad can't seem to find his way in her life. And it is causing her incredible trauma. The next day after I had met with this young girl, my sister and I are--my sister, Gwen, and I are driving to the park to walk and this African American woman, obviously very drugged, I'm driving and she gets me to roll my window down and she says, "Do you have a dollar and a quarter?" which I'm thinking is probably bus fare. So I give her whatever I have in the change cup in my car. And she said, "Well, that's not enough." I said, "Well, it's what I have right now." So she said, okay. Then she looked at me and said, "Tell my father to come and see me." And it felt like an oracle. Like I'm not sure what an oracle might feel like, but that's how it felt. It felt like her voice came from the universe and not just from her. And, truthfully, I couldn't drive for a little bit. I just stood there. She went on. I just stood there. And I said to my sister, I said, "I just wonder what the universe is saying to me" because I had been to a SAMHSA [Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration] discussion several weeks even before this, where I talked about the trauma that girls are experiencing and how much trauma there is in black girls and black women around their relationships with their dads. It's humungous. And so I think if there was something I wanted--but I had promised my friends I would not come up with another project 'cause I have nine going on right now. And the majority of them are centered around Rise Sister Rise, and I have to find funds 'cause I got to. There is no staff. The staff of women who have been my friends for twenty-five, thirty, forty years who are just doing the work and younger--lots of young women are coming now, which I'm really happy about. But I would love for black women to come together and talk about our lives in a way that we've not talked about them before because so much of how we are imprinted is affecting everything around us, our choices in men, our children, our children having--our young girls having these boys, who if they are not imprinted in a healthy way, many of them not, are the ones now that we have to deal with who are in prison. So we have to come back to mother. We have to come back to the female principle, and we have to hold ourselves accountable. But we have to get healed ourselves first. So that's what I would love to do. I would love to find a way for us to have that conversation and then to begin to have that conversation nationally. Story_ID: 178960 Speaker 1: Now, you received, well, lots of awards and stuff (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have. Speaker 1: So we're not gonna take the time to go through all those-- Speaker 2: I have. Speaker 1: --from, you know, recognition in all over the place, especially, here in Columbus [Ohio]. When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there anything major that you wish you could change? Speaker 2: I would have probably liked--as I understand politics now, I probably would have liked to have had a political arm to the work we've been doing with women. Not--and people have always been asking me to run for something. It's not my calling. But we could've probably helped other women, other African American women to have more of a political voice on our behalf. Speaker 1: So you--are you saying that you wish you had cultivated a candidate or-- Speaker 2: I wish. Speaker 1: --around these issues? Speaker 2: Yes, but more than that, what I would still like to see is a team of lobbyists just for black issues-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and specifically for black women and children-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that we would be able to pay a team of lobbyists on our behalf-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause we don't have that. Story_ID: 178961 Speaker 1: Likewise looking back over this, over all the things you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think all the work is my legacy. I don't think it's one thing. I think it's, I think my legacy is my love and compassion for women. I think that's my legacy. I think part of that legacy is that I am very, very clear that you can have vision, but if you don't have people who buy into that vision and help you carry out that vision, and do, as my friend Libby Rann [ph.] says, "Fry that chicken and make them muffins," then you don't have anything. All you have is vision. And so I know that part of the legacy of the work I've done is how to include women and give them great opportunities for speaking, and developing, and contributing to women's work as well. Story_ID: 174831 Speaker 1: I was asking you about children. I know you don't have any biological children. Speaker 2: I do not. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But I got adopted by a young woman. Her name is Love Dixon, brilliant, and she kept coming around me and she said, "I want you to be my mentor." And I said, "Un-un, can't do it." And she said, "No, really." I said, "No, really I cannot be responsible for one person. I don't think I can do that." And she said, "Well, I'm not gonna give up." So she just kept being around me all the time, showing up, knocking on my door, always having a problem that only I could answer. And so eventually, I did not become her mentor. I end up becoming her mother much to the chagrin of her own mother who lives in Cincinnati [Ohio]. So she is my daughter and my daughter--today is my grandson, Elijah's, six month--six months of being in the world today. He is so cute. And truthfully, I didn't know that I would feel this way about a baby. But I find myself like I may have something to do, and I find myself canceling it just to go over there and be with him for an hour. It's interesting. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's here in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: He's here in Columbus, Elijah Malik and precious. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now-- Speaker 2: --but I probably have other daughters too. I have, I do have another daughter. Her name is Cynthia, although Cynthia is fifty-something now. But I met her--actually, her pastor gave her to me. See I've never gone after anybody to nurture or whatever 'cause I don't think I've ever saw myself as a mother, but I am like Mother Isis, you know. But anyway, her pastor called me up and I said, he said, "I've got somebody I want you to, to help out." And then I was--I can't even remember when this was--it was in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], I was helping women who wanted to do women's work and specifically, women's ministries, so I was literally training--I would say training--a group of women, maybe ten or twelve women, and I literally was taking them through a training process over a period of years, and so Cynthia came--Okafor became one of those women. And she's been my daughter for a very long period of time. Love has been in my life maybe thirteen years, Cynthia probably twenty-five, thirty. Story_ID: 174832 Speaker 1: --Now, we usually ask what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community, but I think you've probably kind of answered that throughout the interview. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: So, and I know our time is running short, so is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think that--I think I've really shared what my hopes and dreams are. I think I have shared the spiritual framework for all the work I do and those two things I think are incredibly important. I have siblings who are supportive, my brothers and sisters, who think I do wonderful work and are very proud of me, so I like that a lot. I used to feel that I was somehow--I used to always feel my difference even when I was growing up. And I think I told you that when I was growing up, my friends used to call me "Holy." And, but I, I never felt that I was called to do something great and wonderful. But I do felt--feel like my calling is to be what I feel is my, my life essence, or my spirit, or my soul, that my calling is to live that out, whatever that's looking like. And so, right now, what I've shared with you is what I think that looks like. And I'm positive there'll be more. I just don't know what it is. Story_ID: 174833 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know. How would I like to be remembered? People tell me now how they remember me, sometimes good, some's not so good, but always funny. It's always funny. Let's see, how would I like to be remembered? I would like to be remembered as a woman who was obedient to the call inside of her. That's how I'd like to be remembered. Story_ID: 174834 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is my daughter who adopted me. Her name is Love Dixon, and Love is holding her first new baby, Elijah Malik. Speaker 1: And there he is again, Elijah Malik Dixon, who today is celebrating his six months in the world. Speaker 2: That is Cynthia Okafor. Cynthia was--actually adopted me too. She was given to me, in a way, by her pastor to be a mentor to her, and I end up being her mother. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is me and my sister, Gwendolyn. We are on our way to the Million Women's March in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: That's 1996 [sic., October 25, 1997]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Just say it, just say 1996. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-six [1996]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: In 1996. Now, this is my grandmother, my mother's mother, Mattie Mae Sylvia Cogwell [(ph.) Mattie Mae Sylvia Jennings], an incredible, wonderful woman. She was a Eastern Star. She was one of these, like original club women. Speaker 2: And about what year is this? Speaker 1: Oh, it had to be in, maybe 1946, somewhere around there. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother at my Aunt Sissy's [ph.] home. My mother's name is Leticia Thompson. She was called, Patsy. And this is probably 1940--'54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Wow, all right, so this is my mother and these pictures are in Philadelphia. This is my mother. I'm the little girl with the bonnet. I am probably three. This is my cousin, Brawny [ph.]. And the little girl standing up is my sister, Marjorie Curtis, and that's probably 1951. Speaker 2: This is my dad holding my sister, Vencina. My father's name is William Henry Curtis, and my sister, Vencina Woodrit, named after my, one of my mother's best friends. Speaker 1: This is my mother in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. They always went to Atlantic City, her and her sisters, always having a great time. Speaker 2: This is my dear Aunt Sissy and my dear Uncle Al [ph.]. Aunt Sissy, Fannie Thomas and Al Thomas. My Aunt Sissy is the sister of my mom. Speaker 1: This is my mom. Ooh, that picture looks like we're in back woods somewhere, but I know it's Philadelphia. This is a picture of my mom holding me and my brother, Donald, who is the elder in our family gave me that picture. Speaker 2: This is me. I'm probably three, walking and with my Easter best on. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], my Confirmation, being in the Catholic Church, I was probably nine, somewhere around there and really happy to have that confirmation dress on. Speaker 2: I am graduating from Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia]. Now, it's university, but when I went, it was Norfolk State College with a undergraduate degree in special education. Thank you, Dr. Ruth Winstead Diggs, chair of special ed at Norfolk State. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is, this is me as a VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America, later, AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteer in a little community in--called, Mount Hermon, in Portsmouth, Virginia, sitting on a trashcan posing. Speaker 2: I think I'm in Raleigh-Durham [North Carolina] there. I'm at, I'm going to Norfolk State and I think I am visiting my boyfriend, at the time, Gil Robinson [ph.]. Speaker 1: Oh, this is my mom and her sisters, my mother is in black, my Aunt Sissy's in the middle, my Aunt Ellen [ph.], Honey, we used to call her Aunt Honey, is sitting on the end, and her daughter, Jackie [ph.], is standing up and my sister, Marjorie, is on the other side standing up. And I don't know who that guy is in the center. It's probably a family friend. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. All right, I read--when I was at Norfolk State, I read an article in the black newspaper about this nun who was looking for volunteers to help her in her work in a very underserved, black neighborhood in Portsmouth, no, in Norfolk, Virginia, called Ghent, G-H-E-N-T. And I went there to volunteer and I was there for pretty much the rest of the time I was a student at Norfolk State. I really loved that work. Speaker 1: I am graduating from The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] with my master's in learning disabilities and behavioral disorders. When I graduated from Norfolk State, I had a master/doctoral fellowship to The Ohio State University, so I got my master's in one year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So right before I decided to leave Columbus [Ohio], I met Ron, Ronald Eugene Frazier, and fell in love and we got married, and we had two weddings, an African wedding and a civil ceremony. And it was, it was an exciting time, but a year, almost a year and a half after we were married, Ron was killed in a car accident. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken by [HM] Kojo Kamau, a national history maker and a internationally-known photographer, incredible, and we're in front of Gwen's house, Gwendolyn Gardner. People used to tell us-- Speaker 1: That's Gwendolyn Gardner. Speaker 2: That's Gwendolyn Gardner and that's me. Speaker 1: Fran Frazier. Speaker 2: Fran Frazier, and he titled that "Sisters." Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [1993]. Speaker 1: I talked about our Women's Day of Prayer and this was the eighth annual in 2003. This picture was taken by Kojo Kamau, and I should say that we are now--this is our eighteenth year, 2013, is our eighteenth year from that day of prayer that Charlene Morgan and I had in the rain in Franklin Park [Conservatory, Columbus, Ohio], hundreds of women still come every year and we always wear white. Story_ID: 174835 Speaker 1: Okay, this woman is Dorothy Craft [ph.]. I call her "Mom Hemmons" [ph.] because that was her name when I first met her when I was eighteen. There was a period in my life where I really needed a mother, and my mother [Patsy Leticia Thompson Curtis] was not available to me and so Mom Hemmons was the stepmother of my best friend when I was in high school [at Little Flower Catholic High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And she is still in my life today, an incredible woman. Speaker 2: And this is a picture of me and my sister, Margie, Marjorie Curtis. The role model of many, many great things, and when we talked about the influence of an adult female in your life, that was my sister, Margie. She still is today. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my brother, Charles Albert Curtis, named after our Uncle Charles, my Aunt [Ellen] Honey's [ph.] husband, when--but we called him Terry. When Terry retired from the [U.S.] Air Force, my sister and my brother, Donald, went to his retirement and they said that when they started naming all of the medals and all of the things that my brother had done, they didn't even know who they were talking about. My brother worked in--he was an organizer, and he was the administrative director of several Air Force bases, and even the Vietnam government gave him a medal for his work. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I'm very proud of him. Speaker 2: And that's him on-- Speaker 1: That's him right there. And he made his transition ten years ago..