 Story_ID: 188126 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Peter Versfelt, Jane Jones, Reverend Mary Ellen Bellinger, John Collier and Joan Harold. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: I'm Jacquelyn Grant, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-Y-N, Grant, G-R-A-N-T. Speaker 1: And what is you date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve nineteen forty-eight [December 19, 1948], Georgetown, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor of Theology at the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And you're the founder of? Speaker 2: And I am also founder and director of Black Women in Church and Society. It's an organization and program at the Interdenominational Theological Center. We specialize in dealing with women's issues. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 12, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're located in the Black Women in Church and Society office, on the campus of the Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 188127 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you, and the first one--and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first question is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, whoa. I'm a southerner, fried chicken, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color, probably at this point would be blue, they change. My favorite colors change from time to time. So it's probably a tie between blue and the brown family, beige, tan. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I don't. My husband's [John Collier] favorite vacation destination is San Francisco [California], which is where we spent our honeymoon. So, I'll claim that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, and that's an interesting question, a favorite phrase. I'm sure I have one, and when I think of it, I'll let you know. Story_ID: 188128 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history as much as you know. How far back can you trace say your mother's [Lillie Mae Ward Grant] side of the family? Speaker 2: You know, we've done that--we've done this on paper. We've done a family tree that--for both sides of the family, my father [Joseph Grant] and my mother. Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you about your mother's side first and then your father. Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the--I'm most familiar with their parents, my mother's parents, Eliza and Benjamin Ward. Now when we did the research in tracing the family tree back, we did go further than that. But I don't have that at the time on top of my tongue. But in terms of my familiarity, I go back to my mother's parents. Speaker 1: But are there any stories, I mean, do you know like how far back that side? Speaker 2: No, I don't. When we did the research, when we did the tree, we did go I know, at least back to their parents, but I don't have that document before me or in my head, but I could get that. Speaker 1: It goes back, what do you think, to the late 1800s, that's as far as you can trace it? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about slavery or about the 19th century that you can share with us? Speaker 2: No, I don't--the only story that I remember is from my grandmother, from my mother's mother, Eliza Ward, Mama Liza, is what we called her. And she talked a lot about post slavery, she talked a lot about here working days as a domestic in one of the, I guess, the most unbelievable piece that I recall is her talking about what it was like to work for 25 cents a week. And that's the only story that I remember actually, 25 cents a week, it's kind of amazing. Speaker 1: That's a dollar month, isn't it? Speaker 2: A dollar a month, yeah, for a full day--a full day's work, seven days a week, 25 cents a week. So I've always felt that was unbelievable. Speaker 1: Now this was your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother, my mother's mother, Eliza Ward. Now with that kind of salary, of course one could--one could say that, yes, theoretically it was post-slavery, but in reality it was slavery, you know, so she did what she had to do to bring her--to raise her children. Her husband, Benjamin Ward, the story about him--the only story I remember about him is that he worked on a ship. He was not with the family much at all. And in fact his--he eventually disappeared, really. We don't know his--for a good period of time, we did not know his whereabouts. And the family still does not know in fact how he died, where he died, but the story is that he did work on a ship as a cook and that's the memory that I have of him. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: I never met him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us about your grandparents--well, those were your grandparents? Speaker 2: On my mother's side. Speaker 1: On your mother's side, okay. Speaker 2: Maternal, yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right, now-- Story_ID: 188129 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your mother [Lillie Mae Ward Grant]. What was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was a cosmetologist. Interestingly as we meet today, the annual Cosmetology Convention is meeting in Atlanta [Georgia]. It's a convention that commands fifty thousand plus cosmetologists from across the country, probably across the world. I do recall my mother coming to Atlanta to this convention once. But she's a cosmetologist, she was a cosmetologist, she's retired now. And--so my recollection of her was that she was a very good business woman, self-employed. Her shop, beauty shop, was located in our front yard. My memory as a child tells me that that beauty shop at one time was a store. My parents had a little candy store at one time and that building just in the front yard was converting into a beauty shop, and this where my mother worked. Speaker 1: Now this is in North Carolina? Speaker 2: This is in South Carolina. Speaker 1: South Carolina, okay. Speaker 2: Georgetown, South Carolina. Georgetown is a small town on the coast, sixty miles north of Charleston, thirty-six miles south of Myrtle Beach. So it was--my memory of her as a--from the early child is that when we would leave home in the mornings, often she would be in the shop doing hair, and when we would come home in the afternoon, dinner would be cooked on the stove, but she'd still be in the shop doing hair. And so she was, I guess, like a--beauty shops worked like barber shops in one regard, it really became--it was a community place, because we got an opportunity to interact with many of the women in the community, the professional women, women who were school teachers in the community and all of the women across class lines, because if it was one thing that was common in the black community, women's community, is that when you have their hair done. And so those who did not get that done in the privacy of their home then had to visit the cosmetologist. So we had interaction with school teachers, with school principals, with one nurse in town, the one black nurse in my small town, southern town in South Carolina, the only black nurse that was in the staff of the hospital for as long as I remember and you know just the women of the community would come to our home to get their hair done. Story_ID: 188130 Speaker 1: Was there a lot of interesting conversation in the beauty shop? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, sure. Now of course the children didn't hear the interesting conversations. But over the years I've learned that my mother [Lillie Mae Ward Grant] learned a lot. My mother was not formerly educated back then. She--my mother went to finish the tenth grade. But interestingly, it was with my younger sister, my parents had nine children. And my mother chose to go back to high school in adult education and I think the interesting history making piece about it is that my mother actually finished high school with, I think it was, her baby daughter, one of the daughters anyway, so that they walked across the stage at the same time to receive their high school diploma. But I've often heard my mother talk about the educational experience that came from just doing women's hair, you know, the--although the stories that she heard about what went on in their lives, points of joy, points of crisis, problems, promises in the lives of women, she heard it all, you know as their beautician, she heard stories, and I often heard her refer to many of the lessons that she learned just from the stories of these women. I think that is one of the ways she became a very smart business woman herself in terms of, you know, just knowing how to--how money works and the kinds of trouble that people often find themselves in when they don't know how money works. And so she became a very, a very excellent business woman. I've often said about her, as I recounted some black institutions who have had financial--who are constantly in financial crisis, I've often said, the business manager needs some lessons from my mother because she really learned how to make money work. I remember at a very young age seeing the stub from my daddy's [Joseph Grant] paycheck, and I was very young, but I was aware enough to wonder how in the world can they support all these children on this check--on this check, it must have been twenty-six dollars a week, something like that. How can they support all of these children on that check? Now, of course my mother's income supplemented that a lot, but I think--what I learned from that is that my mother learned at a very early age how to manage money, how to take a little and make a lot, you know, how to, you know, make something out of nothing. And so she's a--I respect her very much, she's an excellent business woman and she learned from practice, from actually doing the work herself. So it was a good opportunity to meet the community, you know, because, you know, I met the woman who taught me how to sew because she would come to the house and get her hair done. You know at a very young age I learned how to sew in sixth, seventh grade, and I met the lady who taught me in mother's beauty chair. You know I met the woman who gave me my first job in that same beauty chair, you know. So it was an opportunity to meet the community really. Story_ID: 188131 Speaker 1: How did your mother [Lillie Mae Ward Grant] get started as a beautician, was she part of Madam [C.J.] Walker's School or did she have any formal training like that? Speaker 2: Yes, she did have training. Now I don't remember her talking about where she received the training, but she did--you had to have had, now you say formal--you had to have had training. Whether I want to call it formal training or not, I'm not sure that would be a proper term. Even after she became a licensed beautician, in order to maintain licensing by the State of South Carolina, she had to go through a periodic retraining, continuing education. And so she would often go--I remember the trips she would make to Florence, South Carolina and to Charleston, South Carolina for the various one week or two day or three day seminars on various aspect of cosmetology new trends, new developments. Speaker 1: I would think that's formal training, I mean, that's a formal kind of process of licensing and certain things you had to know, because many people just started doing hair, you know. Speaker 2: No, no she was properly trained and licensed. Yeah, and she had to maintain the licensing, so she had to demonstrate continuing education, yeah. Story_ID: 188132 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father [Joseph Grant], now. What do you know about his side of the family and how far can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, actually the same. I know my father's parents. Well, a little bit different. I did know my father's father and my father's mother. My father's father was a--he worked at a church, and what sticks out in my mind most is that he used to keep a cemetery. Georgetown [South Carolina] is a very historic port and it has a lot of historic buildings, and I remember this one church, old church downtown, it's a very historic site. And what sticks in my mind most is a picture that we have of him standing in the front of the cemetery of this old church building--in front of the cemetery, it was on the side of the church. And he was the one that kept the cemetery and also kept the church as well. Story_ID: 188133 Speaker 1: Did I ask you your mother's full name, did I ask you her name? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: What is her full name and how do you spell it? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Lillie Mae Ward--Lillie Mae Ward Grant, Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Ward, W-A-R-D, Grant, G-R-A-N-T. Speaker 1: And when was she born and where--was she born in that same area? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Georgetown County [South Carolina]. My mother was born June 5, 1920-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Georgetown County. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you father's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: My father's name is Joseph James Grant, J-O-S-E-P-H, James, J-A-M-E-S, Grant, G-R-A-N-T. I'm kind of smiling because he tells an interesting story about his middle name. I'm trying to remember the story. He really originally did not have a middle name, and he adopted this middle name when he was trying to get a job. And I don't remember the wherewithal in terms of why he had to--why he needed to make that distinction. But for some reason he did, and so he adopted the name James, and that's his official at this point, middle name. His full name is Joseph James Grant. Speaker 1: What was his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born February, wow. I believe he was born February 10, 1917. My question is that when my sister was also born in February then I get those two days mixed up, fifth and tenth, I think he was the 10th, February 10, 1917, in Georgetown County as well. My parents, interestingly, I just read the story again, just a few days ago as I was visiting my parents. My father's father lived up the street, we lived on the same street and they lived on the same street. But initially my parents lived with my father--with my father's father when they married and-- Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: --I don't remember the story. I recall mother talking about daddy coming to visit him--coming to visit her at home and her mother liked him very much. So I don't think they had any difficulty in dating because he seemed to have been a very good person, so there were no strange stories or anything. But I do know that once they got married, they moved in with the father--my father's father for a little while and my father made the proposal that he build a larger house with rooms to accommodate the newly married couple, and which I'm given to believe that it would have been okay with daddy, except mother said, no, we need our own place. And so they went down the street, about a block and a half away from my grandfather's home, and built their own home on their own lot, so the lot in which they live today, by the way. They still live in the same lot, but not in the same house, but on the same lot. The original house that was there, they moved to another location and they built my mother's dream home, a brick home finally in 1973 after all those years. So it was after moving out of his father's home that they were able to identify their own land and build their own home. Story_ID: 188134 Speaker 1: Now, well, what did your father [Joseph Grant] do for a living? What was his story, how did he--what was he like and what did he do? Speaker 2: My father--let me just finish this scenario. My father's mother, I do remember her, Sarah Grant, S-A-R-A-H, Grant. But I don't remember much about her other than the fact that she used to sit on the porch a lot in a rocking chair. So I don't know if she was working or the kind of work she did, I would suspect then, given the location, I would suspect this usual domestic, if she did work, but she died much earlier, so I have more vivid memory of my grandfather than my grandmother. Speaker 1: Did either one of them tell stories about the past? Speaker 2: I don't remember from my grandparents, no, I do not, I do not. My father is a minister of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, pastor, retired pastor. He started preaching in 1952. He tells a story--interesting, I just read the other story just a few days ago, we just left South Carolina. We were spending time with my father who just had a fall on Mother's Day and he's now paralyzed and trying to regain use of his limbs, extremities. But he was telling this story just about three days ago, he said that when he used to pick cotton, there's area in South Carolina called Loris where the buses would come and the trucks would come and pick up the black folks to go to pick cotton for this (unclear) for the month of the season and of course that's what most black folks did, you worked in the cotton fields, you worked in the tobacco fields and the other farm-related occupations. He said that when he would go to the cotton fields out to pick cotton, he would always be, they would have to spend, you know, days there or weeks there, he would always be the one that they would ask to preach the sermons at the worship services. Now at that time he's not a preacher, but he was the one that was very much church-involved, very much religiously inclined and very vocal about it and therefore he was the one identified to do the sermons, the preaching on the--in the cotton--on the cotton plantation on Sunday mornings. I never heard that before, interesting. But my father tells a story of having accepted his call to preach in 1952 at, I think, in Chicago [Illinois], general conference in Chicago, it was held in Chicago in 1952, I think it was. And which I guess kind of unusual because you don't tend to receive the call to preach or get a confirmation to call to preach at those kinds of meetings. But I guess he did, he went as a lay--went to the conference as a lay-person and came back having accepted a call into the ministry. When he came back to Georgetown [South Carolina], he then went through the process of ordination at our home church which is Arnett A.M.E. Church [Georgetown, South Carolina], which is just around the corner really literally two blocks from my home. We could see Arnett A.M.E. Church from my backyard, our backs almost kind of adjacent. Story_ID: 188135 Speaker 1: So he [Grant's father, Joseph Grant] began the ministry track at Arnett [A.M.E. Church, Georgetown, South Carolina] when he returned in 1952 and became ordained, became assistant minister, one of the assistant ministers at our home church and then began to pastor churches himself. His churches that he pastored were always in the rural area so that they were always from forty-five minutes to an hour, hour and fifteen minutes away from our home town--our home location. We never had to--the family never moved to a parsonage, we always lived in our own home and we did the weekly treks to rural area for his churches. He would go at different points in the week for prayer meetings and bible study and to visit the sick, et cetera. But we would go, for the most part, on Sundays. During his thirty-nine years of pastoring, he pastored about six different churches. He pastored two circuits, that's a charge with two churches. He was responsible for two churches at one time. By the time he was pastor of his final church, he was on a one-church charge. So he spent thirty-nine years of his life pastoring and some more years, thirty-nine plus years, as a clergy in the African Methodist Episcopal Church. My father was not formerly educated, well, my father received--stopped at eighth grade, but after entering the ministry, he did attend continuing education, the courses at, what was then Dickerson Theological Seminary [Columbia, South Carolina], which was connected with Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], which is the African Methodist Episcopal Church's college in Columbus, South Carolina. Dickerson Seminary would have continuing ed [education] courses in different parts of the state in Charleston and sometimes he had to go to Columbia or he had to go to Charleston to take courses but he did receive some continuing ed courses that way. Unlike my mother [Lillie Mae Ward Grant], he never did go back to get his high school diploma, but he did go to do continuing education at Dickerson Theological Seminary. Story_ID: 188136 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have five sisters and three brothers, four sisters now. One sister is deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. And where do you fall in? Speaker 2: I'm the sixth, I'm number six. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. All my brothers are older than I am. And three sisters younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they're nine small clan. And eight are still living. I think, of note, my parents [Lillie Mae Ward Grant and Joseph Grant] were very--they were not educated themselves, but I guess true to many African Americans understanding of what's important, they felt that education was the key, or is the key for a better life for their children. And so even though they were not educated formerly beyond high school, they saw to it that all their children were. So of the nine children, all nine finished high school, eight finished college, one chose to go to the military, to the [U.S.] Marines, eight finished college, seven have master's degrees, one doctor of ministry, a professional degree and one Ph.D. Story_ID: 188137 Speaker 1: Just off camera we were saying your family could be what we would call Geechees, right? Speaker 2: Well we come from the area of--it's called Lowcountry, Lowcountry, South Carolina. Now we're from the City of Georgetown [South Carolina], but as I always say, all of Georgetown really is country, but technically, we come from the city, the town--in city area. But the areas, outlining areas, you know, the islands, Pawleys Island [South Carolina], Murrells Inlet [South Carolina], you know, right there on the--Sandy Island [South Carolina]. When I was growing up, the impression was that people from those areas were--the word that was used was Geechee, Geechee, Geechee. Now, to me what that has referenced to is a dialect though, a way of talking, a way of being. The dialects are quite clear, you know. I really think it's a--and you know, the Charleston area, particularly the John Island area, sea island area where you get the very heavy dialect that comes out of those areas. You know there are some who would say that you get some of that even in the towns, even in a place like Georgetown. But there's a heavy dosage of it that comes out of the--out of those islands You know, I don't know how to, I mean, outside of that context, there may be many who would say, you know, that you're all categorized in that. I recall my eighth grade teacher, English teacher, asking me where did you get your accent, where did you learn how to talk? I said, what do you mean, where I--I got it from my mother, I guess. And I said what did she mean, she said well, you don't sound--you don't talk like you come from this area. Well, at that point, eighth grade, I had never been out of South Carolina. And so I really had no idea what she was talking about. But she said, you don't talk like you came from this area. I'm assuming that that meant that I did not have the heavy dialect that you would find from persons coming from, you know, the surrounding areas, or even have some persons who are in the Georgetown context themselves. So it's really interesting too because there--I think when most people--when I was growing--when most people talk about that it's not--it's certainly not considered to be something to emulate. It's considered something to get away from. But the fascinating thing about it is that I really think that that dialect is one of the most beautiful--beautiful songs that you could hear anyway. I went to school at Bennett College in Greensboro, North Carolina, and there was a classmate of mine from the Charleston area and she had such a beautiful melodic voice that was described as Gullah, you know. Speaker 1: Now that's another word for that, Gullah, Geechee. Speaker 2: Gullah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And I don't understand how anybody could laugh at that. It was--it's so beautiful, you know, but of course you know, we live in a context where our culture is not always appreciated because we're taught so much that there's nothing of value in our own culture so we got to always seek to be like the other. But I think when we attempt to devaluate those aspects of our culture, we do ourselves a disservice. We can't see the beauty that's within our own culture. Story_ID: 188138 Speaker 1: I know nowadays there's a movement now to preserve that culture and to--[HM] Julie Dash's 'Daughters of the Dust' trying to cover some of that culture. And there's an association I know, The Gullah Geechee Association down there trying to preserve some of the historic black lands that were freed up by the Freedmen's Bureau down when Martin Delany was down there in the 1800s and so forth, and there's Oyotunji villages also on some Gullah land down there. In those days though was it considered really a stigma by the people in Georgetown to be related to the Geechee culture and the Gullah culture? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't think that as kids going to school, kids of all generations, of all generations could be quite cruel and unappreciative of that which is valuable even in their own culture, you know. So that you know I do recall the tension, name calling and I mean because it certainly was not a positive affirmation of anything to be called Geechee, you know or Gullah for that matter, you know. So I mean so that that was a part of the culture, you know, back then. Now, of course, you're absolutely right, nowadays, people are trying to go back and develop an appreciation and to preserve. Speaker 1: Yeah trying to learn it and preserve it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I was in Charleston [South Carolina] not too long ago, and I had the opportunity to go on a Gullah tour of Charleston. In olden days that would not be the case, certainly not--certainly not led by a Gullah himself, self-employed, you know. If it were to be so, he/she would have been working for someone in the white community, who would in fact be making the money off of what it means to display which is historically called Gullah culture. Speaker 1: I want to return to this theme later on, because I know it must have influenced you on some level in terms of some of the crafts and the culture and things and the African survivals in that part of the country, are now considered so valuable that they weren't valued not too long ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 188139 Speaker 1: What was your first memory in childhood? Speaker 2: Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My life was spent in church. Let me speak of one thing before that though, even though this is probably concurrent. As I was thinking things reflecting on, you know, what childhood growing up in a Georgetown [South Carolina] culture was like back then. You know I remember all of the insults and assaults of what it means to be black in small town USA, small town southern USA. Yeah, I remember the--I remember my mother telling me in Belk's Department Store, there was this column and then on one side was one fountain and on the other side was another fountain and I made a mistake one day, I guess we were going through our own fountain, you know, I was a kid, I must not have been no more than five years old or so, and I remember my mother having to explain to me, now see, see that word up there, look at that now, that's colored, you know, and this is the fountain that you're supposed to--that you're supposed to reduce your drink from. And I remember--I remember, you know, feeling good or being able to see that work and know what that word was, you know. You know, go in that direction means to drink from this fountain, of course. Later then I began to run over, well why can I drink from this fountain. So I remember you know those kinds of insanities. I remember you know wondering why we had to walk to the side of the doctor's office and go to a door that was behind the hedges and walk into a waiting room that was the size of a closet and then, but you can see the other waiting room, and it was a big, nice, you know, waiting room, I mean, the kids over there had a place to play and stuff, you know. And we had to sit so close because there weren't that many seats. You know, I remember all of those kinds of experiences. I never went to a movie in my home town. You know, movie theaters weren't for black folks. If you went you had to sit in special places, so you know, I just didn't go. I never--I thought about that, I never went to a movie. Speaker 1: Was that the attitude of your family or just your attitude? Speaker 2: Well, the not going to movie piece was probably me. I wasn't particularly the sociable type, they used to call me a bookworm. So that particular piece may or may not. It would be interesting for my brothers and sisters to see what their experience was in terms of some of those social interactings in the community. You know, but you know the experience was almost totally segregated, you know, you went to your school and they went to theirs, and the only time you would come together is in places like Belk's department store, you know. I remember the Walgreens that took the fountain, the stools out of the fountain area rather than allowing blacks to sit on the stool, you know. I remember all of those--those insanities. I remember my English teacher in high school challenging the department stores, the ten cent stores, the five and dime stores, the Woolworths and those--Roses and those kinds of stores, you know, why aren't you hiring black kids, you're hiring you know high school kids, and you're not hiring blacks, what's the problem. I remember the challenging of those managers you know on those issues you know. So that was one part of life where there was just you know denial, you know. The only thing that black folks could do--black people could do in that small town in terms of work, had to be service oriented, you know, even that or teach in a black school. And as I said earlier we had for the longest, one black nurse in the hospital for as long as I could--during all of my childhood actually, you know. So you experience that side of life in small town southern USA. The denials, those kinds of insults and you know, my--I learned to sew at a very early age, so my mother used to sew and so we used to do a lot of shopping at peace good places you know buying fabric and other notions and stuff. And you know the insults you get there when you're standing there waiting to be served and all of a sudden, you know, you get all the white folks are being served. You know, you get all of that kind of insult that you live through, you know. Then on the other side you got church, you know. You got the place where you go and you're somebody, you know. You got to, you know, paralleling that life of insult, the life where you got to, you know, try to make it, you know, in spite of all of the insanities that's going on around you, you know, then you got another context where you can go and it's just totally different. So you know my life has been defined almost totally in the church really. Story_ID: 188140 Speaker 1: I want to get back to that but I wanted to ask you about what you were like as a little girl and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: What's fun in the neighborhood? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I remember the Simon Says games and the hide and go seek and the stick balls, we called them baseballs, but I later learned that they were called stickball. (unclear) here you play with what you got. And all you got is a stick pen, that what you used to hit the ball. I remember--I remember growing up in a community that was fun. I remember the skating, I mean, we didn't have any buildings to go to skate and so it was just a slab of concrete, you know that was around the corner that everybody would go and take their roller skates that you got for Christmas to skate, to have fun. Or just you know on the street in front of the house, I mean, that was really a play area. That was a territory, you know, where you were able to express yourself. I remember the black, oh, back then the colored community center, you know, where we were able to go for two weeks, three weeks in the summer to learn arts and crafts, you know, to make all these nice things that we can bring home and hang on the walls. I don't know what you call them but all kinds of arts and crafts and things. I mean, it's quite clear that the community even though we were deprived, I mean, you know no community swimming pool that we can go to, it was quite clear that the leaders of the community saw that our kids needed to be provided for and they did, you know, so even though we couldn't go to the well-established and well-resourced white community centers, you know, we were able to you know get this, you know, this park type place where they finally, after many years of struggle for it, they finally would get a building, inadequate, but it was a building built to where we could go and learn our crafts and stuff and you know and be taught different levels and things that we can take home and admire and give to our parents, et cetera. You know-- Speaker 1: So this is in addition to the school, you actually had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: In addition to that, and this is during the summers and you know weekends and after school and that kind of stuff. The school was another--that was an important place for me 'cause I liked school-- Story_ID: 188141 Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: My elementary school was--I went to two elementary schools, I went to in fact several of my siblings and I started school at the Catholic school, Saint Cyprian, Saint Cyprian Catholic School [Georgetown, South Carolina]. And the reason we started there is that the Catholic Church has a good long history of establishing schools in different communities, black schools as well as white schools. In Georgetown there was black Catholic School and a white Catholic School. We went to the black Catholic School and we were sent there because it was a good school, a very good school, and as I indicated earlier, my parents were very, very education minded. They didn't have it themselves, but they wanted to give it to their kids. And so at least four of us, my three younger sisters and I went to--started out with Catholic School. I went only three years. I went to kindergarten, first and second grade at the Catholic School, Saint Cyprian Catholic School. Speaker 1: That's the name for a black saint too? Speaker 2: Yes. And then I transferred to the public school in the third grade, and that was J. B. Beck Elementary School [later J.B. Beck Middle School, Georgetown, South Carolina]. J. B. Beck Elementary School is the only school in my hometown for a long time that was named after a black--after a black man. Speaker 1: Who was J. B. Beck? Speaker 2: A medical doctor, medical doctor. Speaker 1: Was he from Georgetown [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: No, whether he was from Georgetown, originally, I don't know. But he made his home, he made his place, he made Georgetown his home. There was one black doctor prior to him, Doctor Till [ph.], but for some reason the elementary school was named after Doctor Beck. Now when we left the middle school, elementary school, we went to Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina], which at that point, at that time included both the middle school and the high school. And I just want to tell you a quick little story about that and then I'll get back to how, you know, my experience there. Just as J. B. Beck was named after a black man in the community, we all assumed that Howard High School was also named after a black family, their prominent black family in the Georgetown community by the name of Howard. It was years later, years after I left Howard High School that I became aware of some controversy that was going on back in hometown. And what happened was that the white powers that be wanted to change the name of J. B. Beck Elementary School and the black community was fighting that. But one fellow, I think it was a preacher, I'm not sure, was quite baffled, you know, why are they trying to change the name of this one, you know, this particular school. So we did some research and what we discovered was that J. B. Beck Elementary School was the only that was named after a black family. Howard High School, contrary to what the entire black community believed, was not named after a black man, you know. It was not named after the black family that we all assumed it was named after, because it was such a prominent black family in the town. So it was not named after--so-- Speaker 1: It was named after O. O. Howard, the same person Howard University is named for or was it? Speaker 2: I don't know which one, it may have been, but it wasn't a black man, that's for sure. And so by that person doing that research and bringing that back to the community, they were able to stop that political move to change that one school that was named after a black man and it still remains today, J. B. Beck Elementary School. And Howard High School is still there too, but it's no longer--it's now what's called, I guess, a trade school, a specialty school. Speaker 1: Now, what did Beck look like and did you--I know the answer to this, but please describe the facilities that you had in terms of how they compared to the ones on the other side of town? Speaker 2: Oh, well, yeah, it was modest, it was modest. It's a one level building, it was not very large, it was really small. But you know back then when we were growing up, you know, it was comfortable, I mean, we didn't know any difference, at least I didn't, I mean, the children didn't, but it met our needs in many ways. I remember, I supposed it would be interesting to engage in a conversation with my father [Joseph Grant] about this, because my father served for several years as president of the PTA, Parent Teachers Association, for that school, so it would have been interesting. I never engaged him in conversations about what are some of the issues they were fighting back then in the interest of that school. But it was a small school that was, you know, a good place to be, you know. I was there from third grade through the sixth grade and you know, it had, I think, a very productive time there. Story_ID: 188142 Speaker 1: Your brother said that you were a bookworm now, was this true? What did you like to do when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, I probably was, 'cause I liked school, and that's what I spent my time doing. That's what I spent my time doing, studying all the time and reading. I had a girlfriend whose name is also Jackie [ph.], interestingly. And when we were at school together, we would hang out all the--we were there--she's my girlfriend, I mean my best friend in high school, elementary, high school, but especially high school and also a distant relative. I loved school. My recollection tells me that she wasn't particularly, she didn't particularly care for it but you know we would be together all the time and most times, even when we were together, we were reading, both of us. She was a, oh, she was a great reader, herself, she read everything, and she was a speed reader, which I always found to be fascinating, you know, at such a young age. I was never a speed reader, but you know, I could--I could read, you know, get my work done. So I was always--I would always remember my girlfriend did not come to school, I would always stand on the building by myself after finishing eating my lunch, then I get my book and start reading, you know, I was never one to, you know, play with the other kids. It was either standing with my girlfriend or standing by myself reading and eating lunch. Story_ID: 188143 Speaker 1: Most of my time was spent study--in elementary school, I was a pretty good student. I remember, and the affirmations from different teachers, I remember particularly my fifth grade teacher who was very encouraging of me. I remember she would always-- Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: --Orange, Miss Orange, Mrs. Orange [ph.]. Yeah, she was really great. She was always encouraging me, particularly in mathematics, I loved math. And I remember she--okay, Jackie, just keep, just keep, just keep doing it and you'll get better and better. And she was very encouraging. I had a sixth grade teacher who was not very encouraging. And so my sixth grade in high school was--was not a very good year in that area, it was disappointing, disappointing year for me. And I don't know exactly why other than--other than the fact that I thought the teacher was prejudice actually and-- Speaker 2: This is a black teacher? Speaker 1: --Black teacher. Prejudice in terms of you know you got that class thing that goes on in black community as well. You've had it, you know, and it's been there forever, it's going to be there as well, unfortunately. Speaker 2: Was it a color thing too or was it-- Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure some of that was there but it was, you know, (unclear) comes from the right side of town or the right--your family, your family professionals or were your family the laborers, etc., etc. You know my dad was a preacher, a pastor and so well respected in the entire community. But we still economically we still were not where the teachers were, you know, who lived downtown, that kind of stuff. And that particular teacher I had always felt demonstrated a lot of favoritism toward downtown kids. I have never experienced that before. Miss Orange did not do that, Mrs. Howard [ph.] did not do it, and the fourth grade did not do that. Mrs. Williams [ph.] in the third grade did not do that, but my sixth grade teacher did do that. So the sixth grade was kind of discouraging for me. But it was in the seventh grade that I encountered another Mrs. Williams and interestingly the very first semester, not semester, we had a six-week period, we were divided into six week periods at that time. When she computed the grades--she computed the grades and then she decided to give all the kids in the class their grades from the different subjects and to allow the children to--to allow us seventh graders to compute our own grades. And so she gave me my grades from the different, math, history, you know, so that, etc., etc. And I did the averaging of my grades and it said that I was on the honor roll, I mean, I think it was eighty-five or something like that, that I was on the honor roll, but she did not have me on the honor roll. So I added it again and divided the--averaged it and I was on the honor roll. And so I said Ms. Williams, you know, I'm supposed to be on the honor roll and she came back and checked what I did and she said, oh, yeah, I'm sorry, I made a mistake. And you know, I was so discouraged in the fifth grade that I frankly was not trying and it just by happenstance she decided to let us compute our own grades and she discovered she made a mistake and she apologized and I was on the honor roll. And I said to myself, I said to myself, you know what, I made the honor roll and I wasn't even trying. Imagine what I can do if I tried. I did, I made the honor roll every semester throughout middle school, throughout high school. I graduated second place in my class at my senior year, I graduated salutatorian, actually in reality I don't understand how I graduated salutatorian, but anyway I did because, only because my average, actually up to the last end of the year was actually the highest and I just don't understand how I got to be second, but anyway. It was because one teacher was encouraging, and I was able to see what I can do if I tried. Story_ID: 188144 Speaker 1: So you graduated as salutatorian-- Speaker 2: Yes, of my high school class, yeah. Speaker 1: --of your high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina], and is it 1966, would it be? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So I want to backtrack a little bit and talk about church now. Church had to be a rich part of your youth-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --You know, so what positions did you hold in the church and what was the name of your church again? Speaker 2: The name of my church was Arnett AME Church [Georgetown, South Carolina],-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --Named after one of our bishops in the African Methodist (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Bishop Arnett who was at Wilberforce [University] in [Wilberforce] Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Church for me was my second home. I did everything in there. We were in the church--we were in the church all the time, not in school, you know, we were in church. At Arnett I began holding the leadership positions at a very early age. You know, I began speaking in church at a very early age, of course--and this is for most black churches, you know those Easter programs, Christmas programs, you know, all those things and recitations that you learn and so you learn how to remember to memorize to appropriate, you know, the plays that you, when you get to a certain age, you get too old to do the recitation so you do the plays, you know. I did all of those at a very early age. I started providing leadership in youth organizations. I was president of the Junior Missionary Society, I was president of the Junior Usher Board, you know, I was president of the RAYC, Richard Allen Youth Council, was one of the youth organizations in the African Methodist Episcopal Church named after our founder. And then there was another organization called YPD, Young People's Department, I provided leadership there, you know, I taught Sunday school, I was secretary in the Sunday school, you know I, you know, I did it all. Story_ID: 188145 Speaker 1: You know, and then in the seventh grade, in my family--my family--my folks [Lillie Mae Ward Grant and Joseph Grant] could not afford to send all of us to do musical instruments, take piano lessons, et cetera. So I was--I was one that they, when we had a music teacher to come--a teacher who was a musician to come to town and she started giving piano lessons, I was one that was sent to take piano lessons. So what that meant then, you know, of course a good part of it was learning hymns and you know church music. So it was in sixth or seventh, I believe it was the seventh grade that I began playing the organ for our church. So I provided that kind of leadership at a very early age. It was around that time that my father started pastoring churches and pastoring them in the rural areas. Many of them did not have musicians, they did not have musicians, and in some instances, did not have pianos. And so music was being introduced to those churches, and so I was the one then that would go with him and provide the music for the choir. So it was you know, this is my first job, because then, you know once a month or whatever, they'd take up a collection for me, so you know, I had a few pennies to call my own, you know, at a young age myself. So I would go with my father as he would pastor the different churches and I would be his musician so that I would go with him to various churches, I mean, I've been in so many churches that a woman wondered why I'm still in the church, in fact, certainly some of my peers wonder. I've been in as many as six different services in five different churches in one day, you know, from nine o'clock in the morning to eleven o'clock at night, you know. So I mean that's a lot of church. I would go with my father even during those occasions when my sisters and brothers did not go. You know every now and then you want a break, you didn't want to go forty-five minutes, hour away to church, you just go around the corner to Arnett [A.M.E. Church, Georgetown, South Carolina], you know. But I was the musician so I had to go with him to play for his choirs. So it was in the church context where I got my early training as a speaker, my training as a leader, providing leadership in those youth organizations, and providing particular kind of leadership with the choirs, both at Arnett A.M.E. Church and then when daddy started pastoring at daddy's churches. So that it was ingrained in me, you know. I was--it was just a part of who I was, that is, to be in the church and to live my life out in the church context. So it was a very important part of my life as well as the family's life, but my life as well, and I mean, even to this day, you know, I can't go too long without going to church. I mean missing church for me still to this day is a major problem, because it still stirs a very key function for me. I was introduced, I was doing a lecture once on something, I don't know exactly what it was, and I was introduced by this major theologian as a theologian who still goes to church. It's--I consider myself to be a church theologian and that experience is very important for me and so it's important for me to have to maintain that connection. But it started back in Georgetown, South Carolina, when the church was such a key part of my life, I mean, the people in the church who provided role models for me, the people in the church who taught me, you know, as I was coming along, then I was able to turn around and teach others, you know, coming behind me. So that was always--that was always a part of what it meant to be a child in the home of a Methodist preacher, a Methodist pastor. It was just a part of your lived experience. Story_ID: 188146 Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school [Howard High School, Georgetown, South Carolina], did you already know where you were going to go to college or what you were going to do? Speaker 2: Yes. During my junior year in high school, the guidance counselor called me in and asked me or did he tell me, one or the other, that there was a program at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], a science institute program at Bennett College, that I should be a part of that. So I applied for that and I was accepted. So the summer after my junior year in high school, I spent at Bennett College and it's science institute and studied with high school juniors and seniors from across the country, studied science, science and math. Speaker 1: So would this be a sort of an Upward Bound kind of a program? Speaker 2: Probably similar. Upward Bound, I think, starts earlier and it is more of a mentoring program that keeps you for a longer period of time, I believe, if I understand Upward Bound. Speaker 1: Some are just summer programs. Speaker 2: Yeah. This was specifically a summer science institute. And so I went to Bennett College and had that experience and was very, very pleased. You know, just studying with all these kids from across the country was, was very rewarding actually. It was that summer that I decided that I was going to go to college at Bennett College. Speaker 1: Now Bennett has quite a history of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --In terms of theology, that's, I think, where [HM Reverend Dr. Latta] Thomas teaches. Speaker 2: That's Benedict. Speaker 1: Benedict College. Speaker 2: That's Benedict in Columbia, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I do know Latta Thomas. Frankly, when I was at Bennett College, the summer after my junior year, I came down to Columbia to Benedict College and took religion with Dr. Latta Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I do know him very well. But no, this is Bennett College. I decided that summer that I wanted to study at Bennett College. Now Bennett College is an all-women's college, but the Science Foundation, that program was a co-ed program. But the college itself, the regular program, is an all-women's college, and so I decided I wanted to go there-- Story_ID: 188147 Speaker 1: I went back to Howard High School in Georgetown [South Carolina], did my senior year and then I went--returned to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] after my senior year and started studying mathematics. That was my favorite subject. It started out being math, but then it was around my sophomore year that I decided that I wanted to make a switch to French, to language. And so I changed my major from math to French. And at that time, you know, now we're hitting the Civil Rights Movement and I was--I was fascinated with language, but I wasn't sure how language was going to fit into my plans, but the way that began to unfold, the sense of it began to unfold, was--I was beginning to make the African connections and I was--I came across some person's literature on the Negritude movement in French-speaking African countries and in France. I developed a fascination for that, and I said, oh, I'm going to study French so that I can interpret some of the Negritude literature, and then perhaps even do some, you know, UN [United Nations] interpretations that kind of--some international politic kinds of issues. Well, this was like '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], and the civil rights movement was really heated (unclear) movement. And even though that resolved, you know, in trying to make sense out of a language major, that resolved by help in terms of maintaining relevancy, you know, black folks, African American folks don't know anything about the French Francophone literature-- Speaker 2: Did you take French in high school too by any chance? Speaker 1: --Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, I see. Speaker 1: And so I thought, you know, that was important, I needed to be able to make that Africa connection. But you know as the Civil Rights Movement, you know, was more intense and more intense, I began to kind of move away from that. In college I was still always involved in religious affairs. I was president--I helped to founded and became president of the Student for Christian Social Concerns on campus. We became the Christian organization on campus, we did community service work, etc. at the local hospital and nursing homes, etc. and in the community with the kids. Bennett College at that time was located in the middle of a ghetto area and so we did a lot of big sister community programs for the kids in the neighborhood, etc. And then--but that that whole, the whole question of what am I going to do with all of this was still just gnawing at me and the call of the day was relevancy, relevancy for education, relevancy you know, I've been in church all my life, okay, now you know, how is that relevant, you know. Story_ID: 188148 Speaker 1: So, you know, as-- Speaker 2: This is the black power era we're talking about now. Speaker 1: Black power, yeah. Speaker 2: After '66 [1966] when you graduated, that's pretty much black power that we're talking about? Speaker 1: So I began to raise questions of relevancy in terms of what I was moving toward doing. Being in church all my life, it was increasingly clear to me that the whole question of relevancy was important in that context as well. We were hearing about it in schools, you know, across the country, hearing about in you know in the communities, but you know, we need to hear about it in churches as well. So what I decided that I wanted to do, my junior year in college, I decided that I wanted to work in the church, do work in the church and I wanted to make sure that the church itself was relevant to African American reality as well. As the university needed to be made relevant you know what the beginning of questions being raised in different disciplines, etc. and development of ethnic studies, black studies, etc., the church needed also to be relevant. So interestingly when I made the twist in my junior year in college, I came down here to Atlanta [Georgia]. Most of the seminaries at the time were holding what's called ministry conferences, and these are conferences, two, three day conferences that they would bring college kids to their campuses and to explore ministry as a possible profession, occupation, vocation. One of the first ones I came to was here at ITC, during my junior year in college. And then I went to one at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and then at Christian Theological Seminary in Indianapolis [Indiana]-- Story_ID: 188149 Speaker 1: This is the era where Dr. Vincent Harding was a force in terms of black religion and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Institute of the Black World [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: --Yeah, Institute of the Black World, did you meet him when you came to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes, when I came back to seminary--when I came to seminary in 1970, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, but not until. Not then, but-- Speaker 2: My junior year, no, I did not meet him. In my junior year I just came and explored the issues and decided that I wanted to come to seminary here and decided that seminary was the place for me to go, yes, because what I decided I wanted to do was to write literature that was relevant--that's relevant to African Americans, you know, why do we need to persist in studying literature in our church that's written by white people or was written by people in a white church. We needed to produce our own literature. So I came with that resolve so that I would be--that I would dedicate my life to writing literature, which is basically a Christian education--Christian education matter. So in that regard what actually happened is I came to seminary in the traditional women's route, that is to study Christian education because that's the area that the church allowed for women to do Christian education. So I came the traditional women's route, but when I got here, I discovered that Christian education is not the problem, Christian education is only a symptom of the problem because if you got a bad theological foundation, then you gon' have bad Christian education literature produced out of that theological foundation. If you got poor theology, you gon' have poor Christian education literature. If you got irrelevant theology, you gon have irrelevant Christian education in literature, you know. So Christian education is not the problem, it's just a symptom of the problem. So what I wanted to do was to deal with foundational issues, deal with what is it that's there that enables us to create the kind of literature that we're putting in our churches, you know. If you got a theologist says that God is white, then you gon have Christian education literature that's gonna reflect you know the positive value of this, you know, white God that you know that defines everything white is good and everything black is evil, you know. Story_ID: 188150 Speaker 1: Yeah, just to go back and look at the history of the A.M.E. Church is so--I mean, founded as the African Methodist Episcopal Church and as a like an affirmative kind of move by Richard Allen back in 1829, I think it was, and then to, I mean, the founding of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in 1856 and some of the high goals and aspirations around that as being an independent school and a black woman writing the history of that church and pen pictures of the pioneers of Wilberforce of that school rather, Howard Q. Brown and other people at AME Church, how did we get off the mark, you know, because at one time AME Church was where all the Negro conventions were held and all the black movement, you know, in the 19th century was around the AME Church, how did we get off that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, AME Church actually--well we take our point of origin as a 1787, the national church, at least the walk out took place in 1787. The actual church began after the craft of society in 1850, and 1850, I think, was our first conference. Well you know I think that the A.M.E. Church was so much ahead of its time from its inception. Now I do recognize that there are scholars who disagree, I mean, there are some who argue that oh, the A.M.E. Church was just a social protest, you know, it's just--but there's really nothing different, significantly different, between the A.M.E. Church and the white church. African Methodist Episcopal Church or any other Methodist Church you know that it was just a social protest so it was just a sociological movement, it is not a theological movement. While I along with other African American theologians take exception to that because we argue that theology is not something that you talk about, you know, it's not a theory in abstraction from you know practices, it is not, you know, just a profession, you know but theology you know has to be lived, theology is you know what's that expression, it's not something to be talk, you gotta walk too. You know you just can't talk, you know you gotta walk the walk, you know, you can't just--it's not just a spouting out of beliefs but you know what do the beliefs mean? You know, and what do they mean as they take shape in your life? You know I and many others are beginning to, or have argued that, you know, when Richard Allen and the others walked out of Saint George Methodist Episcopal Church, that was not just a social protest, yeah it was a protest, but that was also a theological protest and a theological statement, you know. What they were saying was that there's something wrong with the church where it is preached that God is the God of justice, but then you practice injustice, you know, right there in your church. God is God of love, but yet you hate black folks 'cause of who they are, you know. God is the God of righteousness, but yet you participate in this evil system of slavery. I mean there's something wrong with that and therefore to declare that that cannot be the case is a theological issue, you know, that yes, sure has some sociological implications but it is clearly a theological issue-- Story_ID: 188151 Speaker 1: So I argue that yeah, Richard Allen was making some very clear theological mandates just by the walking out of that church and those who followed with him and those who came later on. I mean, you know, folks like Daniel Payne and Henry McNeal Turner. Speaker 2: And Turner even said that God was black. Speaker 1: God is a Negro. Speaker 2: God is a Negro. Speaker 1: Yeah. As he was here in Georgia doing religion and politics, God in 1898, God is a Negro. Black folks have just as much rights to imagine themselves looking like God as white folks got, you know. And I mean he was quite clear. I mean he was decades ahead of his time. I mean you read that little shot essay of him (unclear) and it would be radical in many churches today, you know, written in 1898, you know. So yeah, I think that we have a story that's very liberating one, that's, you know, one that affirms who we are as an African people, who we are as a black people, even in midst of a larger, theological context where theology is used and has been used to oppress people, you know, and to keep people oppressed and to keep them meek and mild and docile by giving them a Jesus and an interpretation of--an interpretation that says that Jesus is meek and mild and docile and you know and everything is all right and you ought to be satisfied with what's, you know, with what's here and we'll all live happy together on the other side of (unclear) Jordan. No, theology says, theology ought to deal with our reality here and now and you know, God deals with the other side (unclear) Jordan. So yeah I think you know a good part, there is that liberation, there is that freedom emphasis in the African American Church, but we also find is that, yeah, unfortunately we have there are aspects of the church I think has lost that you know that's really basically lost it's way. And I think the challenge for us then is that we've got to go back. Well, that's really the challenge that got me into the theology piece as opposed to the Christian--now, the Christian education piece still needs to be done, you know, and that's why I see myself as a teacher, I see as a professor, now as I you know train others you know I try to get folks then you know to go into their Christian education, and you know counseling and of these other disciplines so that we can take that liberation emphasis of--that comes out of the theoretical, theological corners and implement those in the various other disciplines in which you find ourselves in Christian education and counseling in ethics and et cetera. So for me then I made a shift from Christian education to theology so that we can kind of wrestle with some foundational issues. Story_ID: 188152 Speaker 1: When you came out of Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] then you went to theological school to--? Speaker 2: When I came out of Bennett, I came here to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: To Turner. Speaker 2: Yeah, Turner Theological Seminary at ITC and did the master's of divinity. Speaker 1: Is Turner named for Bishop Turner? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Henry McNeal Turner, okay. All right, now, well, what happened here was the faculty here ready for you or were they encouraging or were they dragging, what's happening? Speaker 2: Actually, some faculty members were ready, and some faculty members were very helpful. I think of folks like Ndugu T'Ofori Atta, back then he was a George Thomas and he changed his name to his African name Ndugu T'Ofori Atta. With him back then in 1970, '71 [1971], we established the Religious Heritage of the Black World, now called the Religious Heritage of the African World, it's an old history project, actually. And we have tapes from so many people. It was back then that I met Vincent Harding. Institute Black World used to be located just about two blocks from here at the corner of Beckwith Street and Brauley, J.P. Brauley Street. And we go down there. You know as I sit back and remember those days where I had--and where I could just walk down the street and talk with Vincent Harding, my God, you know. You know what an experience, you know. I had teachers like Bishop Thomas Hoyt, you know, who is now a bishop from the CME Church who was able to deal with the questions that I had been raising, that began raising while here. Interestingly, all of my teachers with exception of one were male, because at that time we had only one female teacher and that was in that area that is the area that's carved out for women that is Christin education. So all of my teachers in fact were men. But it was in this context where I began to really put more--shape more form to my understanding of theology as an African American person. Interestingly, was also in this context where I began to raise questions about--questions in my mind understanding of theology and religious life as an Africa American woman person, you know. I did not have any female teachers back then. Christian education was not required, it's required now, and so I don't even think I took that one course with the Christian education professor that was here. All of my--as I tell my students sometimes if they ask, during my seminary career, I never had an opportunity to study women--women's thoughts. I, fortunately, was able to study some of the works of African American men like [HM] James Cone, I was first introduced to the work of James Cone here at ITC and as [HM] Gayraud Wilmore's mother, African American men, but no African American women. Story_ID: 188153 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was also during this time that I began to raise the gender question in theological education. I was introduced to folks like [HM] James Cone, [HM] Gayraud Wilmore, the prolific African American religionist C. Eric Lincoln. In fact, we had an opportunity to bring them to campus to do seminars and so we had a good--a good grounding in African American religious thought as it was beginning to be taught at that time in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Did you have John Mbiti, by any chance, on African religions and philosophy? Speaker 2: Yes. Ndugu T'Ofori-Atta brought John S. Mbiti to campus a couple of times. In fact, that's when I met him back then on this campus, yeah, yeah. And we--so, yeah, we studied his work and Mbiti's work and some other African Kwesi [Abotsia] Dickson from Ghana, West Africa. Well, it was also in this context that I began to raise questions of gender. When I came to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], ITC's enrollment, student enrollment was like 200, and the year I came there, there were seven women students, the year I left in '73 [1973], there were nine women students. And you know the myth is always you know that women come to seminary to either study Christian education or they come to get husbands-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --Yeah. Had to marry there, you know, marry the cream of the crop, you know. But women don't come to seriously explore vocational issues. So you encounter all of that, oh, the myth about what it means to be a female in seminary. Well, it was in this context that I began to raise questions of gender, you know, what is it that women have contributed to our understanding of religion? What is it, black women in particular, what is that religion women had contributed to our understanding of theology and what it is and how we do theology, et cetera. 'Cause heretofore we've been told that women have nothing to do with, not only black women but no women, have anything to do with our understanding of theology, our understanding of religion or have made any contributions to any of these disciplines. But I as a woman who was feeling God's call, then began to wonder why, where are the women, you know, when I was in church, there were a whole lot of women in church, you know, in my hometown and all other churches I've been to, while in college, churches I've visited, the women are there, you know, but why isn't it that we have women, you know, that we can study in seminar. When I left ITC I went to Union Seminary, New York, to do a Ph.D. in theology. And it was in that context that I continued my explorations of black theology, the work of James Cone. In fact, I was studying with James Cone, he was my advisor. Speaker 1: Was he at Union? Speaker 2: He was at Union, yes, he still--yes. It was in that context that I continued to explore my studies in black theology, historically and contemporary black theology (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well let's just-- Story_ID: 188154 Speaker 1: Maybe we should pause maybe just to identify [HM] James [H.] Cone, just for those who are going to be watching this tape, because he's pivotal to this country. Speaker 2: Yes, James Cone is, I guess one could say that he is the father of black theology. He is-- Speaker 1: Which is different from what we had before, which was-- Speaker 2: What was that; what do you mean? Speaker 1: --No, just me. I mean the difference, black theology, somebody watching this who doesn't know would think that we always had some kind of black theology. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, no. Well, we've not had--we've had what I call--yeah, we've had some black theology, but it's been what I call sporadic theology, or I sometimes call reactionary theology. Henry McNeal Turner was a theologian, was a church leader, Bishop of African Methodist Episcopal Church, a theologian in that sense and he did theology, but he did it more, you know, an essay here, a speech there, you know, reactionary, it was, you know, sporadic, you know, here and there. But James Cone was the, I would say the first certainly academic and the first systematic theologian that we've had. He started his work in the late '60s (1960s) with the publication of his book, 'Black Theology and Black Power' and then there's 'Black Theology of Liberation.' So he's considered--I said the father of black theology, but I would say one of the fathers of black theology. When I could I think of fatherhood, I also think of [HM] Gayraud Wilmore who has been a major thinker in black theological process as well. So James Cone is a major black theologian internationally recognized for his powerful work in theology. Story_ID: 188155 Speaker 1: Now during the Civil Rights Movement, the question of what kind of theology black people should have was raised by the activities of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and [HM Reverend] Gardner Taylor and some others in challenging the existing social, you know, situation that black folks were in, I mean, the political and social situation we're in and they positive that we should resist and try to change, you know, if you're not trying to change these injustices you are not doing the work of God, you're not doing what's right. Now you can't just pray and get into heaven. Now some black folks contented that it's all right just to pray about it and a pastor of Chicago, Joseph Jackson, the head of the National Baptist Convention was famous for opposing King in that regard, I mean, were you thinking about that schism too when you were going to school? Speaker 2: Yeah. What does what you believe have to do with what you do, you know? I think it's a struggle, we've been taught that they don't necessarily have anything to do with each other, you know, but no, black theologians are that, no, there is a direct connect, you know, that there's a direct relationship between what you believe, what you say you believe and what you do. If you believe that God is love then you know that oughta manifest itself somewhere in your life you know. If you believe that God is the God of justice then you oughta practice justice, you know, to be consistent with your understand of that God, you know, in that regard prayer without works is dead you know. And you know, you pray but you don't do, you know, what difference would your praying make, you know, so yeah, yeah, I would affirm those who would affirm--those who would argue that there's a direct connect between our theologies and--our theology and our ethics, you know, what we believe and what we do, you know. And I think that needs to be, you know, wrestled with when we deal with issues of race, race analysis as the civil rights and black power movements you know have done. We're talking about James Cone's theology by the way, black theology then in that regard became the theological arm of the black policy rights movement, you know. Okay, if in fact we are our social activism manifests itself in these ways then what does that mean in terms our understanding theology. I think King represented that, you know, very well, you know. He could very well have gotten his degree from Boston University and gone and taught at some major seminary somewhere, you know, teaches theology that he learned so well or he could have gone, you know, pastored a church and be a pastor and you know, and that's it. Speaker 1: He could have made a lot more money. Speaker 2: A whole lot more money, you know. But you know my understanding of what he did was that he was not able to--he refused to dichotomize his life. He refused to dichotomize existence, you know. Okay, I believe you know this about God on this page but it has nothing with what's happening here. So I mean you can't live that dichotomous life you know. And if you're going to seek to be whole, you know, if you're going to seek to you know be consistent in one's life world then you gonna have to be involved in--Nathaniel Heyman [ph.] used to say you know Jesus means freedom, you know, Christianity means freedom. If you profess to believe in Jesus, if you gon be a Christian then you gotta be involved in the freedom movement, you know. I mean there's just no if, ands or buts about it, you know. I mean, you can't talk it and don't walk it, you know what I mean, you can't preach Jesus means freedom and then--and then oppress people from you know from left to right, you know. So there's that consistency that always has to be there, and that's what I've been doing, you know in my work, trying to uphold that consistency. Story_ID: 188156 Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to meet Miss [Fannie Lou] Hamer? Speaker 2: Unfortunately no, I did not. But I've had an opportunity to study her. I've written an essay on Hamer. She's one of my favorite-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she was really a spiritual force you know. She sings, it's hard to describe her other than being a spiritual force in the movement. Speaker 2: --Clearly so. And she was able to make that connection. She was able to make--you can't say one thing and do another. You can't, you know, proclaim, profess to believe in this God that you like to say all these pretty things about and then live such ugly lives, you know, there's just no relationship. Well, it was in this context that I began also to raise the gender question and when I left here and went to seminary in New York and continued my study of black theology and what black theologians were saying, I also began then to raise the issues of (unclear). These are issues that black people and for the most part black men have been raising. How do I and others like me, black women, fit into this equation? What are our questions, you know, that we raise? It was also during that time that I was going through the ordination process in the African Methodist Episcopal Church. You didn't have many women, you know, so that even that process was an interesting challenge, I mean, you still--you still had situations where, you know, before these boards, examiners boards--examining boards, women being asked strange questions that folks would never think to ask men who were coming before the same examining boards, you know, like what does your husband think about your being in the ministry? Speaker 1: They wouldn't ask what your wife thinks about it. Speaker 2: Right. Now, it's not a bad question. You know, I think it's a good question. I think it's a good question to ask men, you know. But the fact that the question is not asked of men represents the problem. It represents the fact that women don't count, you know, so I mean if you were the man, you know, you said that God called you to the ministry, you know, it doesn't matter what your wife says, you know, because I'm the man, you know. But in reality I think it's a good question to ask men and women. But the fact that it's only asked of women represents a part of discriminating practices that are waged against women in the church. Story_ID: 188157 Speaker 1: I began to pursue these questions of gender and you know just as black people were asking questions about discrimination against black people in the larger society and in the larger church, in the universal church, in the white church--or in the white church, then you know, the same kinds of questions were becoming relevant for women, cause some of the same practices were happening with regard to black men in the larger churches were also happening to black women in the black churches, you know, and so the whole question of gender becomes important because we want to--all right now why is it then that the church can consist of 75, 80 percent women, but you don't want us to leave. We consist of what less than of one percent back then. There's been an increase in terms of women's presence but not significant--but not--but there's still a disproportionate number of women in leadership that in relation to men. Women still overwhelmingly populate the churches, 75, 80 percent of membership, but we still are in a minority when it comes to leadership. You know in our history, you know, I seem to kind of remember that we used to call that taxation without representation. Women are responsible for the existence of the church, I mean, without the church--without women where would the church be? Without women as financial backers of the church, where would the church be? But yet we persist in keeping them relegated to service positions in the church or to a limited positions in the church. So much of my work, actually, since my graduate school days the preponderance of my work has been with challenging patriarchal structures that perpetuate male dominance and female subordination. I've been persistent in raising questions inside the church and outside the church about women's participation--full participation at all levels of church structures, at all levels of the structures of the church. Story_ID: 188158 Speaker 1: Back in 1976 here in Atlanta [Georgia], interestingly, back in 1976 at the general conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church [A.M.E.], I presented a position paper there entitled "The Status of Women in the A.M.E. Church" and which basically argued for full participation of women at all levels, including the episcopacy. Speaker 2: How was that received? Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: How was that received, how was your paper received? Speaker 1: Well, it was received but we were, we debated that for decades following, it was not until our last general conference in 2000 that a female was actually elected bishop and that it was in the person of [HM] Bishop Vashti McKenzie. But the struggle was there from 1976 when that first position paper was presented at the convention center in Atlanta to 2000 when Bishop McKenzie was finally elected. Speaker 2: Was she the first bishop? Speaker 1: First female bishop elected at that time, 213 year history of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. First female bishop, first African American bishop--or first female bishop elected in historic black denominations. There have been other female black bishops, but they tended to have been in churches founded by the women themselves. This was the first black female bishop elected in mainline historic black denomination. Not the first African American female bishop elected period because that goes to Kelly--Leontine Kelly in the United Methodist Church, who was elected several years ago. But unfortunately, the movement is still not over because equality in the church is still not a reality for women. Equality for women in the church is still not reality. We got one bishop, but one bishop does not equality make. Story_ID: 188159 Speaker 1: Now in '81 [1981], you founded the Center for Black Women in Church and Society [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did that come before your book or after your book? Speaker 2: Before. Speaker 1: Before your book, okay. Speaker 2: Before. Yeah, I founded this program my second year. I joined the faculty of ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1980. When I came here there was nothing--when I left the seminary as a student, I left and there were--the enrollment was like 200 students and nine females. When I returned to teach in 1980, enrollment was like about 300 students and about 55 or so female students. But there was still no meaningful program for women that provided a platform for women to wrestle with issues that are important for women. And so Black Women in Church and Society was founded for the purpose of providing a space and a place where women could come and wrestle with these issues. We started out doing dialogues where we brought women from across the country to just basically talk about what are the issues, what are the agenda items for African American women in the church--in the churches. So these groups were intergenerational, they were interfaith, (unclear), they were interdisciplinary in terms of a variety of occupations and we just came together and talked about what are some of the issues that are important for us as women in the church, in the larger church community as well as the African American church community, both historic black denominations and black churches in predominantly white denominations. And it's been a fascinating journey. I remember in our early discussions, you know, women were still, you know, radically differentiating ourselves or themselves from feminism, you know, what's the involvement of black women in the feminist movement, there was persistent resistance to that because of the perceptions that many black women and minority women had about feminist movement, but yet, women were still able to articulate very strongly their issues even in the black community--even in the black church context so that women were clear about talking about the sexism that existed in the black church, you know, which manifested by the fact that women were not being ordained at the level of which they were being called, women were not being--when they were ordained, they were not being placed in leadership of churches--senior leadership of churches, women were being placed, they were being placed in the churches that the brothers don't want, literally one, two, three, four, five member churches, I mean, literally, one, two, three, four, five member churches. When they were being placed--when they were being called to preach, they were not being paid on an equal basis, they would be--being called to do the same work and sometime, many instances more work for less pay. You know so that the issues were there that the women were able to talk about, you know. And how do you wrestle with these issues in the church context, particularly when they, many men would be oft to you women to bolster their arguments against women, you know, many of them would say, but women--I don't have that problem, it's not me, now, it's not me, it's my women, my women don't want women preachers. Well, that's some truth to that, but that's not totally--that was not total truth. 'Cause the total truth I've always argued is you know, black preachers are skilled, black people are skilled in anything, they're skilled at getting their program of course when the people don't agree with the program. And so if you're really where you say you are, if you really are a liberationist, if it's really not a problem for you and you have ways that you can teach your congregants--that you can bring your congregation--congregants along with you in terms of a more liberating stance on women's issues. So the Black Women in Church and Society, you know, continues to do advocacy work, continue to address issues that are important for African American women in the church and in the larger society. We deal with issues from sexual harassment in church, domestic violence and black church involvement or position in this whole scenario of domestic violence, whether issues are women's leadership in the churches, training of women in a variety of disciplines in the church, and how do you provide support structures for women who are out there but who are not receiving the kind of support that brothers receive--that men receive in their ministries. Story_ID: 188160 Speaker 1: So the Center [for Black Women in Church and Society, Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] has been going since 1981? Speaker 2: Since 1981. We've had funding from various places, Lilly Endowment has funded us, Ford Foundation has funded us for longstanding leadership development program for African American women in ministry. We had women placed in different social service agencies across the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. Based upon the principle that the doors of the churches are still not opened to women, I mean, to women's leadership, so we're training all these women--seminaries across the country have increased tremendously in terms of their female population enrollment. A few seminaries have--I mean women represent more than half of the student enrollment. Here [ITC, Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], I think, is still about one-third. Well, we're training all these women, what are they gonna do since the churches are still not receiving them based on their qualifications, you know, so we're having to make sure that women are marketable in other areas of ministry outside the churches as well. And so that internship program was designed to provide women more leadership skills, so that the skills they're getting in seminary could be augmented by other skills in other social services agencies of government community services, you know, independent, non-profit programs, etc. The program that we have currently that is going very strong is called the Women and Scholars program. And that program is designed to bring women into the community who are established recognized scholars in different disciplines, interdisciplinary who are dealing with issues where they had to block women in religion and spirituality. And so we bring two in per year to interact with our students, but also to do research and write. Still the area of literature on black women and religion in spirituality is still--we still need a lot of literature produced there. So this program is designed to increase that body of literature. Story_ID: 188161 Speaker 1: --Now you call yourself, from what I read, a womanist. And I know many people would say, well, what's the difference between a feminist and a womanist and a black feminist? Would a black feminist be the same as a womanist? Speaker 2: I would say yes. We use the term black feminism when I began doing gender work. Feminism, of course, was the term that was in vogue. But much of our time, back then in the early '70s [1970s], in the mid '70s [1970s] was spent differentiating between black feminism and feminism and black feminism. And so at that point, we black women used to call themselves black feminist. But it was not a term that was comfortable. We were not comfortable there, black feminist, you know. You know, what does that mean? Okay, you take the best of black movement and the best of the feminist movement, what does it mean to be a black feminist, well it does speak, you know, that which we draw upon to find meaning, you know, the black world, race analysis, the woman's world gender analysis, when you're a black woman, you're impacted by both, you know. But we were never comfortable. It was not until, I think, around 1984 when Alice Walker published her book, 'In Search of My Mother's Garden: Womanist Prose' that she reacquainted us with an experience that I would say the majority of black women experience, that womanish tradition, that womanish tradition. It's not a tradition that you would hold high simply because one was always warned by one's mother that that's not an acceptable behavior. Speaker 1: To be womanish. Speaker 2: Womanish. Speaker 1: Like being mannish on the other side of the coin. Speaker 2: Yes, you know, you're acting in ways you're not supposed to be acting, you know. Speaker 1: You're not ready to act like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know. So it was not a particularly an admirable position to be in to be you know accused of being woman. But what Alice Walker did she took that tradition and she inverted it, you know, she converted it to womanist and then she defined it, gave her own definition and defined that as a strong black woman experience and we are womanist instead of feminist, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187176 Speaker 1: We were talking about what a womanist is. Speaker 2: So that what [Alice] Walker's referring to is, you know, that the strength of the black woman. She actually defines that word womanist is a feminist of color, you know, it's you know a woman who is courageous, audacious, outrageous, you know, it refers to a person who is grown before her time, you know. Like mothers would say to children, you know, girl, you trying to be grown, you know, meaning, you know, acting like you know more than you supposed to know. Speaker 1: Like a black girl who puts her hands on her hips and rolls her eyes at somebody. They are a little bit too ahead of themselves in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yep, there we go, you got it. But you know what sociology, (unclear) you know, traditional sociologist used to call black sociologist used to call that strong black woman tradition, you know, that tradition that a group of black female artists refers to as women who could hold the sky up with a broomstick or it refers to that tradition that Cheryl Townsend Gilkes a sociologist, Colby College [Waterville, Maine], says black women who could hold the ocean back with a broom, you know. It refers to that strong black traditional church lingo, you know, women who could make a way out of no way, you know, women like my mother who can take a little and make a lot, you know. It's that strong black woman tradition. Speaker 1: You all are positing that there is a time when becoming a womanist is fine because you are a woman. So you should stand up for yourself, you should put that hand on your hip or whatever it takes to get things done. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So merely affirming what's been done, what women have been doing in the community anyhow, achieving against the odds in spite of all that's been put in our way, all that that's against us, women who make it anyhow, in spite of people, you know, anyhow people. So that's really basically what we refer to as a womanist, you know, Alice Walker provided, you know, and there's other definitions, other ways, other definitions--other parts of the definition that she gives for that term as she uses it in the preface of that book, 'In Search of My Mother's Garden.' Story_ID: 187177 Speaker 1: Now there's a historical--there's a confluence and then there's some tension between the feminist movement that grew out, I guess, the suffrage, the women's suffrage movement and you know and a lot of the early suffragettes or suffragists were abolitionists and a lot of our 19th century black heroines like Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman knew these women and were involved in--and on the platform with a lot of these women. But there was some tensions you know back in the 19th century and there was some splitting off, you know. Can you address some of that? Speaker 2: Well the tension resulted from you know probably what we called a methodology or strategy, methodology issues or strategy issues. The women who were active in the abolitionist movement were certainly committed to the abolitionist movement but you know there came a time when it was clear that there was a possibility that Negro suffrage could become a reality even when there was not sufficient gains in the area of women's suffrage. And there were those women who indeed argued that, no, we cannot, that you must hold the two together, I mean, you cannot allow Negro suffrage without woman suffrage, and that really kind of caused a split between some of the black abolitionists and some of the white women abolitionists, and you find-- Speaker 1: I think some of the white ones even said you have to let white women vote first before you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, some did, some did not. bell hooks and Deborah Gray, I think is her name, talked about some of the tension that split caused and some of the--and addressed some of the racist language that some of the former abolitionists, white women abolitionists, used as they challenged what was about to happen. So that tension was always if folks like Sojourner Truth, of course, were clear that she was an abolitionist and she was also a women's liberator, you know. And she was consistent in her argument. There are those who were disappointed with Frederick Douglass when he opted for, okay, this is the Negro hour, Negro suffrage and then you know women's suffrage. Speaker 1: They were called a universal manhood suffrage in those days, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So you know that's always been a tension. But the tension even went beyond that, even within the women's movement, the question of non-white participation in that movement was always a source of tension. Of course certain folks like Sojourner Truth would participate anyhow. I mean she was always a part of that--both communities, but you did not find the majority of, or a good representative number of non-white participation in the women's movement. So that even to the point of women's suffrage in 1920--1920s, you still had the issue of racism that was ever present you know there. Story_ID: 187178 Speaker 1: You know, as I always say if the women's movement did not solve the woman question, certainly not for African American--for black women. If that were the case there would never have been a need for folks like Septima Clark or Fannie Lou Hamer or Dorothy Cotton or any of those African American women who were involved in voter registration movement or the freedom school movement in South Carolina or any of the other board of registration movements that were established throughout the south. Woman suffrage in 1920s meant white women's suffrage. It did not mean black women's suffrage, and so you still had in the decades to follow the very basic struggle for the right to vote for not only African American men but also African American women. You know so the tension has always been there. And it persisted even throughout the '60s [1960s] as the new wave of feminism got its start. Still toward the end of the '60s [1960s] and beginning of the '70s [1970s] you did not find a lot of participation of non-white persons in the feminist movement. During the Civil Rights Movement, yes, you did have the involvement of some white women in that movement then many of whom became disgruntled because of the sexism practices in the Black Power Movement itself. But even after some of those women made their exit, you know, there was still tension because many minority women interpreted the work and activity of these white women as basically middle class, white women seeking to advance the agenda of middle class white women, you know. And so the tension was always there. There were always problems with white women that women defined their movement and then coming back and backing up, you know, get some black--initially black then later on, you know, Asian and Hispanic women government, you know, to provide some color into the movement. But minority women never really participating at ground level in terms of defining the movement. That theory was always there and that why you had folks even when Black Women in Church and Society was initially established who were still in the "I'm not a feminist", but mode, you know. They would persistently say I'm not a feminist but and everything that comes after but are feminist issues. But the point is to make a distinction between what African American women were concerned about and what white women were addressing in their "white middle class movement." Story_ID: 187179 Speaker 1: In, what, 1989 I guess you published your first book? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's called 'White Women's Christ and Black Women's Jesus: Feminist Christology and the Womanist Response.' What was that about? I mean what's the difference between what white women's Christ and-- Speaker 2: Well I was actually addressing from the same kinds of issues. When I began my gender explorations, I actually began by looking at what feminist were doing--some of the issues that feminists were raising in theology. So I was looking essentially at feminist theology. But as I was studying the work of feminist, you know, tensions of theologians, you know, I was increasingly struck by the lack of me, the lack of my presence, you know, the lack of African American female presence as I studied feminist analysis, the whole notion that women's experience has been ignored historically in the doing of theology and in the doing of any other disciplines as well and the notion that women's experience really essentially has been defined by men and in the interest of men. I found all that to be true, but that's not the whole story. I was not finding African American women's presence in what women were saying. In other words I was studying white women's experiences as a source for doing feminist theology. So what that did for me then is that it told me that I needed to go and look someplace else. So that sent me to slave and ex-slave narratives to look at African American women's contributions in the area of defining African American women's reality and African American women's reality in our understanding of religion. In my research I was struck by a couple of slave, ex-slave narratives, and I really do not remember, I really need to look this up. I don't remember if these were two separate narratives or the same narrative. I think there were two separate narratives. But one narrative--in one narrative the slave--ex-slave was talking about the devotional life of the slave--of the mistress of the plantation. And she noted that the mistress would, every day at a certain time, she would sit in the parlor and read the Bible, do her Bible reading, devotional reading for the day. And then there's another slave narrative, I think the second slave narrative that I read where the slave or ex-slave was talking about having been beaten, having been ordered beaten by the foreman because the mistress had ordered the foreman to beat the slave, because the mistress had just discovered that the master of the plantation had sexually abused--had raped the slave woman. I call it rape; the text may not have used for the word rape, but it referenced sexual relation with the slave woman. Speaker 1: Who was she? Speaker 2: I call it rape because if you don't got freedom then you don't have the freedom to say no, you know, so it's rape. Well I couldn't reconcile those two narratives. One narrative talking about a woman sitting--a mistress sitting in the parlor reading the Bible as her regular devotional life, and the other narrative talking about the mistress on the plantation ordering the woman to be beaten because she got angry and upset and I guess in her disempowered state, she couldn't do anything to her husband, so she wanted the slave woman beaten. Story_ID: 187180 Speaker 1: And I kept asking myself, what was that woman reading in that Bible? What was that Bible telling her about what goes on outside that parlor that she was sitting--that parlor window that she was sitting in front of? What was that Bible telling her about how slave women, black are being treated on her plantation, even if this is a different (unclear), that's not the point. But the question what was the Bible telling her about slavery, about (unclear) slavery, how a people are systemically dehumanized, disenfranchised, disempowered, dehumanized day after day. What was that bible telling her? What that left me postulating then is that there's a radical difference between the experiences of the daughters of slaves and the experiences of the daughters of slaveholders. How do these people interpret religion? How do they interpret Jesus, you know, did Jesus say anything about what's going on on that plantation outside of your window, you know. Well, the slave woman, you know, talked very clearly about how they understood Jesus. In the book I recount a couple of prayers from the slave women as they prayed to Jesus and how they identified with Jesus and how they felt that Jesus identified with them, you know, even as they suffered every day of their life, how they were able to identify with Jesus on the cross, crucifixion because they were being crucified every day, you know, by way of the beatings that they were receiving and the other you know insults and assaults that they received in their daily lives. Okay, if black women understand Jesus in this you know way that was then able to empower them, enable to give them strength to survive all these, you know, these atrocities in their lives, a Jesus who was able to identify with them, a Jesus who was able to, you know, to help them to come to their help when they're in trouble, you know, how are white women experiencing Jesus, you know. There's something radically different between how one group of women experience that Jesus as liberator and another group of women who experience--what I propose in the book is that white women essentially made--were making the same mistake that white men made and that they were critiquing--criticizing white men for doing it. White men merely take their own experiences and universalize it as everybody else's experiences, and that experience is normative and if you don't come anywhere near that experience that means you're abnormal and that means that you're the crazy one, that means that you're the weak one, that means that you're the problematic one. Well, women were doing the same thing. Women were taking experiences of white women and normaltizing that experience and then using that experience to devalue all other women's experience-- minority women's experiences. What I argue essentially is that that's invalid, can't be done and the problem between the races will never--will never be resolved as long as that same kind of dismissal of the majority of people's experiences continue. Story_ID: 187181 Speaker 1: You think that in terms of the way white people view Christianity in this country [United States] that they see it more as part of the status quo, you know, so you can read your Bible in the afternoon and beat your slave or whatever else you're going to do without having to really challenge it? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's what black theology has said that. In fact not just black theology, but liberation theology, all liberation theology make the same thing--they essentially that same point, and black theology and womanist theology or I want to say all black theology, but what we call now womanist theology. Yeah, and they are making the same point that what white men, historically, have proposed as theology have merely been a figment of their own imagination and have basically disempowered other groups of people and have defined themselves as status quo and other--all others, including women--including white women, all others are to accept that or to be deemed illegitimate, which in fact is what often been done. Anybody else who pretend to do a theology that's different from, then are accused of doing bad theology if doing theology at all, or doing sloppy theology, if theology at all, or doing sociology and poor sociology at that. So, yeah, what all of these perspectives do, and certainly what most theologians and black theology's do is to challenge what has been given to us as normative. Now the importance of this, I think the significance of this kind of work that continues to go on is that there is a direct relationship between what it is we say we believe and how we structure our church and our society. I mean, there's no accident that in a patriarchal society God is male. I mean, our general understanding of God is that God is male, you know. Most sophisticated and intelligent persons would when backed up against the wall, you know, would basically argue that God is spirit, but in reality the way it is manifested in our lives, God really, essentially patriarchal society is male. There's no accident that in a racist society, in a society that where white supremacy is ideology of the day that God essentially is white. I mean that's the way God manifests itself and that's the way we live it and that's the way it's been. That's no accident in a society that's racist you know. You're not going to define God in ways that you perceive to be negative. And if in a racist society it's black, if anything, it certainly is negative, you know. So you can't ascribe that quality to your God who's so, you know, perfect in reality. So you know what these theologians do, certainly women theologians in black theology, what they do is to challenge this--these historic presumptions, the historic arrogance of white theology--white theologians who had deemed that they are the authorities, and no one else has the intellect, the moral authority to define those God realities, you know. So all of these theologies, black womanist, mujerista, Asian American, Latin American, African, Asian theologies, all of these theologies challenge that status quo theology that we've all been given as normative. You know, they're not normative, they come out of your experiences and you deem historically that your experiences have been normative. Story_ID: 187182 Speaker 1: In the black community, correct me if you think I'm wrong, I would say that there are many people, probably the majority of our people don't discuss theology as such. They discuss, do you believe in the Bible or not, especially down south, you know. Do you believe everything that's in the Bible, most people say, yes, they do and they would like to or trying to, you know, trying to believe all of it and that would make you a proper Christian to believe everything that's in the Bible and you know, not really realizing it's a product of theology anyway. With all the black store front churches that pop up every day and the mega churches that seem to focus a lot on you know acquisition, you know what I mean. I mean how do see I guess, what is it, there's a really challenge, you know, someone like yourself who's trying to do a race class and power relationships, how is it challenge you really in a black community to get your point across. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, certainly it raises questions for anybody who raises the kind of questions that I raise, because it makes you face the reality that sure there are many people who are not raising the same kind of questions you're raising and certainly not in the same ways that you're raising them. But you know my response to that surely is you know Jesus didn't have everybody so it does not matter that--well, it does matter, but you don't focus on the fact that you can't get everybody to deal with the questions that you think are important. You continue to raise those questions in key ways, and you continue to raise the questions in ways that are meaningful to them, to the community. Now it become difficult, I think you're absolutely right, I think it becomes difficult, particularly in a society when we are so prosperity-oriented, you know, everybody wants more, you know, I got it, it's, you know, adequate, but I want more. I mean we live in a more generation, you know. And then (unclear) reality is that we tend to ascribe God's blessings--or to define God's blessings in terms of that more mode, you know, the more you get, the more you believe that God's blessing you. The difficulty with that is that it raises so many questions about those who have not, you know. What are you saying about the God who persists in blessing the few and leaving the masses. There's a song that I often refer to, I don't remember. The song says something like be grateful that someone else is worse off than you, or be grateful--you ought to be grateful because somebody else is worse off than you, so you ought to be grateful. I'm not sure what we're being admonished to be grateful for. Are we being admonished you know in the Reverend Ike sense, you know, God didn't call me to be one of 'em, you know, the poor is there and God didn't call me to be one of 'em, you know, so my job is to make sure that I'm not one of the poor, you know. Or is there a deeper calling, you know, I mean, is there a deeper calling that moves beyond my own personal "blessings." Is there a deeper calling that moves us away from what we in the secular world or what we in a world that are so hung up on secular manifestations, want to count as blessings versus the challenge that is there if we take the mandate seriously to go forth into all the world and do all of what Jesus calls you to do. I mean it is easier to focus on the individual racking up of blessings, you know, than it is to go out and see you know what other living conditions of those who have not--who are not sharing in your level of blessings, you know. It's not an easy proposition, you know. There are some who dismiss it by simply saying the Bible says a poor you will have with you always, you know. And so you don't worry about the poor, you just go on and take care of yourself and get as much blessing as you can get. I mean that's one way of dealing with it. But the problem becomes is that God's way, or is that merely a selfish way of looking at the Gospel and how the Gospel benefits me as an individual versus how it is to go forth into all the world and bring folks to God. Story_ID: 188162 Speaker 1: I'll just go with what I just said a moment ago, this room here, the Center for Black Women in Church and Society [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], when you come into this room it's overwhelmingly African in terms of the images on the wall, the you the iconography is clearly black you know and you get the feeling you're in a black culture center when you come in here, not necessarily a chapel, but you know, it's different. You can welcome (unclear) on the wall. So do you think that the black--well the womanist movement in the church has pushed the African agenda in church too in terms of culture and heritage and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, it has. It has. African American women who are womanist tend to be women who affirm the black/African heritage and who are able to affirm our womanness at the same time. So yeah, generally speaking, womanist tend to impress some level of Afrocentrism and so as we, you know, seek to read image to recreate more positive images of what it means to be African American or what it means to be African American women then that means, yes, you have to affirm who we are and we have to affirm our African that includes you know affirming our African heritage, and so it just seems natural, it just seems you know, 'cause this is who we are that we surround ourselves by who we are, I mean, there's no sense that there's any negative understanding of our own images, of our self-imagery when you walk into this space. And that's what it ought to be, that's what it ought to be. I mean we ought to be able to see ourselves in positive light. One of things we didn't talk about that we won't talk about, but let me just mention it. One of the other books I'm trying to finish (unclear) hopefully is a book on black theology and black art and it's a three volume piece on looking at black theologians' understanding of black theology, particularly in relation to understanding of Jesus and God, Madonna and child, et cetera and looking at what artists have done and who's representing blackness--representing blackness and religion form--religious form as well as others. Story_ID: 188163 Speaker 1: The old short story that John Henrik Clarke wrote about his experiences in Columbus, Georgia (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black.' Speaker 1: And he got in trouble. Speaker 2: Yes, yes I'm using that as well in written form, it is in film form as well. But I'm using it in written form. But two of the artist, I interviewed probably about a hundred, just shy of 150 clergy persons, some pastors, some not pastors, artists and lay persons across the country on this whole subject of black theology, black art images and its function in religion. I remember two artists in particular, one artist is Mr. Allen Creighton [ph.] of Boston [Massachusetts], and I remember when I asked him, I interviewed him in Boston and asked him about his work and, you know, how long he'd been doing black work and art and what the response of the people you know to his work. I remember he said he started doing black religious art in 1960, and that when black people would see his--and he would never present black people in negative ways, it would always be serious and positive imagery. He said that black people would laugh, black people would laugh at what they saw, the imagery. It was interesting 'cause at that point when I interviewed Allen Creighton he was somewhere around eighty-four, something like that. In (unclear) age. The other artist that--another--one of the other artists that I interviewed was Arthello Beck of Dallas, Texas, whose religious art we have in our chapel here. I posed the same question to him, it was interesting that his response was the same. He said that black people walked by his art, his presentation of black people in art form on the canvas and they would laugh, you know, and I felt, wow, isn't it phenomenal that we live in a society that's so racist that the racism that has ingrained it's such psychological problematics in us that we can't even take ourselves seriously. Story_ID: 188164 Speaker 1: Well I witnessed a scene in a barber shop, just to interject this, when I was ten about 1960 where there's a calendar with a painting of a black Christ on it and it made some of the patrons angry to see it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, from one extreme to another, yeah--laugh, funny-- Speaker 1: Black patrons, black patrons. Speaker 2: I'm sure, I'm sure. One of the other artists that I interviewed is in California at the church at a Baptist church in Los Angeles [California], I think it's Love Missionary Michigan Baptist Church, I'm not sure I remember the name of that church correctly. But the artist did some canvas murals on the wall in the sanctuary, and when I asked the pastor and the artist what's been the response of the people to the murals. They did different scenes in the life of Jesus, biblical scenes in the life of Jesus on the wall. And I was told that initially when the kids would come in 'cause it's a small church and so Sunday school was held in the sanctuary, and that's where the mural was. The children would laugh at the pictures, you know, initially. But then as the pictures were there and they would, you know, be studying their Sunday school lessons and they were able to use the wall to demonstrate points when they're making--studying particular lessons that involved those particular text, you know, then it became a social pride and the kids were able to learn how to appreciate themselves, "Oh, they look like us" and you're studying it in the Bible. But the interesting thing is is that--is that initially, I mean, we are so disconnected with our own being that we can't even see ourselves in good, positive ways. Now this was like a couple, two or three decades ago. But you know we need to read, we need to re-image our thinking about images, about ourselves. And you know that's what you do in your space, you know, you create the images that are important for you. And it's not only in your work space, but in your worship space as well, you know. I mean the clergy persons that I interviewed, quite a few of them were products of the civil rights black power movement and since that consciousness of that day, they were able to change images in their churches, you know. Now that takes a lot of resocializing and reeducating to do, you know, because I mean, you know, you walk in some of these churches and change its images in these churches, you're looking for another church community soon, you know, I mean, 'cause you're messing with their Jesus, you know. But if you can--I teach my students to get into a teaching mode and, you know, teach people what's the significance of the imagery and what does the imagery do for and to you and your people, you know? What does it mean that Bishop Joe Johnson--Joseph Johnson of the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, you know, raise--I mean what does it do to have your Jesus, the one that you worship, that you adore, that you love looks like your enemy, looks like the one who's got their feet on your neck, you know. Your Jesus looks like the one who oppressing you day after day. Now what does it do the psychic of the people, you know. [HM] Na'im Akbar in his work, you know, talks about the psychological chains of slavery that's there even after slavery is over, you know, as an institution. Story_ID: 188165 Speaker 1: You know there are some that would argue too and this argument has been raised and wrestled with by black people, you know, and it hasn't been necessarily heard that loudly but the argument isn't Christianity the religion of those who oppress us and how do we deal with that, I mean, it is or it isn't, and how do we deal with it? Speaker 2: You got different theoreticians on that. Yeah, you do have those who would argue that Christianity is a religion of our oppressors, you heard a lot of that in the '60s [1960s] from black militants who identify Christianity as a white man's religion and oppressive who is functioning such oppressive ways, but then you have others who have begun to do other kinds research, now valid research, where it is being argued that Christianity actually is, I mean the real Christianity, the true Christianity, is really comes out of the African context and in fact has been bastardized by white western oppressive cultures, which have used religion to oppress people. You know, so you got, you know, different ways of arguing that some say, yeah, and then some say, not really, there's another origin to Christianity and then there're others who would say, who seek to do revisionist history in the context of the United States who go back and see that well, yes, Christianity was used in--was intended to do one thing with regard to blacks, but it did something else, you know, as well. Yeah, there were those who argue that black folks should not be baptized because they didn't want black people to confuse the freedom that comes with baptism with civil freedom, you know, so you withhold baptism from them or there are those who, you know, would argue that well black people don't have any souls anyway so it doesn't matter, you know, whether you evangelize or not, they're not there, you know. But then you got the others who saw Christianity as liberating thread in African--in the African American experience and those who followed it, you know, the black church historical development. Speaker 1: There's an interesting question that's been raised too in regard to that, people have argued for years that Christianity really saved black people, or made it possible for us to achieve liberation and others naysayers that's black people using Christianity as a vehicle, you know, through their own aspirations for freedom wherever to use Christianity to get there. I mean you use it as a vehicle to get there, that being the only game in town, I mean, you know in some ways, you know. How do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well you know there's a variety of ways different ways you gon' get that--I mean there's some would even take it to the extreme, in fact, they even some people who I admire very much but just have problems with this particular analysis. I mean there are those who even argue that God--slavery was even a part of God's plan so that blacks--so that heathens could be introduced--so that heathens could be saved via introduction to Christianity. Speaker 1: That was a common argument among slave's masters in the 19th century. Speaker 2: Yeah, and unfortunately some blacks adopted that idea, you know, as well, unfortunately. I think, you know, as I said bad theology produces, you know, bad beliefs, you know. Poor and irrelevant theology produce poor and irrelevant beliefs. You know, I think that even in spite of these variety of distorted interpretations, I think, you know, you still find that liberative strand in black religious--black American religious history that's represented in many of the churches, such as A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church and A.M.E. Zion Church and C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Churches and other black churches that took that religion that was not necessarily intended for their good and interpreted it as a good and liberating and affirming and empowering movement in their lives. Story_ID: 188166 Speaker 1: Now last year you were part of a major summit on black religion that I think [HM] Tavis Smiley hosted in Detroit [Michigan]. Can you tell us about this and what impact you think this made, this big summit. It was televised on CSPAN and black radio stations around the country? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there was a good--it was a good effort, it was a good platform to raise some key issues that are important for the African American community church and the larger community. I think it had an excellent--had a very good effect of putting some of these issues in the--on the agenda or in the minds at least, people across the country. There were about seven thousand folks present at the COBO Convention Center. But in terms of the number of people reached on CSPAN, across the country and beyond, they had a lot more exposure so that these issues were raised in a variety of context, and I've heard folks from all over the country who said that they have gotten the tapes and they're using it in their churches in various studies and they're using it in their classes, in college class rooms, you know, so that there are key issues you know that are being discussed. In that regard I thought that it was an excellent platform for bringing some issues to the table, granted in a smorgasbord style, you know, but you know, nonetheless, it's there. But I agree with Dr. Cone, with [HM] James [H.] Cone, when he said that what the black church really needs now is to deal with these issues--those issues that were raised on that day for that six-hour period. We need to take those issues and organize them in some kind of way and deal with these issues and devise ways of dealing with these issues apart from the camera in context where folks can really sit down and resolute these issues. There were some key issues that were--critical issues that were raised, but you can't deal with them in any significant way on a stage of twelve, thirteen panelists and seven thousand folks, you know, sitting there. Now I think the fact that churches and schools across--professors and schools and pastors of churches across the country are taking the tape and using them to generate discussions and to do some teaching, I think that's excellent, and I think if that can go on for a long time, that would be very helpful. But I do agree that--that we do need to take these issues and take them to another level so that we can really address them in a key way. Actually, there's going to be a follow-up about out conference here in Atlanta [Georgia] in February, actually that will--that's intended to take Dr. Cone's challenge seriously and kind of brings some of those issues into another place, another--I mean another context where it can be addressed in some substantive ways, you know. It was good when were able to do I thought was good, you were dealing with a lot of sound bites and you know just quick responses to questions, some of which you can wrestle with them for, you know, for a whole year just on those situations, you know. And so that was good in terms of what it did, but I think the challenge now is to move from there, move from that platform and begin to deal with some of these issues that are affecting us in such important ways. I think Tavis Smiley did an excellent job in terms of getting it started. I think that we need to move it to another place so that we can--so that they can begin to make a difference. Story_ID: 188167 Speaker 1: Okay, let me put it like this, would you welcome non-Christians into a spiritual dialogue or would you see that as something that doesn't, you know, I mean, if they're not a Christian, it's no point in talking to them or would you see like the inclusion of Muslims and Yorubas and other peoples (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We do need an interfaith dialogue. Actually we need both, both-and. We need the intra-communal dialogues and we need the inter-communal dialogues, so on both levels, I mean, you know African Americans, Christians are just as--need enlightenment on the Muslim faith as any other Christian, you know, does. So yeah, we do need that interfaith peace as well. Story_ID: 188168 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general today? Speaker 2: Well, what I hope for is a stronger--is for the black community to become a strong community. I'm tempted to use the word unity. We hear often discussions on unity of the community, the black--the need for unity in the community. Yeah, I think that's important, I think that's important as long as you recognize that unity does not necessarily mean uniformity, does not mean sameness, it means, you know, how can you be in community and acknowledge and affirm the diversity that we all bring to the community which have the potential of helping to strengthen the community. You know I often say when we talk about gender issues in the black community, the thing that gets me about the response of many men is, and some women, is that they interpret the raising of the issues as divisive, you know, so that you go into certain context, raise the issues of women, women's rights, equality, etc., then there is the issue of dividing the community. You know I would like for us to get to the point of recognizing that just because an issue is my issue does not mean that it's not a black community issue, just because an issue is a black women's issue does not mean that's not a black community issue. If it's a black women's issue that means it's a black community issue, you know. If it's a black male issue, that means a black community issue. I as a black woman am as concerned as any progressive black man about the number of black males in prison, you know, about the number of black males not in college, you know, about the number strung out on drugs and the increasing of black women in that category as well. You know I'm concerned about it because you know if that's a problem with black men then it's a problem with the black community, and I'm a part of the black community, you know. I think it was R. J. Cooper that says that a chain is as strong as its weakest link, you know. If the link of the chain is weak that means the community is weak. If a link of the chain is broken, the chain is broken, you know. And so the community is broken if the link is broken. So what I like to see happen is I'd like to see black men who are strong enough and who are secure enough to deal with black women's issues in ways that are beneficial to the black community, to them as for us. Well on the same token, also black women who are secure enough and who are strong enough to see that you know it's not just all about us it's about the black community, and if we don't deal with these issues that are affecting our black men, you know, then the black community suffers, you know. So what I would like to see is strong black community and that's composed of strong black women and strong black men. Story_ID: 188169 Speaker 1: In terms of the history of black women in this country are there any texts that you would recommend that people read? I know it's a lot that has been written lately, and we're learning things we never learned before. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there so many. You know I would say, well actually two things. I won't give you a text, I mean, I can give you--you know, you want to get a good sweep at 'Notable Black American Women' by Smith from Nashville [Tennessee] from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], [HM] Jessie [Carney] Smith is her name. Or there are another couple of encyclopedic type volumes on African American Women or you know look at the proliferation of women in literature, you know, the Alice Walkers and Toni Morrison and etc., etc. onto literature types you know (unclear) you know bell hooks' works. But you know I think what I would suggest is looking at personalities, but in two ways, you know. We're accustomed to looking at the exceptional black woman, the Phillis Wheatleys and the Maria Stewarts and the-- Speaker 1: You just named Anna Julia Cooper and most people don't know who she is even though she was quite exceptional. Speaker 2: --Oh, yeah. Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, you know, these are the exceptional women that we are really looking at. Fortunately there are a number of dissertations that are coming out on these women. But you know so we need to look at these women. But I'd like to also encourage particularly given the fact that we've been left out of history for so long, you know, that we need and when people tend to write history, they don't tend to look at African American women you know. So I like to encourage folks to look those unsung sheroes, you know, the ones that, you know, the great-grandmamas whose stories you've heard, you know that are not recorded in the books. One of the things I do in my class, I teach a class every year on black women in ministry, and one of the assignments of that class is that each student has to find a woman in his or her denomination to write a bio-theological paper on. And I encouraged them to select someone, you know, we got the Sojourner Truth, we got the, you know, the Harriet Tubmans, you know, the few exceptionals that society has allowed us to have. Find some of those women that would have, could have been other Sojourner Truths or other Andrea Coopers or other Maria Stewarts or Ida Barnetts [Ida B. Wells], you know, had circumstances been different, had their social political reality been different. These were thinking women, you know, the exceptionals that--the exceptions that you know race and society has allowed us to have are not all, you know, that's not all. There are many exceptional women who just did not make the cut because of we live in a society that's just so-thorough going and pervasively racist. Story_ID: 187191 Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you about the gay rights issue and church. The Episcopals just had a big conference and elected a first gay, openly gay bishop. Do you have a position on that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think God calls who he wants to call. Well, you know, I don't know, but that answer may not be apropos there, 'cause actually he was in-- Speaker 1: He's already a priest. Speaker 2: --Yeah, he was already a-- Speaker 1: But the question was should he be a leader in church? Speaker 2: --Yeah, he has the qualifications, you know, and his diocese obviously felt him qualified to serve in that position, you know, so it was really the question being raised from folks outside--well, I'm sure there were some folks, some minority of folks that made the question even within his territory. Speaker 1: Is there such an issue in the black church today that you know of? Speaker 2: Not to that level. We haven't gotten serious about that issue yet. Speaker 1: Is it because you don't anticipate it being an issue or you think it's-- Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm sure it's an issue, it's just it has not become a public issue. I mean there are issues of homosexuality. In fact even in my church we attempted to do a position paper on homosexuality some years ago. But the paper was sent back for further study I believe it was. I'm not even sure it gotten to the same position paper book that referenced with regard to women in ministry (unclear) back in 1976 at the general conference here. There was--that was one of the issues being dealt with, but I think, my recollection tells me that that paper was sent back for further study. Do you know if that paper got into that book? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER: No. It's still being studied or pigeonholed. Speaker 2: Well, no pigeonholes in the study, I don't think anybody was doing anything on it, you know, so it's not a public issue yet. Story_ID: 187192 Speaker 1: Earlier, we talked about your upbringing in South Carolina and we talked about the Gullah culture which is now known as the most African of African American cultures. And with African survivals in the culture. There are some black people and there are theologians I heard who say there's nothing--black theologians said there's nothing that survived from Africa, at least in the '60s [1960s] they were saying that. They have written and wrote that we have no African religious survivals whatsoever and so you know we shouldn't even look that way. Do you have any thoughts on what African cultural values have survived Middle Passage and present itself in our spiritual practice? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think generally speaking when we talk about the continuity between the African heritage and African American heritage, we speak about such issues as our understanding of communalism versus that western notion of individualism, the "I think therefore I am" a formula versus the "I am because we are" African notion. In theology we generally tend to focus on the notion of an affirmation of communalism not to the point of eliminating all concern for individualism but suggesting that the communal--that the community takes precedence over that radical individualistic notion that we get in western context. So that's one issue that I've certainly made argument that I made myself and that other African American theologians have tended to focus upon. I've heard other thinkers talk about, you know, worship styles that which takes place in worship particularly in the South that tend to be elements that come out of the African tradition, the African American style of preaching of what we call the African American style of black preaching. To call an answer form that comes out of an African context, you know, the talk of worship style that includes certain kinds of music and dance that are particularly key in the South you know and the way dance has to take a certain form. Dr. Melva Costen who has dealt with that in her work on black worship. Dr. Costen is from South Carolina and has done some work where she draws a connection between what are some of those traits that have been retained in African American worship style that comes from the African culture. I tend to believe that there's continuity between the African, African American experience. I do recognize that there are those who say that we are American, not only American first, but also American only, but then there are those who reject that (unclear) from both cultures and that we did not lose all of it. Yes, we lost a lot, but not all of it. And I think you will probably see that even from the language, some of the Gullah language. I mean it's difficult, you know, it's difficult for me to understand, the Gullah language. I mean if you're not there and you're not listening to it constantly becomes really difficult to understand. There is a bible even that, a translation of the bible, into the Gullah language that does exist. I'm not sure if it's the entire bible or just the New Testament or in fact just a couple of the Gospels. But that has been translated into Gullah, and it's kind of, if you not either trained to listen, you know, to it, it's most difficult--it can be most difficult to understand even by someone like me who grew up in the area. But some interpret a lot of that interpret, some measure of retention of the African language structure, et cetera on these islands, sea islands of South Carolina. Story_ID: 187193 Speaker 1: How would you describe your own personal religious philosophy or theology? Speaker 2: Well, the term is womanist. Now womanist from my perspective takes the shape of--takes its starting point from African black women's experiences. So that I--in my work--what's important for me is uplifting the life world of women like my mother or like a Fannie Lou Hamer or a Mary McLeod Bethune or a Nanny (unclear) in Baptist tradition, Mary McLeod Bethune in Presbyterian tradition. You know these are folks that I look at, I mean, affirmation of--my basic argument is as a womanist, my basic argument is that single issue analyses are helpful, but they cannot solve all of our problems of the day, for example, I do affirm with my brothers that racism is so pervasive in our church and in our society that racism has to be dealt with. You know, we have to deal with what it has meant to live in a church in a large society that lives by white supremacy, express supremacy ideology. You gotta deal with that. But that's not gon' solve all of our problems, all the problems, I mean, indeed we have. As an African American woman what my reality tells me is that I can look at that reality and I can see one group of folks, but I also simultaneously see connectors that take me in different places. What I often say is the best way to look at liberation and our need for liberation is look at the African American woman's reality. If I were to--if our God thought--no forget that, let's just say if God were to miraculously at the stroke of midnight tonight eliminate racism from our church and from our society, well, the fact of the matter is that African American women's experiences would not change radically, it would change, you know, to the degree you know that, you know, I'm in a relation with my husband and my husband's situation may change 'cause racism doesn't exist anymore, my father's situation may change, 'cause racism does not, you know, exist anymore, my brother's situation may change, but as an African American woman, as a woman, you know, sexism is still a reality and so the, you know, unless you're attached to somebody, you know, your reality is not going to change. Well, if on the other hand God were miraculously to eliminate sexism from our church and from our society at the stroke of midnight tonight, I as an African American woman, my situation is not going to change very much, you know. I just hope and pray I gotta, you know, I know some white women who might, you know, take, you know, look kindly upon me and maybe my situation might change, you know some, because racism is still pervasive and even in a society where we might see that sexism does not exist, racism is still a reality, which means that you're still, you know, disenfranchised. Speaker 1: So there's a devil there either way you cut it. Speaker 2: Either way you cut it, you know. So the least common denominator for me then becomes the African American woman's reality. Story_ID: 187194 Speaker 1: You know so if I deal with in my reality sexism you know then that means that I'm automatically dealing with other women's reality, Hispanic women, Native American women, you know, Asian American women, you know, I'm dealing with African--other women as women. I deal with the contradiction of race that I encounter as an African American woman and you know that I'm dealing with other black men and you know those Hispanic men and Native American men, you know, because race has to be dealt with in some (unclear). So that as we look at that reality, it by necessity keeps you connected with others, you know, so you just cannot be locked into that individualistic small box, you know, that makes you deal with just this one set of issues. You necessarily have to deal with other issues, you know. So that I would argue that liberation must be a reality and it can happen. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] said and Kobe Bryant just reminded us the other day that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. And if injustice exists anywhere then justice is really not a reality. So that as long as any form of oppression exists, whatever it is, racism, sexism, classism, homophobia, heterosexism, ageism, militarism, colonialism, you know, whatever the form it exists in, if it exists, I as an ambassador of God gotta be involved in it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you're a Christian, [Fannie Lou] Hamer said, Christianity means freedom, Jesus means freedom if you proclaim to love Jesus, if you claim to be a Christian, you gotta be involved in the movement toward freedom, wherever that movement takes us. So I think the bottom line for me is eradication of the sins for various manifestations of sin and evil as they are found in people and in our communities and how do you eradicate them, how do you get rid of them, how do you purge the community of all of these isms? You can't do that by staying in a box. Story_ID: 187195 Speaker 1: Now at this point in your life and you're still relatively young working on a number of different things, what would you consider at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: The advancement of women in the church and in the larger society, but particularly in the church. My struggle has since, prior to '76 [1976], I focus on '76 [1976] because that was the first opportunity we had to call the church's attention in a public way to this whole issue of gender discrimination and gender equality in the church. I hope that my legacy will be that I have been able to do something to move women forward to advance women's position and place, particularly in the church, but in the larger society and my church I--coming out of that 1976 position paper at the general conference was at that same general conference that we called women clergy for a meeting in a back room in the convention center (unclear) that led to an ad hoc committee from which we were able to present to the bishop at several years following that and that ad hoc committee led him to the development of women in ministry organization in the church which led to the creation of the first women in ministry commissioned of any historic black denomination in the country, in the world which led into whose advocacy led to the election of the first woman bishop in the AME Church. I hope that my legacy will be that I have made a difference in the lives of women in the church, women increasing as pastors as mid judicatories as, in my church they call presiding elders. And one of my two sisters who in the ministry is presiding in South Carolina and remains the first and only presiding elder in South Carolina, female presiding elder in South Carolina to this day. And the increase of women in various other positions in the churches. I just like for it to be said that I was able to make a difference. I didn't want it for myself, I don't feel a call to pastor, you know, I don't feel a need to be a pastor, but there are women who have been called to the pastor and who deserve to do so. So I just hope that my advocacy, my words that I have written, my speeches, addresses that I have given, my sermons I have preached have and will continue to make a difference in the lives of women who continue to seek to understand to interpret God's call upon their lives. Story_ID: 187196 Speaker 1: Now you have several books in development right now. Can you tell us about what you're doing? Speaker 2: Well, interestingly, two books are on women in ministry. One is an anthology on African American women in ministry. It's a book that came--I have a course that I have been teaching for the last ten years or so, enabling women to wrestle with various issues surrounding what it means to be--to accept one's call to the ministry. This course to my knowledge is still the only course of its type being taught in the country. Black Women in Ministry we attract students who come from other countries to take this course, from other states to take this course and so the book that I am--the anthology that I'm putting together is one that's designed to help the women to wrestle with issues regarding women in ministry. The second book that I am working on that I'm trying to finish is called 'Bricks Without Straw,' the story of women in ministry at the African Methodist Episcopal Church and it is an anthology of works that about and by women in ministry and the African Methodist Episcopal Church. The third is an anthology on "Black Theology For the 21st Century" and it is looking at challenges facing black theology for black and women in theology for the 21st century and finally the fourth work is 'Black Theology and Black Art.' It is a three-volume work on looking at black people's understandings of divinities. Volume One is an interpretive essay based on the 150 interviews that I've done across the country on black theology and black art, volume two is an anthology of what we have been able to collect from theologians by theologians, artists, a variety of art forms, poetry sermons on black people's understandings of divinities and the volume three is a portfolio, black religious art focused on Black Christ--focusing upon Black Christ and Black Madonna and Child. Story_ID: 187197 Speaker 1: The one last question that we always ask and it's slightly different from legacy is how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: One who made a difference. As one who made a difference in the church and particularly for women..