 Story_ID: 327114 Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating. My name is Evelyn Pounds and I am the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state and spell your full name including your middle name? Speaker 2: Stephanie, my middle name is actually my maiden name, Smith, I use S, and Hughley [HistoryMaker Stephanie Hughley], and that's S-T-E-P-H-A-N-I-E, S-M-I-T-H, Hughley, H-U-G-H-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Your date of birth and your location of birth. Speaker 2: October 16th, 1948, and I was born in Massillon, Ohio. Speaker 1: Would you spell Massillon? Speaker 2: M-A-S-S-I-L-L-O-N, and that's only because my mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] was working for a doctor and his office was in Massillon. But they--I actually lived in Canton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date. Speaker 2: February 13th, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location, the address of this interview. Speaker 2: We are at my home, at 117 Selman Street, S-E-L-M-A-N Street, Southeast in Atlanta [Georgia], 30316. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the executive producer of the National Black Arts Festival. Story_ID: 327115 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you just a few People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is salad, all kinds of salad with all different kinds of vegetables on it. Raw, fresh greens and everything you can think of vegetable to be on a salad. Speaker 1: Okay, time of year? Speaker 2: Probably the fall. It's, it was--my birthday is in the fall and I always used to just kind of take the fall off, kind of like the end of the winter, I mean the end of the summer, get ready for winter. I think the fall. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is yellow. I love yellow. It's so bright and sunny and makes me happy (laughter). Speaker 1: The vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation is Sapelo Island, Georgia. Sapelo Island is just off the coast down between--about forty-five minutes south of Savannah [Georgia], little bit north of St. Simons Island [Georgia], but it was home to the Gullah people. At one time fifty of those islands belonged to the Gullah people. They were the direct descendants of African enslaved people. And Sapelo is still pretty much preserved with the Gullah community. And it's the only place on the planet that I can go and truly rest because there's nothing there. There is no hotels, there is no restaurants. I mean the, the people who are there, who live there, who have been there for centuries, own their own bed and breakfasts and trailers and now Ms. Lula has a kitchen [Lula's Kitchen, Sapelo Island, Georgia]. But I mean it is, it's just the most peaceful place on the planet for me. The beach is the most beautiful beach. There's usually no one on the beach. It's just a small Gullah community and the University of Georgia has a marine biology lab [University of Georgia Marine Institute on Sapelo Island, Sapelo Island, Georgia] there. And it's just--it's still pretty much as it was hundreds of years ago in terms of all of the--there's been no development. So it's, it's untouched and it's beautiful and pristine and just perfect for me. Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying. Do you have one? Speaker 2: Gee. "All things work together for the good of those that love the Lord and are called according to His purpose" [Romans 8:28]. Story_ID: 327116 Speaker 1: Please tell us something about your mother. What was her name or what is her name? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillie Mae Smith [Lillie Bradley Smith], her maiden name was Bradley. She's an awesome woman. Probably my Shero. Speaker 1: Now where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama, in, I think in Luverne, Alabama. Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us? Speaker 2: L-U-V-E-R-N [sic.], Alabama. It's where her parents came from, her father [Ciscero Bradley] specifically. Her mother [Lola Mathis Bradley] was born in Greenville, Alabama and her father was born in Luverne. And I think she just happened to be born there. You know what? Actually, my mother was born in Canton, Ohio. My uncle was born in Luverne, Alabama before my grandparents had moved to Ohio. Both my grandparents were from that area and I believe that my--her--my grandmother's oldest son, Sephus [ph.], was born in Alabama and then they moved to Ohio and my mother was actually born in Ohio. My mother and my aunt were both born in Canton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about her background and her growing up days? So she was born in Canton. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about growing up in Canton? Speaker 2: Yes. My grandparents had come to Canton from Alabama. And my grandfather's brothers had actually gotten a job at the Republic Steel [Republic Steel Company], which was a big factory in Canton, Ohio, and they brought a lot of their family up from Alabama. And so my mother says that when they were growing up, there weren't a lot of black families in Canton, Ohio, so they were one of the first. My grandfather and his brothers, he had quite a few brothers. I think there were thirteen total children and I think maybe eight of them were boys. So most of the brothers came and actually worked at the Republic Steel. And my grandmother was a domestic worker for a long time. She cleaned people's houses. She--I tell you, she took cleaning and cooking to a high art form. She was known all over the place, everywhere, all over the town for her cooking and her cleaning, I tell you. She used to come and clean our house and cook at our house and it was just an incredible affair. She, she just recently passed at ninety-four years old. But I think that she was a great influence on my mother and on myself. And I think she helped to shape both of us. My mom actually got married pretty young, she was only about seventeen. She met my father [Robert Smith, Sr.] in high school. My father says that when he saw her for the very first time, he knew she was his wife. And inevitably they got married in April of 1948, and I was born also that same year. And-- Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother? I know you told us some of the--her characteristics and, you know, how you feel about her. But just tell us how would you actually describe her? Speaker 2: She's the most positive person the planet. If you ask my mother how she's doing any time of the day or night, my mother will say excellent. You can ask anybody from that town or anyone who knows her. No matter what her condition is, she always says excellent because she believes that it's your choice. And so she chooses to be excellent, no matter what. I remember when she had her neck in a brace and they were saying "You're not excellent," and she'd say, "Yes I am." She's very strong, very independent woman, very independent thinker. Has worked as a secretary in the education system I think over thirty something years. She was in demand. Her principals, they fought over her, they always wanted her because she's very, very meticulous, very clean, very--everything--she used to say, "Everything has a place. So if you're not using it, it should be in its place." She was very bent on all of us getting a sound education. I can remember back in those days she bought us a set of encyclopedias and no one, no one even knew what encyclopedias were. She went out and got us a set of encyclopedias because she wanted us to know that the world was a big place, and that we weren't--we were only limited by our imaginations. And that my mother used to always tell me if anybody can do it, you can do it. So, incredible, awesome woman. Story_ID: 327117 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father. What is his name, when was he born? Speaker 2: My father is Robert Lee Smith, Sr. [Robert Smith, Sr.]. He was also born in Canton, Ohio. My dad is--he's such a great man. He's a pastor. Has been a teacher of the Word for so many years. Has basically lived the life he's taught. His word is his, is his bond and he's a man of integrity. I will say that he has loved my mother [Lillie Bradley Smith], oh man, since they met. They have been madly in love. I remember being teased by a lot of my, a lot of my friends all through school that my parents were always so together all the time. They're just inseparable. They've been married this, this coming April will be fifty-eight years. And they will tell you that they are as happy as they have ever been. So I think that that speaks to who my father is in terms of his integrity and he believes in family, he believes in home. He never put anything except God before my mother or all of us as his children. Just an awesome man. Speaker 1: Now did he share any stories with you about his growing up days in Canton? Speaker 2: Well he doesn't know much about his family. He knew that his mother [Zella Smith] came from Kentucky. He knew some of her people. But my dad was kind of a loner. He was always kind of hanging out by himself. We tease him. He tells us he used to dance and play basketball and he's kind of short guy, and he taught me how to play basketball, though. And I know a lot of people used to tease him 'cause he was so short. But he would say, "They always have to bring the ball down." Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now he grew up in Canton. And he did, he did like sports. Did he share any stories about he became involved in the ministry or was this later in life that he became-- Speaker 2: It was later in life when he met my mother's father [Ciscero Bradley]. My mother's father. My mother's family actually had a church on their farm in Alabama. It's a historic landmark now. But my grandparents both, on both sides grew up very religious, very much steeped in Christian values. And so when my father married my mother, my grandfather was already, you know the head of the church. He wasn't a pastor himself, but he was the head deacon and opened the doors every Sunday. Used to call us every Sunday morning and wake us up. But my father was always a Sunday school teacher and just got very, very deeply into the Word. I remember one of my most vivid memories of growing up as a child was my dad, he used to work at the A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], remember the old A&P grocery stores? And he had to work in every position. He started as stock boy and he worked through every position in that store. Finally up to becoming a manager of one of the stores and just seems like after he became a manager, he left and got into politics. But he--my vivid memories of my dad are on Saturday evenings he would come in from work and he would sit down at this old desk that he had. And he would open up his Bibles and his notebook and he would start studying for his Sunday school lessons. I just remember that so clearly. And that he always taught us, I mean our whole value system was based on that word of God. So it was right because the Bible said so and it was wrong because the Bible said so. And there was no gray area. It was either right or wrong. And there was always a price to pay for the choices that you made. Speaker 1: And you said he became involved in politics? Speaker 2: Yes he did. He actually ran for city council and he ended up becoming the--I think he was the mayor of Canton's right hand man. I know he ran their housing and urban development, that whole HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] program when it came into being. But he was a, a very strong proponent of civil rights. I remember when he went to the March on Washington. I was a young girl then. I think it was the early '50s [sic.]. And I remember a whole busload of folks going from Canton and my dad was right on that bus because he did believe in, in equal rights and human rights. He always thought that it was God's desire that all men were created equal and that we all should have had the right to do everything that any other man could do and you know he fought hard for the things that he believed in. Story_ID: 327118 Speaker 1: Did he [Hughley's father, Robert Smith, Sr.] or your mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] share any stories about what Canton [Ohio] life was like being of African American decent? Speaker 2: Yes, definitely. I mean it was--they can remember segregation in the city and just the, the inequitable treatment of blacks in Canton. Just the menial jobs that they were able to hold. And like I said, you know they made him go through every rung in the grocery store where they would bring in, you know, white men over him and give them jobs over him as his bosses and he would know much more than they did. And I mean they didn't talk a lot about it, they just lived it. I can remember the first time you know as a child growing up, people calling us names and my mother would just always say that those people are ignorant. She and my father would just say people are ignorant when they judge you by the color of your skin and you can never be like that. You can never stoop to that level. You've got to bring them up to your level and you deal with people by how they treat you and do unto others the way that you would have them do unto you. Story_ID: 327119 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your grandparents, your mother's [Lillie Bradley Smith] parents. We've mentioned something, you know you've talked about them and being from Alabama and moving toward the, the North. Now tell us about--what was your mother's, mother's name and her father's name? Speaker 2: Lola Mae Bradley [Lola Mathis Bradley] was my grandmother. She was really my Shero. She was born in Greenville, Alabama. And she had about fourteen brothers and sisters; she was the baby girl. And her mother [Mollie Mathis] actually passed when she was just maybe like three or four years old. My grandfather didn't live very far away from her. His name was Ciscero Henry Bradley, Ciscero Henry Bradley [Ciscero Bradley]. And he had about thirteen brothers and sisters as well. I think the total was thirteen in his family. And they were--he was born in Luverne, Alabama. And so my grandfather actually met my grandmother because one of his brothers was dating one of my grandmother's sisters. And they had a car. And in those days, you know this is way back in the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s]. They actually had a car and my grandfather drove his brother over to see his girlfriend and met my grandmother. And I think they kind of hit it off and inevitably they got married and he like I said, moved to Canton, Ohio and then brought her and his son at that time to Canton. But they tell me stories about their farm, growing up on their farm and my grandmother, she loved her father [Henry Mathis] because she had lost her mother. She used to say that people used to feel sorry for her because she was a motherless child. And so she felt she got very spoiled by her father and he was a farmer. And he also was the herbs man. In other words, he grew a lot of the herbs and the people would come to his house to you know, get the herbs to get healed. She said, she often said she wished she had learned more about those herbs. She knew some things, but she said her dad would go out there and pull weeds and boil them up and give people teas and she thinks that she got them from--that he learned it from his mother who was actually part Native American. But she doesn't remember much about--she didn't remember much about her. But anyway her dad was a farmer and he grew all the fruits and vegetables and she can say, you know she said when she was a young girl, she didn't even realize that they were poor 'cause she felt that they were the richest people in the, in the whole county because everybody came to her father to get food and he was very generous; always gave food to whoever would come. When she was about thirteen, they sent her away to go to school. And my grandmother actually got up to about the sixth grade I think she said. Speaker 1: Now when you said they sent her away, did they send her to another state, or-- Speaker 2: Not another state. Speaker 1: Or another city. Speaker 2: Just another county so that she could go to school. Speaker 1: Did she stay away from home, you know, she didn't commute back and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she stayed with one of her older brothers and sisters. My grandmother's oldest sister was twenty years older than she was. And actually, her oldest sister had a son that was born the same time my grandmother was born and she actually nursed both my grandmother and her son at the same time. Her name was Essie Mae [Essie Mae Mathis (ph.)], Aunt Essie. And so my grandmother got to go and live with some of her older brothers and sisters throughout her life. They kind of took turns raising her and I think it was thirteen, at thirteen she told me she went away to school so she could learn about cooking and cleaning. She actually learned a lot about domestic work at school. Story_ID: 327120 Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandfather [Ciscero Bradley] grew up amongst his brothers and sisters on a farm where they actually had their own school and their own church right there on the farm. There was always some preacher in our family, some cousin or uncle, great uncles and great cousins who were the preachers in the church. And even when we moved to Ohio, the cousins--we went to a church that my cousins were always the preachers of and the deacons and the elders. So it's always been a family church, both in Alabama and when they moved to Canton [Ohio] as well. Speaker 2: So when they moved to Canton, they almost reconstructed Alabama life. Speaker 1: They really did because my grandfather's oldest brother got to Canton first. And he actually bought a farm and inevitably all of my grandfather's brothers and sisters and his parents [Sarah Bradley and James Bradley] moved to Ohio and lived on that farm, relocating from the farm that they had in Luverne, Alabama. Now my great-grandparents, they did not like Ohio or the winters. And I think that they didn't like how they were treated, so they moved back to Alabama. But my grandfather's brother kept the farm and almost everybody either lived on the farm or worked on the farm until they would go and build houses for one another. And we still--we owned that land up until just recently when my great-uncle's wife after my great-uncle passed, my great-aunt lived on that farm until she almost--'til she passed. Speaker 2: Now this was in Canton. Speaker 1: In Canton, Ohio. And she just sold it to a greener--a nursery. They were building, or raising trees. Speaker 2: Now I've seen in Ohio, in certain parts of Ohio, that a lot of families did live--they had the farms, but they would also build houses in the city. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And that--is that what they did? Speaker 1: That's exactly what happened to our family too. And the sad part is that nobody in my generation wanted to live--they didn't wanna work the farms. I had one cousin that went away to the [U.S.] military and came home and really wanted to work the farm but I don't know, it never, it never worked out. And you know, our generation, that farm life was hard. I didn't even wanna pick berries, let alone cut, you know, plant and harvest and I remember my birthday was in the fall and so sometimes for my birthday I would--we would go and have hayrides out on the farm. And one of my cousins would drive the tractor and we'd load up the, you know, the flat wagon with bales of hay and we'd get on there. And you know we'd go out in the fields and have weenie roasts and things like that. So it seemed like a fun life except that when you had to work and get up at five o'clock or four o'clock in the morning and milk cows. And they had a big dairy farm and they actually grew everything. My grandparents told me that at one time they didn't have to buy anything and that people actually came to barter and that really even the white people who surrounded their farmland, would come to them to barter to get things that they didn't grow themselves. So they were pretty independent. I think the only thing they needed was oil and gas. And believe it or not, maybe thirty, forty years ago they actually found oil and gas on the land. Speaker 2: On the land before they sold it. Speaker 1: Before they sold it, yes. Speaker 2: So did you all keep the mineral rights to it or did she sell it all? Speaker 1: I don't think so. I think she sold it all, she sold it all. It's sad because we--I think our generation didn't realize the value of land and all that our forefathers went through to get that land. Speaker 2: To get that land. Speaker 1: We just--I think we didn't have a clear understanding of the importance or the value of that land. Story_ID: 327121 Speaker 1: Did they tell you any stories about how different farming was in Ohio versus how it was in the South because of the winters in Ohio? Speaker 2: Yes, that was basically the biggest difference, snow and cold that they did not experience growing up in Alabama. And they did have to make great adjustments and prepare for the winter. I can remember my uncle just talking about, just even having to store up wood for the fireplaces. And they had an outhouse, can you believe it? An outhouse in Ohio in the winter? I already didn't want to go to the outhouse in the summer, you know. I mean 'cause I--my cousin used to always tell me there were snakes down in there and so I can remember sitting with my legs crossed all night long, you know, not wanting to go out to the outhouse. And my great-uncle, he did not believe that a, a bathroom should be in the house. He did not have a bathroom in that house until I think I was about grown when he finally got a bathroom inside the house. But that, that winter and the outhouse did not work well together, I can tell you that. Speaker 1: Okay now that farm in Alabama, now you stated that there were lots of children in the family, there were like twelve or thirteen of them. And if I remember correctly before we started, you stated that they had divvied out the land to the different brothers and sisters so the whole family lived on that property. Speaker 2: Yeah well the--not in Alabama. In Alabama, they basically kept it. My--there is talk that my [maternal] great-grandparents [Sarah Bradley and James Bradley] actually left the farm to like the fifth or seventh generation. I forgot exactly how this story is going. But--and that's been a challenge because the children of that generation are scattered all over the world. And to try to pull them all together to figure out who's gonna own the land because we had cousins that lived there. And there were certainly cousins that bought farms adjacent to the land in Alabama. But right now, I still have of my grandfather's [Ciscero Bradley] thirteen brothers and sisters, there's still two sisters who are alive. And they basically still go down to Alabama. But we are concerned of course about what will happen to the land once they're gone. And we've been, you know, working with some legal teams to talk to us about how we might secure ownership of the land. Still of course no one--none of my generation or younger, my children's [James Austin and Dana Austin] generation, they're not interested in going to farm land but we certainly do know the value of it now and we're trying to figure out how we might secure that land for generations to come. There are several hundreds of acres. And we've had cousins that have periodically gone down to live on the land, build homes on the land and work the land. But it's a, it's a serious matter. I think that too often many African Americans who did not realize and do not still realize the value of land, have lost land to taxes or you know, unscrupulous, you know methods or means that people have used to secure land from African Americans. But I think we have a responsibility to figure out how we secure as much of our land as we can. Story_ID: 327122 Speaker 1: Now did they share any stories as it related to wars? Did any of your relatives, your grandparents, great-grandparents that you can actually remember, might have fought in any of the wards? Speaker 2: Not any of my--my [maternal] grandfather [Ciscero Bradley] did not. Many of his brothers did, certainly. And my uncle did, my mother's [Lillie Bradley Smith] brother went to World War II [WWII]. Maybe, maybe it was the Korean War actually. But not a lot of war stories. I have an uncle who went to the war. He was in World War I [WWI] and did talk about being at the--when the United States troops landed on the coast of Normandy [France]. He was in that part of the war. He was kind of bitter. He always felt like he had fought in that war and came home and, and was still treated like he had not helped to save his country. I can remember my grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley] talking about when all the soldiers went off to war, how that was her first factory job. She had been a domestic worker and she ended up working at--was it Republic Steel [Republic Steel Company] or Hoover [Hoover Company], one of the major factories, making nuts and bolts and things that went into war, you know, machinery. You know and they talked a lot about the war and just the Depression [Great Depression] and the things that happened as African Americans in this country during that period (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they, but were they affected by the Depression in the same manner that some of the other families were affected because they did have their own property? Speaker 2: Yes. It was still hard, though. I mean they, they certainly had the land and they were growing the food and stuff, but it was still really tough, especially in terms of the jobs. I remember my parents talking about they had--my grandmother was able to buy a house, a little small house. And how they all ended up living together so that they could survive through the Depression. Kind of helping each other. And I think that's the--that's been the beauty of my family. They will always pull together, and maybe that's the, that's the survival and the strength of us as African American people. Our ability to pull together and figure out how we're going to work together and use all of our resources to, you know, help each other. I think that was our key to success. Story_ID: 327123 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your father's [Robert Smith, Sr.] parents. Speaker 2: Well my father didn't know too much about his father [Ivory Smith], his father's family. But he did know that his mother [Zella Smith] had come from Kentucky. He said his father also came from Kentucky. But he didn't know much about his siblings, the siblings of his father. His mother he did know some of his, some of her family. But they didn't know very much. He said that they didn't come to visit that much. My grandmother did go visit them a little bit more. They moved from Kentucky to Indianapolis [Indiana]. So she had quite a few of her family was in Indianapolis. And she believes, or my father believes that some of her people may have come from the Carolina region. But we just don't know that. She never really talked much about her family at all. My Grandma Smith was, she was one of those women that worked so hard all her life. My father's father, Grandpa Smith, he was always in a bed; he was an invalid. He had slipped and fallen and fractured his hip, but then he had many complications which prevented him from ever walking. My whole life I just remember him laying in a bed that sat right in the center of our--my grandmother's house. And you always had to walk by his bed to get to the kitchen; so it must have been like from the living room to the kitchen, so it must have been like a dining room area that they had transferred, I mean or converted to a bedroom for him. And so I, I guess I was always kind of afraid of him too when I--I was kind of small and, you know, we would just kind of run past him real quick. Speaker 1: It's amazing how the young children are always afraid of the ill. Speaker 2: It's so true. It's like wow, you know and so I never really knew him at all. And my father really didn't talk much about him. Speaker 1: Were his family farmers also, or was his mother a domestic? Speaker 2: Well, his other, my grandmother had a garden in her backyard. I mean, she had a major garden in the backyard of her house. She--you know and I don't even know how she acquired this big double house. We actually lived on a half of that house for a few years of my young life, I believe I was in kindergarten. Maybe a couple of years and then I was in kindergarten. Actually maybe it was--I was in first, second and third grade. I went to first, second and third grade in her home. And in the back of her big double house, she had these two big, it was like two big patches of land that had these rows and rows of all--everything you could think of. So she was always out there cooking and we were picking beans and berries and-- Speaker 1: Now when you say it was a double house, was it like two shotgun houses put together, or was it-- Speaker 2: No, it was this big, huge house that had two separate houses inside. There were two stoops that you--two sets of steps you walked up and went in the front doors. And they were joined either you could go down through the basements and come up, or on the second floor bedrooms, you could go across to the other side. But-- Speaker 1: Now this was in the city? Speaker 2: It was in the City of Canton, Ohio, in the southeast section. It's where my father grew up in that house as well, he and his brothers and sisters pretty much grew up in that house as well. So I don't know much about how she acquired that house, that's a good question to ask my dad if he knows it. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your grandmother share any stories with you about when she was growing up and what life was like for her? Speaker 2: She only talked about how hard it always was. My grandmother was very dark skinned and she used to always tell us, don't marry no black men, 'cause then your children will be black. And you don't want no black children, 'cause their life is too hard. And she just--she was--I always thought she was mad. I always thought she was angry. And so I didn't really get that close to her. I didn't like to be around her too much because she always--she was kind of negative. But you know as I grew up, I really--I hated that she passed before I got time to spend with her, to really get to know her better because I, I think it was because her life was so hard. She just always talked about working all her life and how the darker you are, the harder your life is. Story_ID: 327124 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know I--my earliest memories of growing up is in my grandmother's house. My parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] lived with my mother's mother, Lola Mae [Lola Mathis Bradley], when I was born. My dad tells the story about how when my grandparents actually separated, they actually divorced on my mother's side, my grandmother--when my father and my mother were getting married, she asked my father if he would come and live with her and help her. And my father said that he didn't even know that she was figuring out a way to take care of them, 'cause she knew he didn't have nothing. And he tells this story and tears will come to his eyes when he tells you that when he came to my grandmother's house to live, he had all of his possessions in a brown paper bag (laughter). Speaker 1: And you said he was about seventeen or eighteen then because that's when they married. Speaker 2: He was about eighteen years old, right. And he moved in with my grandmother. So I was born and came right to my grandmother's house. And my grandmother always told everybody that when I was born, she went and worked day and night so that she could put carpet down so that I wouldn't have to crawl on hardwood floors (laughter). So in my grandmother's little house it was all carpeted and I grew up there. And I can, I have memories of being a young child in my grandmother's house and her coming home. She always had this great smell and she always cooked, so there was always an aroma in her house. Between her perfume and her baked bread or her cooked cakes or whatever. And everybody always came to my grandmother's house. All my friends came. For generations--first my mother and all her friends would come and all her siblings and their friends. Then my generation. I would bring home whole football teams. We'd bring home our football team and the visiting team. My grandmother would cook hot dogs and sloppy joes for us. We'd have dance parties there. Speaker 1: So her place was the place to be. Speaker 2: It was the place. And she used to always say she would rather us be at her house than in the streets. So I mean--and she knew everything we were doing. We would be sneaking, drinking a little wine and stuff. One time, one time she came down the steps. She used to always go upstairs when we would have little dance parties and stuff. And I remember one time she came down the steps and we heard her and we had bought this beer. We were probably maybe junior, seniors in high school. And when they heard her coming down, she had this old dishwasher that you could, you know, you pulled it up to the sink and hook it up. And they lifted up the lid and put the beer down in the dishwasher and closed the lid and pushed the dishwasher back. My grandmother came right down those steps, opened up that dishwasher, put her dish in there, closed that dishwasher and went back upstairs. You know that, my god, you know she knew that. You know I mean we would get sick. We would be down there trying to drink little wine and stuff, and then we'd throw up in her yard, you know. And she would hear us out there and she'd come down. "You all right? Okay." I mean she just had the biggest heart. She used to always say no matter what anybody did, she would always say that's just his way. You shouldn't talk about them because that's just his way. Everybody has his own way. She was an awesome woman, she really was. So I have the most--I have the fondest memories of my grandmother and living in her house and I can remember even after we moved out and got in our own house, I would run away and go to my grandmother's house. And I would tell her that I don't want to live with them; I wanna live with you. I was her oldest grandchild too, so I was the first and so I think we had a really special bond. And we were close to the day she took her last breath. Story_ID: 327125 Speaker 1: Now what were holidays like? Speaker 2: God, she [Hughley's maternal grandmother, Lola Mathis Bradley] was the queen of Christmas (laughter). I mean we would decorate and lights everywhere, big trees, angel hair, she loved angel hair. I hated angel hair. It would get all over me and make me itch. We would do angel hair all over her tree. We would put a thousand ornaments and lights and we'd decorate the whole house. And she would always bake cookies. She baked cookies 'til she was ninety-four years old. She would make cookies and cinnamon rolls and like I said, she took cooking to a high art form. I mean to this day nobody can make that red cake like she did, that red velvet cake. They still--they all struggle in my family trying to figure it out. Speaker 1: And she made hers from scratch, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean but every holiday. Chris- I mean Eastertime, you know, she would decorate eggs and I mean every holiday. She made it so special for us. We may not have gotten a lot of gifts and presents and stuff, although I always felt like we got a lot. But they, they made it up in love. Oh my god, I think the love in my family is just what has sustained me over all these years and just held us all together and kept us moving forward and growing. Story_ID: 327126 Speaker 1: Now you said you was--you were the first born. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Now how many siblings? Give us the name of your siblings in order of birth, including yourself, and I know you're number one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Number one. Next was my sister Sharon, Sharon Lee [Sharon Smith Curle]. She was born in '53 [sic.], I was born in 1948 and she was born in 1950. And then my brother Robert Lee Smith, Jr. [Robert Smith, Jr.] was actually born in 1950, '53 [1953], yes '53 [1953]. And there's just the three of us. My mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] actually had two other boys after my brother, but both died during--right after childbirth and one in childbirth. So it was just the three of us. Story_ID: 327127 Speaker 1: What street did you live on and from your earliest memories did you--and this could be when you were with your [maternal] grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley]. Do you remember the name of that street (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my grandmother lived on 7th Street, 7th Street, 7th Street Northeast [Canton, Ohio]. And my other grandmother [Zella Smith], when we left my mother's mother's house, we moved to my father's mother's house, the big double house. And we lived there, that was on Young Avenue, Southeast. And then my parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] finally were able to buy their first new home, and it was on Young Avenue Northeast. So we just moved way on the other--up, up the road from my father's mother. And that was their first house. And my grandfather [Ciscero Bradley] was a plumber and his brother was a carpenter, you know, it was all the brothers. Speaker 1: These are your mother's brothers. Speaker 2: These were my mother's--her father and all his brothers and her brother also. I mean they all would--whenever anybody moved, if they didn't build the house, they redid the house. So they steamed off all the wallpaper and painted walls and put in new toilets, new plumbing system. I mean they were--those brothers could build--they could build a house that you just can't even imagine. They were something in terms of just the skills that they had. And they were all self-taught, self-taught. But they could do it all. So they all showed up at that house and turned that house around and we had a beautiful, beautiful new house up on Young Avenue, Northeast. Speaker 1: Now tell me something about that block. About how old were you then when you moved into the new house? Speaker 2: I must have been nine years old. I was in the fourth--I know I went to the fourth grade my first year at the--at Washington, at Washington Elementary School [Canton, Ohio] was fourth grade. And so I must have been about nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay so before then, you lived with the-- Speaker 2: Before then, my-- Speaker 1: The two grandmothers. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. My mother's mother, I went to kindergarten there at Hartford School [Hartford Avenue School, Canton, Ohio]. And then I moved to my father's mother's house and I went to the first, second and third grade at Martin Elementary School [Henry S. Martin Elementary School, Canton, Ohio]. And then I moved to the new house and we lived like a block and a half from the school, so we walked to school every day and we knew everybody in the neighborhood. I mean in those days in all those neighborhoods, I mean I can remember one of my best friends from when I lived with my mother's mother. So I was in kindergarten, four or five years old. My best friend lived across the--catty-corner across the street. And we're still best friends to this day. I knew all the people in our neighborhood. Speaker 1: And that was when you lived with both grandmothers. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You knew them from-- Speaker 2: I knew everybody. I still know people from those neighborhoods and still to this day. And when we moved to our new house, I still--some of my best friends lived right around the corner. My first boyfriend lived right through the alleyway, you know. But it was neighborhoods. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody knew everybody's parents so you didn't mess up 'cause somebody's parents would put you in your place and then go tell your parents so that they could then put you in your place again a little more, maybe a little stronger, put you in your place. But you know, we walked to school together. And we lived in that house until I actually went off to college. Story_ID: 327128 Speaker 1: Now let's go back to the two grandmothers' houses before you moved to your own house [in Canton, Ohio] with your parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.]. What are some of the sights and sounds that you can recall from those days? Speaker 2: Wow. Well certainly that my first, my mother's mother's [Lola Mathis Bradley] house, I'm telling you, it was the smell of good food, fried chicken and every kind of thing you can think of, cinnamon rolls cooking every day. We lived right next to an alleyway, you know we had alleys in Ohio. And it's where we played all the time. So there was always the sound of laughter and children running around the neighborhoods, playing the kick the can at night, you know. Speaker 1: And what is kick the can? Speaker 2: You know, kick the can where you, you start off and everybody runs to hide. And the person who's standing on the can has to come and find you and get back to the can. Once they see you, they gotta get to the can before you get to the can. Speaker 1: Is this a regular, small can that food, vegetables come in, or is it a big can? Speaker 2: Well it was a little bit bigger, you know, maybe a little bigger can. But you would go and kick--if they saw you, you had to kick the can before they could kick the can. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before they put their foot on the can or else you were out. We used to play monster. We used to have friend that would dress up like Dracula and go back in the alleyway. So I just remember lots of, lots of games and laughter and sitting out on the porch and on the gliders, all the older people would be sitting out there, you know, in the evenings. Speaker 1: On the gliders? Speaker 2: Yes, cooling down. Speaker 1: And what's a glider? Speaker 2: I have one on my front porch right there. That's my aunt's glider. We had that thing for probably fifty years. Speaker 1: Is that a seat, or-- Speaker 2: It's like a couch that glides back and forth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You kind of rock like that in it, yeah, glider. You don't know glider? Yeah, we always had gliders. Speaker 1: That's a new one. Speaker 2: We always had gliders and rocking chairs and you know, we always used to congregate on the porches and, you know, laugh and especially in the summer 'cause you know, we didn't have air conditioning. So it was about being out in the--catching the cool breeze in the evening, sitting on the steps. Speaker 1: Now what--how did the block look? You played a lot in the alley. Speaker 2: Played a lot in the alley. Speaker 1: Was that--were the older people sitting on the alley porches or were they--were you sitting on the front porches? Speaker 2: No, they were on the front. We were all on the front porches. Speaker 1: They were on the front porches, okay. Speaker 2: No, we would be back in the alley just running up and down the alleys playing, you know. Everybody's backyard kind of butted up against the alleys. So you might be in somebody's backyard and, you know, go over to the-- Speaker 1: Were these concrete alleys? Were the streets concrete or were they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were dirt, dirt alleys. The streets were paved, but the alleys were pretty much dirt alleys. You know, you get stuck in the mud back there when it rained real hard. You know, they put their cars back there and be digging trenches with the tires trying to get out sometimes if it rained too hard. Snow would be, you know, piled up, trying to dig a car out in the snow, you know. Story_ID: 327129 Speaker 1: Let's say for example a truck got stuck in the snow. What happened? How did you get out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody come out, try to help them get out, you know. They'd be putting--like you know boards underneath the tires so they could roll back on them, or you know trying to dig them out with shovels and put salt or rocks or you remember those old coal, coal stuff from the coal bins. Put that down, charcoal down on the ground, trying to get a car out, truck out. Speaker 1: So it became something of a community event. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Everything was a community event, though, you know when I think about it. Speaker 1: See today it's altogether different. You might just be-- Speaker 2: You are by yourself. Speaker 1: Left there or call AAA [American Automobile Association]. Speaker 2: You are by yourself, you better have AAA. No, but I, I, you know I just--it was always about community. It was always about people helping everybody. There was a police officer, one of the only, one of the top ranking black police officers that lived in back of my [maternal] grandmother's [Lola Mathis Bradley] house. And so Mr. Mack [Guy Mack], you know Mr. Mack took care of us. You know he just like looked out for us. But you didn't mess around 'cause he was the police, you know. Speaker 1: Now this was a black police officer. Speaker 2: Black police officer. Speaker 1: In Canton [Ohio] during the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: In Canton, Ohio during the '50s [1950s], that's right. Speaker 1: Was he like the first one that was elected or because it was-- Speaker 2: I think he could have been, he could have been the first. He certainly was the highest ranking black police officer. I think there were quite a few black police officers though as I think about it. You know it was, it was pretty--it was still a little bit segregated in that there were of course the southeast was mostly black people and the northeast was mostly white people. And where my grandmother lived, there were actually a few white families and there were a lot of Portuguese, a lot of Geechees we called them that lived in our neighborhood as well. Canton became a settling place for a lot of Cape Verdeans. They weren't really Portuguese, but we--my, my aunt actually married one. And I didn't--until then, we just thought they all came from Portugal, you know, 'cause they all spoke Portuguese. And they had a whole little community not far from where my grandmother lived. And right up the street from her there were a number of Portuguese families, or Portuguese speaking families which later all turned out to be Cape Verdean. Speaker 1: So some of the children that you played with were actually-- Speaker 2: Well, we didn't really play with them, other children. We mostly played with mostly the African American children in our neighborhood. I don't really remember--now as my brother [Robert Smith, Jr.] was coming along, I think he had more friends that were different colors. But most of us--mostly all my friends in both my grandparents' homes were African American. Speaker 1: See that's interesting because I know you lived in Boston [Massachusetts]. We're moving a little bit further ahead, but the Cape Verdeans, some of them actually consider themselves as black. Speaker 2: I know. My uncle-- Speaker 1: But during that, during the time that you were growing up in Canton, they considered themselves Portuguese. Speaker 2: Yes, and don't you call 'em black either. As I grew older and my aunt started dating a Cape Verdean man who she eventually married, I became closer to a lot of Cape Verdeans who lived in Canton. But I was already in high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio] by then and I can remember him coming to court her and you know, me kind of--him slipping me money to go tell her stuff, you know. But I always thought they were such gorgeous people. I mean there were a couple guys that I liked a lot in high school 'cause you know, they had that coal black curly hair, you know, and they looked good. And I thought my uncle was just one of the most handsome men I ever saw in my life, you know. I always used to ask my father [Robert Smith, Sr.], wondered if my father was Cape Verdean 'cause he always had kind of wavy, black hair too, so. But anyway, they lived, they lived just around the corner from my grandmother, so we saw them a lot. But when I lived there, I didn't really know them that well, I wasn't--I didn't go that far up the street. It was just the immediate neighbors surrounding us. But there was a--there was a white woman that lived next door to my grandmother for many years. And several white families up the block from her. Speaker 1: But you all didn't--did she have children? Speaker 2: We did not. Speaker 1: Okay, you all didn't play. Speaker 2: We didn't play with any of them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any of the children, okay, all right. Do you have any other memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Well I can remember in my father's mother's [Zella Smith] house, the big, the big house. We always called that the big house. In the big house she had a alley by her house too, but she lived on a dead end. So we could always play in the middle of the street down there and there were railroad tracks at the end of her street. I can remember getting--I bet I got a spanking every day, if not two, for playing on those railroad tracks. She would tell us do not go out and play on those railroad tracks, and I don't know if it was just that rebellious streak in me, I don't know what it was. But I would--my friends--because--and it wasn't that we were playing right on the track, but you had to go over this little hill and then the tracks were on the other side of the hill. And we would play on the hill and slide down the hill and she just would come out there with razor straps and tear us up, you know. And then she'd tell my father when he came home and she would make him spank me. And there I would go again the next day. I don't know what that was to this day. It's that hard head (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get that from your mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] or your father? Speaker 2: My daddy. My daddy is hard headed. I got that from my daddy, no question. Story_ID: 327130 Speaker 1: Now you said your dad [Robert Smith, Sr.] looked Cape Verdean. Do you know what his mix actually was? Speaker 2: No, we don't know, you know. We don't know. We don't know a whole lot about his dad's [Ivory Smith] story. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And very little about his mother's [Zella Smith], so--although I decided that his mother was really from Sapelo Island [Georgia], which is where I go all the time. Because when I first went there, I always thought my grandmother had this little--like she couldn't talk good English because she would say these little phrases. Like she would call chickens biddies, biddies and like chicken salad was biddies in the field. And so when I went to Sapelo Island, I saw a family that looked just like my grandmother. I had to really--I mean I would kind of slip around and just get closer them and just stare at them 'cause I was like my god, they look like my grandmother. So I decided that she was from Sapelo Island, she was related to the Banks family and that's where she must have come from; somewhere around in there. And they also were talking about biddies and you know, some of the little phrases, the little Gullah phrases and stuff. I said I think my grandmother used to say that. So I'm sure that, you know, because they lost so much of the history in terms of where they--people had migrated from or who got sold to who and how they--because I asked my father how did my grandmother get to Kentucky. And he, he said he really didn't know, that he thought that her father was actually in Kentucky. But he thought that they may have brought him from somewhere else, probably in the Carolinas. So I think that it's very likely because, you know, between the tobacco plantations and the sugar plantations, I think that a lot of African enslaved people were moved throughout that whole corridor on that eastern seaboard. Speaker 1: Were there other similarities between her and the Gullah people as it related to, say the way that she cooked or-- Speaker 2: And rice at every meal. Rice for breakfast. I don't--when I left home, I thought everybody ate rice for every meal. She said you didn't eat if you didn't have rice, so she always--and she bought rice in these big, huge brown sacks, you know those old--what do they call them--gunny sack? Speaker 1: Well I know the flower came in like-- Speaker 2: Burlap sack. Speaker 1: Yeah, the burlap sack. Speaker 2: Burlap sacks. And she always had a pot of rice cooking on the stove, you know. I think, you know the way she used to cook okra and tomatoes and corn and you know, we used to call it, gosh-- Speaker 1: Goulash. Speaker 2: Well they used to cook goulash too, my dad cooked goulash all the time, with all the vegetables and potatoes and stuff. But no, this was something else; I can't think of the--okra, the okra, the tomatoes and the corn. I can't think of what they called that. Speaker 1: Succotash? That had beans in it. Speaker 2: I started to call it succotash, but succotash was kind of like corn and-- Speaker 1: It had beans. Speaker 2: Lima beans, yeah. The Geechees used to cook that. My uncle, they still cook that. Yeah, it's funny how different recipes kind of got into different groups of people and how they would take them and make them a little bit different and, you know. Tracing foods has always been pretty amazing to me. Story_ID: 327131 Speaker 1: Now what elementary schools? I know you had talked about the different ones that you, you did attend. Were there any teachers at the elementary schools that influenced you in any way? Who were they if there were? Let's start at the one you said that was with your grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley], your mother's [Lillie Bradley Smith] mother. Speaker 2: Yes, no I can't really even remember who that teacher was in kindergarten. Speaker 1: Kindergarten. Speaker 2: But in the--I moved to Martin School [Henry S. Martin Elementary School, Canton, Ohio] and there was a woman who had actually been my father's [Robert Smith, Sr.] teacher. Her name was Mrs. Rock [ph.]. And she was kind of a little short, chubby white woman. But she loved me because I guess she loved my daddy. And I just know I know I couldn't be bad in that class (laughter). Speaker 1: Not even let your rebellious streak show? Speaker 2: No way, now way. She was a no-nonsense kind of woman. You know there was a--when I got to--let's see that was, that was actually in the--my first--I went, I went to a partial year kindergarten at my first grandmother's house. Then the second grandmother [Zella Smith] I actually ended up going to the end of kindergarten into the first, second and third grade. And it was a black teacher by the name of Mrs. White [ph.]. And I never--she was the first black teacher that I remember. And mostly all the teachers were white and so I thought she was just really beautiful, you know. And I just--that just came to my mind. I think that none of my teachers really--I mean I, I, I can see pictures of them in my mind, but I can't think of any that were just profound in my life. Speaker 1: So now in elemen- in kindergarten and elementary, what was the mix of the students? Speaker 2: We had integrated schools. So all of my life I remember going to school. There were fewer black students in my classes, they were always predominantly white. And certainly when we moved to the, you know northeast, it definitely was predominantly white. But there were still a lot of black students in the school. Speaker 1: And this was early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: This was early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: So like '52 [1952], '53 [1953], somewhere around in there, you were going to integrated schools. Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], '54 [1954], '55 [1955], yes almost all the schools that I went to, even all the way through high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio] they were all integrated schools. I never went to a segregated school. There were schools, but I didn't attend. Story_ID: 327132 Speaker 1: There's just a couple of things too, that I was picking up on when you said your [paternal] grandmother [Zella Smith] said never marry a dark skinned man, never marry a black man and I like your explanation because that was kind of prevalent in a lot of black families. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They would state that. And if you kind of looked at it, you know if you did a little study on it, it was a lot of the darker skinned people were saying that or ones who had darker skinned ones in the family. It's amazing that you should say that. Speaker 2: She was serious too. I mean I can remember, you know we didn't live with her, but I took one of my boyfriends--I think I was in college. I took one of my boyfriends to a dinner, Christmas or Thanksgiving dinner at her house. And she went off. And he was just brown, you know, nice caramel color. She was like, "I told you don't you be messing around with no black men up in here." I was like, "You darker than he is." She said, "And that's why I'm telling you." She was, she was something. She had a hard life; that's all I know-- Story_ID: 327133 Speaker 1: We were talking about your elementary school and we even mentioned kindergarten [Hartford Avenue School, Canton, Ohio] and we were talking about some of the, the teachers who might have influenced you. Now you talked about the one black teacher that you had, Mrs. White [ph.]. Did she play some role in your life at an early age? Speaker 2: Only in making sure that, that I understood how important education as. I mean even after I moved on to other grades, I think she was, you know, kind of always watching out for me and my sister [Sharon Smith Curle]. She was always kind of making sure that we did good and she was always telling us that we had to do good 'cause we were black. And that meant we had to be even better than normal. And I think my mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] because my mother was also in the school system, she was very clear about the importance of education because they always felt that--they used to say the only way out of the ghetto is education. So-- Speaker 1: So she was actually carrying the same banner that your mother was waving about education. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. I think most of the black teachers in those days, even teachers that weren't my teachers, they all had, you know it was almost like that community thing again. They were--they had a special eye on the black students to make sure that we understood you cannot mess around. You have got to learn and you've got to learn it well. You've got to learn it better than anybody else because you got two strikes against you, you're black and a woman. So you've got to know it better than anybody else. Speaker 1: Now since you were at an integrated school and most of the teachers were white in elementary, did you have any other black teachers or were the other teachers white for the, you know, the other classes. Speaker 2: Well, we didn't switch or anything; we all just stayed in one classroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Through the whole time. Speaker 1: For the other grades then. Speaker 2: Yeah, for the other grades, I think that I didn't really have any other black teachers until I got to high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio], and I started high school at the eighth grade, in the eighth grade. Speaker 1: So did you have--did you have a junior high? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have junior high in those days. Speaker 1: So elementary went from what grade to what grade? Speaker 2: Went from kindergarten to seventh grade. And most of the time, eighth grade. But in my particular school [Washington Elementary School, Canton, Ohio], it only went to seventh, and we had to then go to the high school for eighth grade. So then the eighth grade I had several black teachers. And then the rest of the high school I always had at least three or four black teachers who were focused in on the black students and, you know, kind of making sure that we were getting through school and getting, and learning what we needed to learn to get through school. That was the first time I had black men teachers too, male teachers, was in high school. We had a couple of--couple of black teachers who were tough but really good, really good. We had an assistant vice principal too, who was also black, and Mr. Hunter [ph.], and he was serious. But you know I just, I just remember that all through school there were always black teachers around us who were, you know, not letting you loiter in the hall and constantly pulling you in a corner and telling you how important it was that you got good grades and that Bs weren't good enough, Cs were out of the question. It was about A's. And I got all A's all the way through high--all the way through school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because everybody just kept telling me you had to, you had to learn, that was your way out. Story_ID: 327134 Speaker 1: Now what type of child were you? Were you well mannered, were you rambunctious? I know we talked about the little rebellious streak (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I had a lot of energy. Speaker 1: --rebellious streak before. Speaker 2: I think I was--I, I think I was a good child. I think that my parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] would tell you that I basically was a good child. I had a rebellious streak, there's no doubt. I've always had my own mind. And I've always been very creative, you know. I've always, you know, I like to make things up and you know, and you know I liked stories and I liked music and I liked dancing and so I, I think I only--I would bump heads with my dad 'cause he was very strict and I was the oldest and I was a girl, and he was definitely like this and I was like trying to bust out. We would bump heads, especially when I got to high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio]. I loved to roller skate. And he would say you know, you be home at nine o'clock or ten o'clock and I'm always sliding in like fifteen minutes late, twenty minutes late. And you know, get put on punishment. But not bad things. I was not--I wouldn't ever say that I was a bad child. I think he did good at striking the fear of God in my heart. God and my dad. Speaker 1: Well what kind of student were you? Speaker 2: I was a great student, A student. Speaker 1: You made all A's all the way through? Speaker 2: All A's, all the way through. I was a serious student. I felt--I, I--they instilled in me and I believed that, that education was important and that, you know, they would talk about how they didn't have a chance to--the chances that I had and you know, my grandparents didn't have--they didn't get to go to school, they had to go to work. And that it was a privilege to be able to go to school. So you know, don't take advent- don't--you take advantage of this opportunity 'cause it's an opportunity that you have. Story_ID: 327135 Speaker 1: And you know I was aware of segregation and I hated going to the South 'cause you--you know, it was still segregated and you couldn't go to the bathroom when you needed to go to the bathroom and all that kind of stuff. And I never liked the South. I can't believe that I live in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: Now did you make, did you make trips to the South when you were in elementary school? Speaker 1: Yes we made trips to the South when we were little. Speaker 2: When you were little. Speaker 1: Only really one that I remember, and I wasn't too small. We came down to Alabama. My dad [Robert Smith, Sr.] would come to Alabama every year. Him and my [maternal] grandfather [Ciscero Bradley] and a lot of my uncles. They would come to Alabama every year and they would go hunting and come back and bring all kind of squirrels and rabbits and you know, we'd skin them and clean them and eat them and, you know-- Speaker 2: Did you help? Speaker 1: Yeah, well you know at some point, at some point. We used to get the rabbit's foots, you know. I remember keeping the rabbit's foots. And they would bring back sugarcane. I love sugarcane. That was like, you know they would go in the fall and come back. Speaker 2: So they would drive down. Speaker 1: They would drive down, and you would have to stop at certain places because you couldn't stop everywhere, so you had to--they mapped the routes out, how you get down and how you go back. You know and a lot of the roads weren't that--we didn't have all of these great highways and stuff, so they had to really be careful. And I just remember them talking about how you know they had to pick a certain way to go, certain route to go. And which ways you couldn't go, you know. Story_ID: 327136 Speaker 1: Now you didn't go to junior high school, but between eighth and twelfth was high school for you. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Now in between though, did you have dreams and aspirations? Speaker 2: That's right. My mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] bought those encyclopedias. I think I was maybe in the second or third grade when my mom bought these encyclopedias. Boy, her and my dad [Robert Smith, Sr.] like had it out. My dad was like I can't believe you're paying--you know all you--and she probably paid for them ten times over 'cause you know, those little white salesmen would come to the door and sell stuff. And you know black people would be paying for them ten times over. But my mother bought those, she bought those encyclopedias and I lived in those books. I used to open them up, tell my sister [Sharon Smith Curle], "You see, I'm going here. When I get big, I'm gonna go live in Paris, France." I'm gonna go live in, you know. So I always--I knew I was much bigger than Canton, Ohio. I knew I couldn't survive in Canton, Ohio. I couldn't wait to graduate. I busted out of that city and I've never lived in Canton, Ohio again. I always dreamed of going all over the world, which is probably why I do that now, you know. I think ever since I was a young girl, you know, seven and eight, reading those books and you know, listening to my grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley] tell me stories about some of the people that she worked for. Speaker 1: And this was your mother's mother. Speaker 2: This was my mother's mother. She worked for all these very wealthy families in Canton. And she was always telling us about you know, their trips abroad and going places in the world. And I was like I'm going there, I'm going there. I can remember a friend of mine, one of my buddies would always say, "They don't let black people go there." And I was like, "They gonna let me go there. I'm gone be the first black person to go there." (Laughter) I just remember Paris, France was one of my dreams. I was going to Paris, France and speak French. Story_ID: 327137 Speaker 1: Did you, did you take French? Speaker 2: No, my sister [Sharon Smith Curle] actually took French. She would come home and teach me a little bit here and there, but it was interesting too because my sister got selected to--we took these tests, you know, who's gifted. And my sister ended up getting to go to these all white schools. She was the only black student in her schools. Speaker 1: Now was this in junior high, well in senior high? Speaker 2: She started in elementary school, actually. I think she started going to this--they called them CHAP programs [Canton's High-Ability Program], I don't know what the acronym stood for. Speaker 1: And how do you spell--C-H-A-P? Speaker 2: I think it's C-H-A-P. But they took--she got to go to these schools. She got to go to schools on the north side [of Canton, Ohio] and she learned French when she was in elementary school and you know, I used to--I think I was a little jealous because she got to go. And so I would always tell her, you know, you just trying to be white like them, you know. But I secretly wanted to learn that French 'cause I was going to Paris, France. Speaker 1: Now she went to school (unclear) did she--did you go by bus or was it that the parents-- Speaker 2: No, my mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] took her or and then sometimes the parents of other children. My mom would drop her off and they would take her. But she had to go, she had to travel. But usually it was by car. Speaker 1: Okay. But you could walk to school every day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I walked to all my schools. (Laughter) I walked to all my schools. Story_ID: 327138 Speaker 1: Now were there any dancers or were there any people in the media who you saw as mentors or who you wanted to be like or that you aspired to be like as you read your encyclopedias and-- Speaker 2: No, not really. I can't say so. Speaker 1: Were there any blacks in the town, the City of Canton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: I don't remember any blacks in the media. I don't remember any blacks in the arts except music. My uncle was a musician and he was a painter and an artist too. He--there's a picture of me in my room that he painted of me. And, but you know everybody kind of blew him off as this bum kind of guy. Speaker 1: But how did you feel-- Speaker 2: I loved him. I thought he was so talented and so gifted. Speaker 1: Is this the same one who was so handsome who married the Cape Verdean? Speaker 2: No, no. This was actually my aunt's first husband. She was married to my Uncle Pete [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he--they ended up divorcing and he actually was incarcerated for many, many, many years. But he was the most talented person I ever saw in my life. Even after I, I was grown and he got incarcerated again. I mean he would come out and be out for a while and then he would go back. But he was just brilliant. And he sent me this picture--he had a graduation picture of me and he drew this--he painted this picture of me and it was just magnificent. And I just always thought he was the most brilliant man and nobody could see his genius but me. He could play every instrument. He could play every instrument. Speaker 1: So he was a musician, he was an artist. Speaker 2: And he was too big for that town. They couldn't get to him, you know. But I, I didn't really--I can't say that I was so inspired by many people outside of my family. I think it was my, my mother and my parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.], my grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley]. They always just encouraged me to follow my dreams and that I could do anything I put my mind to do and you know, if anybody could do it, I could do it. And I guess more than anybody I can think of, I think it was really inside our family where I gained most of my inspiration and encouragement. Story_ID: 327139 Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the high school again that you went to? Speaker 2: Canton McKinley High School [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio], McKinley Bulldogs. Yeah, we were a major football team, basketball team. Ohio as you know is a big sports town. Speaker 1: Very big sports town. Speaker 2: And I mean people who are like in their eighties and nineties, my grandmother and them, they would watch those football games, watch Canton McKinley Bulldogs playing football and basketball. I mean really, serious sports. Speaker 1: They, they took it as serious as the NFL [National Football League], high school football was just as popular. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. The Football Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame] is in Canton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Is in Canton, right. Speaker 2: That's right. That's how serious that town was, you know, is, was and is about football and basketball. Story_ID: 327140 Speaker 1: Now were there teachers in high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio] who influenced you? And if so, what were their names? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: You talked about one of them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr. Hunter [ph.], yeah Mr. Hunter did. I had a chemistry teacher. My parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] had decided I was going to be in medicine. Now me, I'm trying to do something major creative, but they decided I was gonna be in medicine. I think that was kind of more of my dad. They wanted me to have a profession that would establish me so that no matter where I went, I would be able to have a good job, you know. It was about good job. And make money. And so they decided I was gonna be in medicine. And from the time I was a little girl, they were buying me chemistry sets and biology sets and cut up the grasshoppers and the worms and the- Speaker 1: Frogs Speaker 2: --you know and the bugs. That's right. Go catch the bugs, pull them off, look at them under the microscope. And I actually liked it. I was fascinated by it and I was very good in math. So all of my teachers tried to encourage me between mathematics and science; that's where you need to be, that's your gift, that's your talent. You took all those tests, those preference tests and intelligence tests and they all said she should do something in science and math and one test said I should be a mechanical engineer. That I should be a--I thought that meant be a car mechanic, you know. 'Cause I liked figuring things out. I have a kind of analytical mind. And so my chemistry teacher Mr. Christie [ph.], he was an African American man and he was so much fun. He made me think I wanted to be in science because he was--he used to say nothing happens until it happens. And when it happens, it really happens. And I loved chemistry after him. So he, he helped me think about, you know, careers in science and math. He told me all about how important it was for the race to have scientists and doctors and lawyers, I mean professional people. And you know they got me going on that little course and shipped me off to college to be a, be a doctor. I was on my way to be a doctor too. Story_ID: 327141 Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio] that was what you had in mind (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the track. That's right, I was gonna be a doctor. So I got a--I went to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] and got a bachelor of science of degree. On my way to be a doctor. But along the way I started to dance. I was always very physically athletic. Always very physical, very athletic. My parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] were athletic. They were both swim instructors and so I became a swim instructor when I was in high school. Worked in the swimming pools, worked on the playgrounds. Played all the sports, basketball, foo- I mean volleyball, ran track. So our family's always been very, very athletic. And cheerleading, we were cheerleaders, my sister [Sharon Smith Curle] and I. And so there was something about the body and the physical-ness of it. The ability to control your body and make it do what you want it to do, you know. I, I think I got all of that very young. And I remember when I--first time I saw a black person dancing. And they were doing work on pointe. I'd never seen a black person dance on pointe. Now I-- Speaker 1: Now what age were you when you saw that? Speaker 2: I was already like eighteen or nineteen years old. Speaker 1: And was this in Canton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, this was in Boston [Massachusetts], this was in Boston. One of my early trips to Boston right out of high school. Actually, right as I was in college. And my God I thought I gotta do that. But how can I do that and be a doctor? You know. So I was a little torn, but little did I know it was--there something, it was a seed that had gotten planted. And I think it got planted even in a much, at a much younger age. Speaker 1: Than in high school? Speaker 2: Because I loved dancing. I loved to dance. Speaker 1: But in your elementary days, there was no dance. Speaker 2: That's what--but, but street dance, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Put the music on and dance. Speaker 1: All right, so there was the, the evenings and that, the parties and the-- Speaker 2: Parties, and I danced. I remember my first boyfriend was the boy that made up all the dances, and so (laughter) we turned the parties out because we loved to dance, you know. So I think that even from that early age, it was in me to dance, you know, to express myself. It was a way that you could just release all of this energy and, and create something that maybe nobody else did like you did. Speaker 1: Now in high school, were there a lot of dances? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said you liked to roller skate, but were there a lot of dances? Speaker 2: Yeah, and the roller skating was dancing on wheels, you know. They played all the good music from the days, you know, all the Motown songs and the, and the Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] sounds and the Memphis [Tennessee] sounds. And you know we loved it. I mean there were people that loved to sing and I loved to dance. Speaker 1: Now you went to the roller rinks when you were in high school. Speaker 2: In high school, yeah, and they were wonderful. My goodness, I got in so much trouble in never getting home on time. Because they would--not only did we dance on the skates, but then we'd take the skates off and dance, you know. And my dad always wanted me to be home before the dance was over. Speaker 1: But you would always stay for the dance. Speaker 2: I always stayed for the dance and I'd be running home. I remember one night my dad--they told me my dad was coming up the, coming up the doorway, into the doorway for the--where the skating arena was. And out the back door I went. Skates on my shoulder. I got home, I had bruises all across my back and my abdomen right here. And my mother was like you better go get in that bed; your father's gone beat you when he gets in here. I was--my heart was thumping. I was like Lord, he done showed up, you know to get me 'cause I'm really late now. My mom wouldn't let him mess with me that night, though 'cause I, I'm sure he might have forgot that I belonged to him (laughter). Or beat me like he didn't know me like they used to say (laughter). Story_ID: 327142 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, so you graduated high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, I graduated high school. Speaker 2: From Canton McKinley High [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you went to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Kent State. Speaker 2: Now why did you choose Kent State? Speaker 1: Well you know I didn't--it was close to home. You know we didn't have a lot of choices in those days. Interestingly enough, I had a good friend that went to Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. And I thought, you know I'd gone down to visit her once. I was you know, boy it was a all-black college. I thought my goodness, I wanna go to an all-black college. And my parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] were like no way because it's not reflective of the world. And you need to go to a college that's more reflective of the world. Now I tell all the young children if you can, you should go to a black college undergraduate school, and then go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], you know. But I think that there was something that we missed by not going to a black school because there it was like all of the teachers and the professors really cared about the students. And you know just--there was a different kind of relationship that I saw happening that I didn't see in the mixed schools. But yes, off to Kent State I went. Was just right up the road from Canton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Okay, and your major? Speaker 1: My major was science. Yes, I told you that. Speaker 2: Did you have a concentration in chemistry or pre-med, or-- Speaker 1: Pre-med. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Pre-med. I was on my way to medical school. Speaker 2: You took all of the requirements for-- Speaker 1: All of it. My god, all my friends were playing bid whist in the student union and there I am going to labs, three and four hour labs and every day, even on Saturday. The first quarter I just almost had a fit. I couldn't believe how much work I had 'cause every class had a lab with it. I had biology, chemistry, algebra and maybe one little light like English or something like that. But I spent--I worked so hard that first year. I, I fussed at my mother not long ago for making me work so hard while all those other kids were having such a good time. Now I will admit that by the second quarter, third quarter, a lot of those kids were gone. Speaker 2: So how did you turn out academically? Speaker 1: I did all right. I mean I think I, I was a pretty much a B student, you know. That was the first time I'd ever gotten--I worked so hard and only had like a 3 point, 3.2 or something like that. I was used to getting all A's, so you know this kind of rocked my boat. And for the first time I felt like they were right about how much harder we had to work, being black students. Because I swear, there were kids in there, they didn't work half as hard as I did and you know and I mean I, I didn't socialize that much with them. But I mean I felt like I got better grades than they did on tests and things like that, but they still got better grades than me. Story_ID: 327143 Speaker 1: I felt like that was the first time I really tasted racism in this country was in college. And it was, you know, we were moving out of the civil rights era into black power. So on our campus, it was serious black power. We had, we had one of the first student unions, black student unions on our campus. We walked off the campus and that was my first failing grade I ever got because this professor would not give me--he wouldn't let me take the test. He wouldn't let me make the test up, so he failed me in his class. Speaker 2: So what happened with that class? Speaker 1: I left college. I didn't even graduate from Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. I actually had to go--I moved to Boston [Massachusetts] and I took a course, and I ended up sending it back and getting my degree. Speaker 2: So when you walked out, you just left altogether. Speaker 1: I left. We all, we all walked off in protest of--just a lot of injustices at Kent State. And-- Speaker 2: So what was basically the racial mix at, at Kent State at that particular-- Speaker 1: There were thirty thousand students and I think there were five hundred black students, something like that. But we were very close. And I mean we brought Angela Brown and--I mean [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton]. I mean we brought all them to our campus to talk to us about the Black Panther Party and we were real revolutionaries in college. Speaker 2: Do you remember some of the students who helped to actually bring the student union, the black student union to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. There was a guy from Kentucky. His name was Fargo [ph.]. We called him Fargo. He was from Louisville, Kentucky. Real light skinned guy with red, big red afro. He was like a ringleader. And then there was a guy who's name was Larry Simpson [Lawrence Simpson]. He was--he became the president after Fargo left. And just mostly a lot of guys from Cleveland [Ohio]. A lot of the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]. We had Kappa Alpha Psi's were really some of the more revolutionary brothers that were on the campus in those days. Speaker 2: So you did have the sororities and fraternities on the campus at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was actually--I was the president of the Delta Sigma Thetas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] for a long time. Then we had this big protest against all the sororities and fraternities. We said they were irrelevant and not part of the solution. Speaker 2: So they were there before you got there. Speaker 1: They were. They had just started the Delta chapter. The Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] were there, the Kappas were there and the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity]. And then they had just started a Delta chapter, and the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] were there. So yeah, they rushed me and you know I had a, I had an AKA roommate, a woman that was gonna pledge AKA from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and her sorority sisters made her move out of my room 'cause I wouldn't pledge. I was like how did--how can we afford to be divided? I became extremely revolutionary, I really did. I think all that rebellion that was in me from those early days, it came out when I went to college. Because you just saw all the injustices that were happening in the world. And you know we, we were, we were determined to change the world. Story_ID: 327144 Speaker 1: So you left like a year or so before the Kent State riot. Speaker 2: Actually I was there [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. I was living off campus when they had the riots and I was actually working on--when I graduated with my science degree, I had to do an internship 'cause I--instead of going to medical school, I ended up doing medical technology. And I had to go back to--I went back to Canton [Ohio] for a year. Well I didn't--well I did kind of move back eventually. But I ended up working in a hospital to do a, a residency. And that's the year that they had the riots on the campus. But you know, mostly that was kind of the SDS, Students for Democratic Society [Students for a Democratic Society]. And along with the--our black student union was called BUST, Black United Students Together [sic. Black United Students (BUS)]. And so together they kind of rioted on the campus and that young student got shot and killed that time, that most people know about it. But it was, it was--those were strong times for me. Speaker 1: All over the country, but especially-- Speaker 2: I think I grew up, yeah, I grew up a lot in those days. You know a lot was going on. There was this kind of Malcolm X versus Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] nonviolence and which one was it. I remember having these arguments with my father [Robert Smith, Sr.] about how you know, Christianity kept black people on its knees, and we needed to get up off our knees and go take back what was ours. And you know it was, it was about, you know, fight the power, black power, you know. And it was a lot of soul searching in those days. I mean I remember us wearing all these dashikis and stuff. And I'll tell you that's where I, really where I started dancing. There were two students on our campus who were from Africa. And one of my, one my friends, one of my sorority sisters, had started taking these African dance classes and invited me to come. And my goodness, we started doing these African dances, and boy we have these--we'd have these big African balls and we'd dress up in African clothes and we'd do these African dances, and it was really something; it was something. Speaker 1: So this was actually your first introduction to African culture. Speaker 2: It really was, it really was. Speaker 1: So how did that feel growing up in a predominantly, I'll say white environment or mixed environment, going to a predominantly white school, and then having African culture come in at a time when you were becoming aware of blackness? Speaker 2: Well for me, it was a growing up period. I think for my family, it just--they didn't understand at all because they were like, you know, we're not going back to Africa, you know. And so you're not African, so I don't know why you trying to act like you a African. You know because we, we had been taught that African people were natives in jungles and you know, our depictions were Tarzan and you know, bones in noses. I mean what did we know about Africa? Nothing. Speaker 1: And even after your father and even other relatives stressed that you were black so that you would have an identity, then this brought quite a bit of challenge to them. Speaker 2: Well you remember we were Negroes. We were Negroes. Don't forget. I mean he didn't say you're black, he said don't forget you're a Negro. 'Cause you know that's who we were in the '50s [1950s], we were Negroes. And black was a derogatory term. Matter of fact, if somebody called you black that was fighting words. So you know this transition from being Negroes to African Americans, that was a, that was a major period in our country. I think all across the country, you know I mean from Watts [Los Angeles, California] to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. We were all learning about being connected to African people and that that was a proud thing to be. Story_ID: 327145 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the BUST and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black United Students Together [sic. Black United Students (BUS)]. Speaker 1: Yes, let's talk a little bit about them and what all it was about, you know, what your programs consisted of, et cetera. Speaker 2: Well we really had gotten inspired by the Black Panther Party. And when we heard about them feeding the children and the education, we really started focusing on education. And we were, we were actually--groups of us would go into a neighboring community, in a little city called Ravenna [Ohio], Ravenna or something like that, right next to Kent [Ohio], where, I mean black people were living in the most impoverished conditions I had ever seen in my life. And we started going over and tutoring the children. We had food programs. We were just looking for ways that we could support the black people in that community. And we felt like we had been charged with a responsibility that we had to be responsible for. We had to be responsible for our own. And so as black people, we wanted to go and help black people wherever we could find them. And so a lot of programs came out of that, reading programs and tutorial programs and mentor programs. It's really where I learned how responsible I had to be. Speaker 1: And about how long were you active with BUST? Speaker 2: I think for about three years, two to three years. My--all my--it started at the end of my freshman year, and so my sophomore, junior and then my last year [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. I was very active. At one point I was the secretary. Speaker 1: And after you left, did the organization, did it go down or did other students-- Speaker 2: Well it kept going for a while, but you know what happened with the Black Power movement, I think that the whole SDS [Students for a Democratic Society], anti-war, all the protests, I think that started to overshadow it. We thought that by joining our forces, we would get a lot more accomplished. But on one level I think that maybe that actually helped to, you know, disintegrate the Black Power movement. And I mean then there were lots of riots, you know, between Watts [Los Angeles, California] and Detroit [Michigan] and there were so many riots going on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All over the country. Speaker 2: You know and people were getting killed and so now it was about are you ready to die. And I mean at one point I remember we were really--it was a very violent move for us to walk off the campus, 'cause we were prepared to, if they had brought police or guns or whatever, hoses, we were, we were ready to fight. Speaker 1: A lot of times even when white organizations are confronted by, let's say in the Kent State case, the National Guard, whatever. A lot of times the black students would end up suffering, you know, from some of the problems that, you know, just suffering period. So did you all feel any offshoot from the Kent State riots? Were any of your people harassed or were any of them hurt during the-- Speaker 2: I think there were some that were hurt, but not, not, not-- Speaker 1: So none of them were actually targeted. Speaker 2: No, not targeted. It was most of the leadership of the white--of the Students for Democratic Society, I mean and one died. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was when [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory made the statement that this is when white America turned on its own. Speaker 2: That's the truth. Speaker 1: On its own children. Speaker 2: Exactly. I mean that, that Vietnam War really did--I mean it made this country kind of split right down the middle. I mean and it wasn't a matter of color anymore. Now it was about the war and what you believed in. Did we have a right to be there or not? How many, you know, how many of our boys died in Vietnam and how many came home and couldn't even get a job? I mean, I had friends that moved to Canada because they were not gonna go fight in a war that they didn't start. Or fight with an enemy that they didn't even, that they didn't have, who wasn't their enemy, you know. Speaker 1: Did you all lose any of your organization students to the war? Like did they leave school? I know that attrition was probably high at that particular point, but with the organizations-- Speaker 2: A lot of the guys, a lot of the guys, all the guys that were in the, what was the, the kind of military part of your college and high school? Speaker 1: ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corp]. Speaker 2: ROTC. Almost all the guys, the black guys that were in ROTC, they all had to go to Vietnam. As a matter of fact, it's interesting. One of those guys called me not very long ago, settled out in Denver [Colorado]. But it was, it was just a tough time, you know, it was really a tough time. And it just kind of--it just watered down all of the efforts of the Black Power movement in a way. It kind of took the attention away and got the country focused on something else. And by the time the attention came back, I mean our leaders were gone and many of them had been jailed and it just dissipated (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 327146 Speaker 1: Now what was the atmosphere around the school during the time that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 2: Tense. Speaker 1: Were there any riots or any breakouts? Did your organization do any type of activities or did-- Speaker 2: Well I wasn't at college. Let's see, when he was assassinated in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], I actually--in '68 [1968], yes. Dr. King's assassination. Yeah, Dr. King's assassination really made us pull ourselves together because we were just on that brink anyway of saying nonviolence doesn't work. And I think that his assassination, and then Robert Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] assassination, I mean it was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right behind it. Speaker 2: --Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I mean it was like boom, boom, boom. All these assassinations were happening and we--it just solidified our whole belief that this was violent country. That the only means to the end was violence. Violence--we, you know we were all reading Malcolm X and all of his teachings and I think many of us were--a lot of those students at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] became Muslims behind it. It actually instigated our walkout. So a lot happened after his assassination. Story_ID: 327147 Speaker 1: Now you stated that you were into African dancing at that particular time. Now how did the African students view what was going on in America at that particular time because you're dancing in their groups and ensembles or whatever, are dancing with them. You had a lot of interchange with them. Speaker 2: Well I didn't really because there was just one African student from Africa who had taught the African Americans to dance. So most of the dancers were African Americans. So we didn't really have that much encounter with African people, African brothers and sisters. I really did not have serious interactions with African people until--until I was grown and in New York [New York], living in New York and started to dance with Babatunde Olatunji. That was my first real encounter with African people. And when I realized, and I actually had met him in Boston [Massachusetts]. I was living in Boston then, right out of college and he was teaching at the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts] and I was taking my sons [James Austin, Jr. and Dana Austin] to, you know, classes and stuff. And I would stop and watch them dance and I'd listen to those drums. Those drums called me, they just called my name. And inevitably, they invited me to come and start taking classes and eventually I got in the company at Elma Lewis', and then Babatunde had a company in New York City on 125th Street, and invited some of us to come and dance with his company. And boy, that's all I needed. New York and African dance that was another chapter about to begin. Speaker 1: Okay so your--they just kind of revived themselves from where you had been introduced to it and then here you are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --carrying it on to, to a different level. Speaker 2: It was my first time I realized that we were really connected to African people. We had talked about it at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. We wore dashikis, but we'd never been there. We talked about naturals, you know, I mean I had this big poof afro and I was so proud of it. And when I realized, I mean the whole idea of being natural, letting your hair be natural, whatever it is, let it be that. And so that was freedom for me, you know. It was like freedom to be who I am. That's all I needed, right. Speaker 1: Well describe some of the experiences that were associated with your afro, like what were your parents' [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] response? Speaker 2: My god, they just-- Speaker 1: What was even your response to actually having your hair in this hairdo for the first time? Speaker 2: Well I had a lot of friends that were always saying, "Well you know, your hair is not really nappy. Why are you trying to wear nappy hair?" I had a roommate from Cleveland [Ohio]. And she was relatively dark skinned, and she would always say, "I don't know why you trying to be no African. You too light to be African. Your hair is good hair. Why are you trying to make your hair be nappy? That's the stupidest thing I ever heard of." And I would be like, "You need to let your hair be natural. You sitting up under all these hot combs and everything trying to press your hair, trying to look like who? Who you trying to look like? What's our standard of beauty?" I mean it made us ask a lot of really hard questions in those days. My parents, they were like, "Are you crazy? You are not African. You know, you're a Negro." You know we were Negroes in those days and my uncles had told me, don't you ever forget that you're a Negro. If you have one drop of African, of really not African, one drop of black blood, you are Negro. But nobody in those days wanted to be associated with Africa, you know, that was you know, the jungles, you know, the natives, the uncivilized. We were so ignorant. We didn't know. And like I said until I had that encounter with Olatunji, then I really got it, you know. It's probably the--why I am the revolutionary that I am today. I mean a lot of people--I've gotten into a lot of situations because I'm, you know I'm fair and people see my hair and they think a nice, calm, quiet, you know. And then I get up in there and really--I, I make people be responsible. I make people deal with the truth. Here's the truth, now what are we gonna do about it? I've always been a agent of change. I've always been a cultural warrior. I call myself a cultural warrior. I believe that all cultures are equal and that in this country that we've been exposed more to European culture, it's just one culture. And we need to--and one of many, many cultures. And we need to be exposed to everybody's culture. So I, I don't know, that revolutionary '60s [1960s] girl is alive and well. Story_ID: 327148 Speaker 1: All right so you graduated Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and then you went to work in medical technology. Speaker 2: For a hot minute. But all along I was dancing, see. This was the problem. I was having a great conflict. I was living in Boston [Massachusetts]. I had married an old friend of mine, who was my brother and I should have left him my brother. I love that man, and to this day I love him but we just were not destined to be married. But we had sons [James Austin, Jr. and Dana Austin]. He had actually had these sons and I adopted them. And they came when they were babies. And so we raised them and I was taking them to Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts] and while they were studying--you know I got tired of going back and forth and so I started taking these African dance classes and lived in Boston and, and actually ended up working on my master's degree. It was a program that Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] had brought into the school from Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio]. So I ended up getting a master's in education and went to classes at Harvard University. The degree is actually from Antioch College, though. Because it was a new program. It was a whole program called the Institute of Open Education. And myself and a colleague had actually started working with young, inner city students from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. And we had been associated with a group of professionals who were--who taught us about group dynamics and achievement motivation and organizational development and planning. And we started working with some students and in fact ended up getting our master's degree around a program that we had created at this--with this group of students in Roxbury, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. Now let's back up. What actually took you to Boston? Was it marriage or was it career or--what took you from Ohio to Boston (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. It was--one night in a snowstorm, I was in Ohio, I had gone back to do my internship there. Knew I wasn't gonna stay there, though, I just only went back for that internship. And one of my best friends had gone to the [U.S.] Navy and in a blinding snowstorm, he and a good friend of his drove into Ohio on their way back to Boston and stopped over at my apartment. And it was a blizzard, so they ended up staying over at my apartment. And all they talked about was Boston. And I said, "I'm going to Boston." And I couldn't wait. I graduated and got all my paperwork and became a registered medical technologist, and moved to Boston. I went to visit and I knew when I visited that was it. That was it for me. Speaker 1: What was it about Boston that actually just captivated you? Speaker 2: Well first of all, there was so many black people doing really well. They were--my best friend and his friend were actually trainers, training government employees around group dynamics and they were training all of these groups of people that were--I remember this group of nuns. They were teaching them about group dynamics. They were going to be missionaries somewhere and anyway part of this training was about group dynamics and you know how do we work together or not work together. And I just was so fascinated with the work that they were doing and you know I'd seen--that was the first time that I saw a black girl dance on pointe at the Elma Lewis. [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis had a dance concert in the park, Franklin Park [Boston, Massachusetts], and all these young, black, beautiful black bodies dancing all over the stage. The girls were on pointe, and then they were on barefoot and then they were in tap shoes, my goodness. I was like this was the hottest place I had ever been in my life. So I immediately went home, packed my bags, graduated and moved to Boston. Story_ID: 327149 Speaker 1: So when you got to Boston [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: I lived my life. Oh my god. It was magnificent. It was some of the best years of my life. I really did grow up a lot. You know it was a time that Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was the president and a lot of money was being poured into the black communities to help, you know, all kind of programs came out of those years. And we were able to capitalize on a lot of those dollars and get into that training program [Institute of Open Education], work on our master's degrees, start dancing at Elma Lewis' [Elma Lewis School of Fine arts, Boston, Massachusetts], taking more classes. I mean Ms. Lewis [HistoryMaker Elma Lewis], I mean Ms. Lewis was from the West Indies. But she had such--she had so much wisdom and information about black culture from Africa and the Caribbean and, and just the beauty of the culture and the importance of the culture. And so she had this beautiful school and all kinds of classes. Every kind of music, theater, dance. She had a theater company and you know, there was an ensemble company. And there were two or three dance companies. There was a ballet company, there was an African dance company. And all the most important choreographers in our country were coming to her school and setting works. Directors were coming to direct plays. And so it was really a time of flourishing around African American culture. So I was--I just got caught up in all of that and I just you know, it was just where I was supposed to be to get, get my spirit fed and get some of the things that had been turning over inside of me, realized in terms of culture. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where in Boston did you actually live at that particular time? When you moved there, what part of the city that you--did you move to? Speaker 2: Let's see. When I first moved there, I almost--I always pretty much lived in downtown. Sometime--somewhere between Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts], in and around that kind of downtown area. I ended up marrying my best friend and having my two sons [James Austin, Jr. and Dana Austin]. And then I kind of built this whole extended family that were--really around the arts. There were photographers and dancers and musicians and we just formed a community in Boston. And just you know, fed each other and you know, nurtured each other and raised each other's children and it was a great time, really great time in my life (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now you-- Story_ID: 327150 Speaker 1: You got your master's [degree] through the program [Institute of Open Education] at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio]. Now Antioch is where Coretta Scott King went to school. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: But you never--did you ever get a chance to visit that campus at all? Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Antioch because it was actually down near Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. And in those days we were traveling a lot back and forth to Central State. When I was in college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] we spent a lot of time in--at Central State and Antioch College was right there. And it was funny because we used to say well that's where all the hippies go to school, you know. All of the liberal, white, you know, hippies went to Antioch College. And so, you know we'd go there and they'd be walking around in bare feet and you know, it was, it was a wild school. I actually wished I had gone to that campus, you know 'cause Harvard was very Harvard, pulled up, you know, intellectual, Cambridge [Massachusetts], period. Just--I think Boston [Massachusetts] period very intellectual atmosphere. All those universities around there. I mean I felt like I was intellectualizing all the time. Speaker 1: Yes, it's been stated that Boston has more colleges and universities than any other place in that-- Speaker 2: In that vicinity. Probably in the country, in that concentrated area. Speaker 1: I think it's over fifty or more schools in that area. Speaker 2: Yes, so everybody is intellectual. I mean it's a, it's a major atmosphere for thought and thinking and provocative thinking. So we were challenging one another's ideas and thoughts. I feel like a lot of our, a lot of those questions and, and or questionings that we were--that were coming out of our high, I mean out of our college days in the '60s [1960s], got realized in the '70s [1970s] when we started getting those jobs and you know, things started changing and we started, you know, being more focused on African culture and Caribbean culture and the African diaspora you know. So the '70s [1970s], I think the '70s [1970s] were a great growing period for a lot of us coming out of the '60s [1960s]. Now my sons [James Austin, Jr. and Dana Austin] say that we basically dropped the ball 'cause he said that, you know, there was so much that we had fought so hard for in the '60s [1960s], that by the '70s [1970s], coming into the '80s [1980s] in particular, we got too educated and too assimilated and too integrated and he said you know we, we didn't really pass on to them the cause. And so I think we were so busy working and trying to achieve and have and be and do, and making sure that they didn't have to struggle so much, that we didn't take the time to really immerse them in the same ways that we were. Speaker 1: So they didn't get the experience. Speaker 2: They didn't. Speaker 1: They didn't get a bit or taste of it so that they would be able to carry the banner on. They just got the benefits of it. Speaker 2: Yes. And I mean we're speaking in general terms. I mean certainly we--I spent time with them talking about all of the struggles that we went through and making them read 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and you know but it wasn't something that they had to struggle for like we did. They felt--and you know now my son is approaching forty. He's, you know we've been talking about now how do we keep the legacy going? What do we say to our--my grandchildren now? How do we make them aware of it? Because now today, you know there's--I've had young people say to me they don't know why black people are still so angry, you know, we've got so much. So why are we so mad? And I'm--I try to keep young people around me so that I'm aware of how they're thinking and, and always conscious of the continuum and trying to help them see that you didn't just evolve out of nothing; you stand on shoulders that I stood on shoulders and now you stand on shoulders. And each generation gets to stand on the shoulders of the last generation. But you would not be where you are had we not been able to do what we did and all of those before us. So I know it's kind of our responsibility. Story_ID: 327151 Speaker 1: You put medical technology on hold. Speaker 2: No, I set it to the side. I--you know I worked in hospitals. When I first got to Boston [Massachusetts], I actually took a job in a, in a hospital. And I got into research. And I just realized that I could not just be around sickness and death and disease and dying, you know. So then I tried to work in--I went to work at this New England nuclear corporation, where we were making chemicals and you know and I just--it was so boring and so, you know, not me, that I just realized that I had to go dance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Boy I remember that first time I told my father [Robert Smith, Sr.] that I was leaving all this science and medicine and going to dance and he asked me, "Well what are you gone be? A belly dancer?" You know I just, I said if I have to, whatever, you know. But he did not understand it at all. Speaker 1: So after you got the master's [degree] you received the training, you did your work with [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis' school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], then just explain what happened then? How did you transition into the new career? Speaker 2: Well I, I had gone--all these choreographers were coming from New York [New York], George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], Fred Benjamin, I mean all these incredible choreographers were coming to set works on our dance company. And an incredible choreographer by the name of Billy Wilson had come. He had been a classical ballet dancer. He and [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell had been contemporaries. And Billy went to Holland [the Netherlands] to dance with the Netherlands Ballet and--or the National Ballet of Holland [sic. Dutch National Ballet], I forget which one. He had married one of the ballerinas there and they'd come back to the states. And Elma brought him to Boston to be our choreographer. And over the course of time, he kind of--they kind of fell out a little bit and he ended up starting his own company, the Dance Theater of Boston. So I went with him. And I danced over there for a couple of years-- Story_ID: 327152 Speaker 1: Then we went on a tour, an international tour. And I got to live in Aruba for about seven or eight months and teach down there and when I came back, Billy [Billy Wilson] and several of the dancers had moved to New York [New York] because he had been selected to choreograph a Broadway show called 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' So I packed up and moved to New York. Well I didn't pack up, I mean I had a lot of things to go through. I mean obviously I had--I was married and had children [James Austin, Jr. and Dana Austin] and so it wasn't quite that easy, but my husband [James Austin, Sr.] and I had separated and we were kind of going through some changes. And so I decided that I was gonna go to New York. And I moved to New York kind of on a part-time and I was commuting a lot back and forth. And I went to audition for 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell]. I didn't, I didn't really know much about Broadway shows. I didn't really--I never had that exposure to Broadway shows. I'd certainly seen some wonderful plays in Cleveland [Ohio]. My mother [Lillie Bradley Smith] had taken me to see a couple of plays when I was younger, and I loved it, you know. 'Kiss Me, Kate' and 'Oklahoma!' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] or something like that. And so I went to New York and I auditioned and what they said was that they had all the dancers they needed for the show, but they needed some understudies. And I was like well what do you do if you understudy? And they were like well, you have to wait and if somebody gets sick, you go on. And I was like but when do you dance? And they were like well, you don't really, you just--you know you can take classes, but I thought I don't wanna do that. So I--there was a man sitting in the audience, and I was asking some, some of the people backstage who was he, he was black. Big, heavyset black man. I was like who is he? And they said he's the producer of the show. And you know I went, I was getting dressed and as I was coming out of the theater, I saw he was sitting in the theater by his self. So I just--here's my little revolutionary self. I walk down and sat down behind him and tapped him on the shoulder and I said, "Hello Mr. Springer [Ashton Springer], my name is Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Hughley]." At that time it was Austin. "I think you should hire me in your office. I would be a great asset to you. I can type and file and do all these other things." And he started laughing. And he said, "Well, why don't you come by my office and talk to me?" And so I tell you he gave me all his information. The next day when he walked in, I was sitting at the front desk answering the telephone. "Theatre Management, may I help you? I'm sorry Mr. Springer's not in right now. Can I take a message?" He--and when he walked in, he stood there, he looked at me and he walked on by me and went in his office. So I just kept answering the telephone. And eventually I walked into his office and I said, "So does this mean I have a job?" And he said "I guess so." And so I got a job working at Theatre Management Associates [New York, New York] on 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' Now of course in the meantime, you know I'm still trying to be a dancer. So I'm taking classes all over New York now. So inevitably I moved to New York. I moved in with a friend of mine and I just started dancing, starting taking classes at Alvin Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and I had been going back and forth on weekends sometimes to take classes, you know and I was just--I got to see all these dance companies. I was in heaven. I mean Ilio Pamari [ph.] had a company, Fred Benjamin, George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] had the Universal Dance Experience [George Faison Universal Dance Experience]. I mean there were so many dance companies, black dance companies. And you talk about the black tradition. I mean they had, they had combined this African movement with modern dance with classical European ballet and the work that was being created was just incredible. It was--I had never seen anything like it and I felt like I had finally found my place in the world. Story_ID: 327153 Speaker 1: And I started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now with your audition for--I mean as an understudy, did you get a chance to actually perform at all (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't want to, I didn't want to. Speaker 2: You didn't want to. Speaker 1: No, because I wanted to dance, I had been dancing in Boston [Massachusetts]. I'd been at [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis', I'd been with both of her companies. I'd been with the Dance Theater of Boston, you know. I wanted to dance, I was dancing, I was a dancer. A dancer has to dance. So for the next couple of years I just hustled around, danced with whoever I could, took classes everywhere, you know, was a pickup dancer. And then you know to earn money-- Speaker 2: And explain what a pickup dancer is. Speaker 1: Well like if none of them could afford to keep a company, only Alvin [Alvin Ailey] had a company that got paid regularly. I think George had a few people that he could pay regularly. But you know like if they had a concert, they would pick up dancers. They would invite you to come and perform with them, and they would teach you--you'd learn the choreography and then you would dance with them. But you didn't get paid a salary. That's basically what a pickup dancer was. So and to earn money, I actually started teaching dance in schools. I taught at the Little Red School House [Little Red School House and Elisabeth Irwin High School, New York, New York]. I taught at--I had started teaching in Boston though, even when I was dancing with the Dance Theater of Boston. Once I left medicine, I went and got a job teaching dance. And I taught in a lot of places. I taught dance all over Boston and Cambridge [Massachusetts]. I taught a lot of colleges, you know, Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] and Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts]. And I taught at the Commonwealth School [Boston, Massachusetts], high school. That was--the headmaster was Charles Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.] and that's how I earned my living and kept dancing. Went to New York and started too. Started teaching in all these little schools and high schools and, and earned my living as a dancer. Story_ID: 327154 Speaker 1: Now tell us about dancing and training under Alvin Ailey or with the Alvin Ailey dance group. Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater was like the most outstanding dance company. And I mean and in those days, I can't say it was most outstanding because there were so many dance companies. This was in the early '70s [1970s]. And Alvin had just been really fortunate to form a company that somehow struggled through and had survived and thrived, even to this day. But I used to trek all the way across New York [New York]. They were over on Lexington Avenue and somewhere around Bloomingdale's, 'cause that was my route to Ailey's, cut through Bloomingdale's and cross the street. And they were up on several floors in this building and this--all the most incredible dancers and teachers were there. It was just, it was just outstanding. I mean, everybody was trying to take classes there. Everybody was trying to be in the company. And I just remember just being--you know I always--all my career I always got in the front to dance. Wherever there was a class, I was gonna be in the front just in case somebody was looking for somebody. If they were looking for my type, I would be in the front (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now was he, was he struggling at this time, or had he already made his place? Speaker 2: No, they were all struggling. They were all struggling in that they, they--Alvin did have a company that he paid so they could stay together and keep working. Most of the other dance companies couldn't hold a company together. I mean they might hold them together for a little while, or they might hold a core of dancers. But usually when it came time to perform, Alvin had his company, where everybody else was, you know, trying to pick up more dancers to make their companies bigger for their big performances. So Alvin was like the company to be in. And I always felt like Alvin had the--he got to choose from the cream of the crop because everybody wanted to be in Alvin Ailey's. Eventually they had started a second company and two of the dancers who had been in the company at Elma Lewis' [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts], were teachers. So that's really how I got started. I started as a, a--I got a scholarship to study. And so I started dancing there and I remember Delores Brown was one of the dancers. Speaker 1: She was from Elma Lewis. Speaker 2: She had been at Elma Lewis. She was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and had been in Elma Lewis' ballet company. Boy that girl, she was awesome. She was, she was a kind of short, short, stocky woman. And when she put those pointe shoes on, you would have thought she was one of those little slender gazelles. She could dance in those pointe shoes. So I was always just, you know in awe of her. And here she was teaching at Alvin. So you know I immediately got in her ballet class and you know the beautiful part about Ailey's school was that you could take all kinds of dance at one time. You could take ballet and then you could take three kinds of modern technique. You could take Graham [Martha Graham], you could take Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham], you could take Horton [Lester Horton]. And then you could take tap, you could take jazz. I mean you could just study all different kinds of dance. I actually studied at a couple of different schools, I studied at the Graham school when I was learning the Graham technique. I studied at a couple of ballet, some Russian ballet teachers were in New York teaching smaller classes. I would take ballet from them. I studied at the Clark Center for the Performing Arts [Clark Center NYC, New York, New York], Thelma Hill was there. An incredible dance teacher, Thelma Hill. So in those days for probably maybe two, three years, I just studied everywhere, everywhere I could and danced anywhere I could and taught you know, in between that, to earn a living and, and pay my rent (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what type of person was Alvin Ailey? Speaker 2: He was just the most warm, giving person. I think the reason his company is probably the greatest dance company on the planet today is because Alvin, though he was rooted and grounded in an African American aesthetic, he understood the importance of involving everyone in that. So he always had dancers of every kind of ethnic group and all kind of cultural origins. And he also had choreographers. So if you dance with his company, you got stretched to the max because all these different choreographers from all these different races and cultures, would come and set work. And you'd have to do something different. The only thing that Alvin didn't do that the company in Boston [Massachusetts] did, was he didn't do pointe work, and they did pointe work in Boston. So I mean in a way I felt that Alvin's company was a little closer to Ms. Lewis' [HistoryMaker Elma Lewis] company. I still say Ms. Lewis had the best dance company in the world 'cause those girls would take those pointe shoes off and put on those high heels and do that jazz. But in New York, I think that Alvin had probably the most diverse company. I mean [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell was in Harlem [New York, New York] and he was putting together this very classically--European classically trained company and he was getting a lock of flak because it was like why do we have to dance like them? But just the beauty and the grace of those dancers. And then there were all these other choreographers who were trying to build these dance companies, who had schools where they taught classes and you know so it was just a--it was a heaven for dancers in New York in those, in those '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 327155 Speaker 1: Okay now tell us how Billy Wilson ended up working for you and the ending to the story of the 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] and management and how all this came, emerged. Speaker 2: Well Billy Wilson got the job as the choreographer of 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' And I got the job in the manager's office, who was the manager and the producer of 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' So we hired Billy Wilson. I mean he was on contract with our company to do that. And so Billy and I became very, very good friends over the years. I mean we were good friends in Boston [Massachusetts]. So we just brought our friendship into New York [New York] and, and while we toured the show around before it actually came back to Broadway, we, we had lots of chances to have dinner together and talk and share and you know I was still trying to dance and it was interesting that he and a couple of other producers on Broadway had said to me that, you know, I had really great management skills and that I really should think about becoming a manager since there were so many black shows and no black managers. That maybe that was a niche for me since--I mean in New York you really do get to locate yourself as a dancer. And though I've always loved to dance and thought I was a good dancer, there were great dancers in New York. And you know, I was already in my twenties and so many of those young girls were in their teens and you know, had grown up dancing and here I was, I just started dancing in my late teens, early twenties. And so I, you know and I was enjoying being a manager. And I got an opportunity to get into the union. The union is the Association of Theatrical Press Agents and Managers, better known as ATPAM. And at that time, there were nine black shows on Broadway and we were about to bring 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' in as the ninth show, and there were no black managers. And so the unions were getting a lot of pressure. Well let me say there were no black managers, there were actually--there was one black manager and one black press agent. And they had actually gotten in through the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. But the woman who was the manager was actually the manager, Ashton Springer had brought her in as the company manager for 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' So we--actually they actually were putting pressure on him because he was holding the general manager's contract and he wasn't in the union. So the union invited him to come over, and he took me with him. And you know, I ended up becoming an apprentice to Carolyne Jones [Carolyne A. Jones], who was the first black manager in ATPAM on 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' And you know I wasn't so sure I wanted to give up my dancing and be a manager, I still was loving my dancing. So I'm still kind of doing both. But it became apparent that I was gonna have to soon make a decision because the management position was taking more and more of my time, it was a full time job. And then you'd go to the theater at night. So you'd work all day and then you'd be in the theater all night. So when was there gonna be a chance to dance? And so I can remember sitting in my living room and getting me a half a gallon of pistachio ice cream and tying my ballet shoes in a little knot and hanging them on my wall and making a decision I'm gonna be a manager. But not just a manager, I had decided I was going to be a producer as well. So--and that really started my theater career on Broadway. Story_ID: 327156 Speaker 1: Now I will say that at one point right before I got the job at Theatre Management [Theatre Management Associates, New York, New York], I was still dancing. Some friends of mine--and I will say Carolyne Jones [Carolyne A. Jones] was actually our manager in Boston [Massachusetts]. She came up from New York [New York] to be our company manager at Elma Lewis' school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts]. And Carolyne Jones is really who kind of encouraged me to go to New York. And she had gotten her--she had gotten into the union [Association of Theatrical Press Agents and Managers (ATPAM)] through the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. And so when I got to New York, she had given me all these people's names to call and look up. And all of them were working at the Negro Ensemble Company. And so I went over there and actually got a job backstage, you know, just doing props and stuff backstage. And really that was kind of my first introduction to theater. And I did that for a couple of shows that they were doing at their old St. Mark's theater [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] on over the east, in the East Village [New York, New York]. We then opened a show over--on the west, in the West Village [New York, New York] on Christopher Street at Theater Delise [ph.]. And I ended up over there for a while. And then I actually ended up taking a course that the theater manager gave one evening called 101 Ways to Steal out of a Box Office (laughter). Speaker 2: Now that was interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah it was. Speaker 2: That's the title? Speaker 1: Listen, I still carry a lot of what he taught me there. And then what happened was that one night the house manager for that little theater didn't show up. And the Negro Ensemble Company had a production of the 'Brownsville Raiders' [sic. 'The Brownsville Raid'] in there by Charles Fuller. And the, the gentleman that was teaching the course, his name was Paul Brokowski [ph.]. Paul asked me if I would mind, would I like to be--take over the house manager's job. And all I really had to do was let the people in and make sure there was no drama, and here was the telephone number if there was any issues. And so I, I stepped in and did that. So I got a job working at the front of the house. And then with the Negro Ensemble Company as a, you know once they met me, then that's how I got the job in the back of the theater. And just that was kind of my beginnings into the theater world. And then I actually auditioned for 'Bubbling Brown' ['Bubbling Brown Sugar,' Loften Mitchell] and met Mr. Springer [Ashton Springer] and got the job at Theatre Management. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that started my Broadway career which spanned about twelve years. Story_ID: 327157 Speaker 1: Now what are the difference between prodush- producer and manager, or production? Speaker 2: Well, the producers basically bring all of the pieces together. They get the director, they hire the managers, and they raise the money, basically. Bottom line, producers raise the money and basically have the last say-so. Whereas the managers come in and then they take all the pieces that have been brought together--the general manager does help the producer select some of those people, set designers, light designers, costume designers, property people, production people, crew, you know. And the general manager actually manages the show while it's running. While it's rehearsing, and while it's running. And they pay all the people and they file all the paperwork and they deal with all the advertising people and the marketing people and all of the pieces that go into producing a show on Broadway. The managers actually manage all of that. The company manager, as opposed to the general manager who is like side-by-side with the producer, the company manager is actually responsible for the artist and the actual show. The company manager goes to the theater, makes sure that everybody's in place, do what they have to do, deals with the company on an ongoing basis. So when I got into the union [Association of Theatrical Press Agents and Managers (ATPAM)] as an apprentice, I apprenticed specifically to Carolyne Jones [Carolyne A. Jones] who was the company manager, but I worked in the general manager's--she and I both worked in the general manager's office, and his name was Ashton Springer. And at that time, Ashton Springer was a--had a general manager's office in a Broadway theater on Broadway. And he was the only black person that I--that did that. There were other black producers, certainly Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] was doing something down at Henry, at the New Federal Theatre at Henry Street [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York]. And Vinnette Carroll was doing her Urban Arts Corps downtown as well. Rosetta Linda Warr [ph.] and there were a group of them up in Harlem [New York, New York] that were doing things. But on Broadway, Ashton Springer was the man. Story_ID: 327158 Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened next? Where did you go from there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, here I was in this union [Association of Theatrical Press Agents and Managers (ATPAM)]. And this young woman by the name of [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange had written a play called 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf.' And they had taken the play from California, I think they found it in the San Francisco [California] area, in the Bay area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], and brought it down to first Henry Street [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York], Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] was involved with it. And then they were--then they took it to The Public Theater [New York, New York] to the Shakespeare Festival [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park], Joseph Papp was the producer there. And he was working with a general manager by the name of Manny Azenberg [Emanuel Azenberg]. And they decided to take the show to Broadway. But Ntozake had told them that she wanted a black woman company manager. Well they weren't able to--there were, there were none 'cause the only black woman company manager [Carolyne A. Jones] was doing 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell]. And they opened the show on Broadway and they decided that they were gonna take a company out on the road. And Ntozake told them that they were absolutely not taking out that company without a black woman manager. So I had met Joe Papp. He was certainly the impresario of Broadway. And he and Manny Azenberg took me lunch one day and asked me would I consider taking this show out on the road as the company manager. And I said, "Well, I'm only an apprentice." And they said, "Well, we'll hold the contract, we're in the union, we'll hold the contract. And you'll go take the show out." Now my union got wind of this and they were like you can't take a show out on the road, you're only an apprentice, you've only been an apprentice for a year and you have to apprentice for three years. And Joe and Manny, they said, "Listen, they can't stop you." And so I decided to take the show. So I went out on the road with the first national company. I got trained in New York [New York] at the Broadway theater, the Booth Theatre. And we had auditions there and hired all the women. But I went out on the road as the first, the first national company of 'For Colored Girls.' I was the company manager. It was funny too because at first I said to them, "Are you paying me the full salary?" And they said, "Well, but you're not really in the union." And I said, "But I'm doing the work." And they said "Okay." Speaker 1: So they paid you. Speaker 2: They paid me the full salary. And my goodness, this was in 1977. And you know my goodness, they were making like, I forgot like seven hundred dollars a week. Good grief, I went from poverty to, you know, to the big house. Speaker 1: You're not joking. That was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was serious. Speaker 1: --good money. Speaker 2: Those girls were making more than that. The actresses were making outrageous sums of money, plus per diem, you know, two, three hundred dollars a week per diem. So we were all in heaven. And the show as a phenomena. It--nobody knew what it was. We went all over this country, to all the A cities, Washington [D.C.], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], you know, Wilmington [Delaware], all over the country. And nobody knew what it was. They couldn't pro- they couldn't even pronounce the title. We would go to the box office and collect all of the names. The box office treasurer would write down the names of all the names people, 'For Black Girls who Killed Themselves,' you know. But we had a phenomenal company. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay on the road with it? Speaker 2: We stayed on the road--well I stayed on the road with them over a year. And then I actually met my second husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] touring through Chicago. And one of the lead actresses, LaTanya Richardson, introduced me to him. They had gone to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] together. And I met him and he proposed to me and I left the company and actually married him some months later. But that was a pretty amazing tour. It was, it was a phenomena, that's all I can tell you. In every city we made more money. It was outrageous. Story_ID: 327159 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that you could tell us about some of the experiences on the road? Speaker 2: Oh my god. It was--because the show ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] was such a big hit and we were making so much money, every city I tried to outdo the last opening night party. So in every city I would have these incredible parties for the company and for the, you know the, the people that were hosting the show in those cities. And I remember when we got to St. Louis [Missouri], I had a party on a boat, you know. We just sailed on the Mississippi [Mississippi River]. Had a major party. I mean but it was just, it was, it was--and I would tell these--I would say to these women this is not real. Don't think that this is how all these shows go because they do not go like this, you know, not that I, you know, this old veteran here. But you know I knew that this was something very, very unusual. I had so many wonderful experiences and I, I attribute so much of who I am to this incredible man named Manny Azenberg [Emanuel Azenberg] and Joe Papp [Joseph Papp]. Manny Azenberg used to fly out on the road and you know I might do something really crazy and he would fly out and take me to dinner and I would think uh-oh, what did I do? And he would talk to me. He would say you know well why are you--tell me what you were thinking. And so I would tell him what I was thinking. And he would say well think about it like this. And then he would give me another way to think about it. So it would just--I mean I feel like he was molding me and making me into a really great manager by this incredible way of teaching which I've tried to adapt in my own work now as I work with younger people coming along. It's, it's not that what you think is wrong, it's just there's lots of ways to think about it. So think about it like this. And it was just a phenomenal experience. Gosh, we--there were so many great, so many great--we stayed in mansions. We would rent mansions in these cities and we'd stay in these cities you know. Speaker 1: This is for the crew, the whole production staff. Speaker 2: For the girls, for all the women in the production, you know. I remember in San Francisco [California] we went up on the, up on the Presidio [Presidio of San Francisco], you know overlooking Presidio. And there was a mansion there. We actually went to San Francisco twice and we stayed in that Presidio. I stayed in that mansion two years in a row. It was a different show the second time, but that first year--and there probably maybe six or seven bedrooms. And so, you know all the--bunch of the women stayed there with me. And I mean we were limousined and champagned and you know, we just--we were spoiled. I know that you know a lot of those women have gone on to be great actors and actresses and we often--we see each other and we just get so excited. I mean we actually hired from Detroit [Michigan], S. Epatha Merkerson who just won an Emmy [Emmy Award] for 'Lakawanna Blues.' She was in my first company and we hired her from Detroit. Sharon Epatha, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was a--what did a typical day consist of? Speaker 2: God, let's see. Well, sleeping very late. They did especially, but you know I, I had to work, you know I mean I certainly worked in the theaters. For me, I would generally get to the theater around twelve, one o'clock. Kind of check in and check the box office, see how the ticket sales were going. Probably talk to the press agents to see you know, what kind of press opportunities might be coming up. Were there interviews, who was being interviewed where. Check on the next cities, you know, look at the airlines and the hotels and figure out how I was gonna move the company to the airport and then to the places where we had to go to live in those different cities. We always had press agents that went out ahead of us. So they were always sending me information back to say here's what I think we should be doing. This is how I think we should do it. And then you know, planning my opening night parties and figuring all that out. And then really figuring out how, who were the right people that we should be talking to in each city. How did we get--especially the women, and particularly the black women for that, for that particular show. The women carried that show, black and white. I mean they would be dragging those husbands in there. But you know always you're, you're looking out for your next city and who are the people that are gonna help you sell all the tickets and understand what it is you're trying to do. A lot of times Ntozake [HistoryMaker Ntozake Shange] came out on the road. And you know you had turnovers. Lots of times you might be rehearsing some of the understudies to go on if someone was sick or leaving the show or whatever. And then around six o'clock we'd go eat dinner and come back. Everybody had to be there by half hour, 7:30. Most people got there an hour ahead of time. And the show would--you know, I usually spent most of the time at the front, in the front of the house once the house opened, and greeted the public and talked to the reporters or the press or whatever. And show would go on and we'd usually hit the street and go out and hang out, you know, listen to the music, go to the jazz clubs and see the feel of the city, get a pulse for the city. And that kind of set the stage for my career. Story_ID: 327160 Speaker 1: I did a lot of shows on the road, lot of shows on Broadway. I toured, I toured on the road for about eight years, even after I got married. I was on the road with 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] for about a year and a half, September. And then I, I left 'For Colored Girls' to get married to my second husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] in Chicago [Illinois]. But right after I got married, Manny Azenberg [Emanuel Azenberg] called me and said look, I got a great show called 'Ain't Misbehavin'. I got it on Broadway, I wanna take it on the road. If you're interested, you can bring your husband with you. Speaker 2: He could travel with you, okay. Speaker 1: He sure did. And you know my husband was a executive at Sears Tower [Willis Tower] in Chicago. And but I think he was a frustrated actor. And-- Speaker 2: Why would you say that? Speaker 1: Well, he had grown up here in Atlanta [Georgia] and went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and was a part of the Morehouse-Spelman Players and really LaTanya Richardson and Samuel Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson], those were all his friends and colleagues. And so they all had gone off to New York [New York] to become artists and he, you know, got a job here in Atlanta at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and then got transferred to Chicago. And though he--when I met him, he had a art gallery, he had a film symposium. He was still very close to the arts. I think he was--always had that dream to go to New York. So I, I packed him up, took him on the road and then took him back to New York. Story_ID: 327161 Speaker 1: So he [Hughley's second husband, Thomas Hughley, Jr.] was on the road, and how long did you stay on the road with 'Ain't Misbehavin' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well 'Ain't Misbehavin' was probably about a year and a half. It seems like most of my shows were--I took them about a year and a half. And then usually I would either--we started a lot of companies. We always started other companies too. I mean 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange], I think ended up having about seven companies. And it was interesting because it--when we did 'For Colored Girls,' out of the same manager's office we were doing 'The Wiz,' 'cause 'The Wiz' was on Broadway and we did the first national tour of that. And he had 'A Chorus Line,' which was the phenomena. There were twelve companies of 'A Chorus Line.' And so sometimes we would jump from company to company or, you know, from show to show and we'd start other companies. We'd audition in every city we'd go to, we'd hold auditions. And we found a lot of really wonderful people that we were able to bring into the musical theater world doing it like that. So I did that, I did that 'Colored Girls,' 'Ain't Misbehavin.' I did 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' with Vinnette Carroll. I actually got to go abroad with that show. I went to Belgium and Paris [France] with that production. Speaker 1: And about how long did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did--with-- Speaker 1: Abroad, how long? How many shows did you do abroad? Speaker 2: I did about three, two, two shows and then I came back and then I went back. But I--'cause I picked up a company of 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' with Patti LaBelle and Al Green. And I took Patti out on the road with a show nationally. Then I took her to Broadway and we added Al Green to that Broadway production. And then that show closed and I went abroad to Paris and did 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' in Paris. I made it to Paris. (Speaking French), "Tu as les bras trop courts pour boxer avec Dieu." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I learned how to speak French and count in French and that was my French, I got back to my French. Speaker 1: So how did your sister [Sharon Smith Curle] take that? Speaker 2: She was excited, you know she was excited. She always tried to teach me more words. But you know I kind of got immersed in French culture just like boom. And we had a company in Belgium and a company in--we had a company of--we had a company of 'Ain't Misbehavin' in Belgium. And we had a company of 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' in Paris. So I was, I was abroad about--I guess it was maybe eight or nine months, maybe close to a year. Speaker 1: Now how was this experience different from the experience in the United States being on the road and, and traveling and with the shows? Speaker 2: Certainly the language was major. That was the biggest difference. Speaker 1: So did you have to have interpreters? Speaker 2: Yes, always, always had an interpreter. Speaker 1: But the performances were still in English. Speaker 2: Yes, they were in English. All the advertisements though were all French. Speaker 1: Everything was in English. Was in French? Speaker 2: It was in French, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the language was actually--and we had subtitles in French so that people could read the French if they couldn't get the English. But you know I think most people, especially in France, they love gospel music. They didn't care what it was called. They didn't really care what the story was. And you know, 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' wasn't like some major drama. It was the gospel of, let's see, was it Luke [sic. Matthew]? And then the second act was just all gospel music. And it was rousing, wonderful gospel music. So I think that that's what made it such a hit all over. I mean it toured other places too, I just did the ones in France and Belgium. But it was a great experience. I mean I think traveling internationally is always a great experience. I did--when I left Broadway, I actually came back to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] and worked with them for three years as their general manager this time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And we took a couple shows to all abroad, we--all over Europe and Asia. We sent a company home to Asia. We took a company of 'Soldiers Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller] to Scotland and to England and all around Europe. So I had quite a lot of experiences abroad that were just life changing and wonderful. I, I would not trade one moment of any one of them. I think always our biggest issues were you know, how are we gonna be received. How will the show be interpreted? Will the nuances that happen here, will they understand them abroad? And usually they, they translated well. Story_ID: 327063 Speaker 1: Okay we were in- we were all over Europe. Speaker 2: Yes, but you're back-- Speaker 1: I'm back-- Speaker 2: --to the Negro Ensemble (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. And there--I mounted probably in the three years I was the general manager, we mounted about twelve productions. I got there just as 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller] was becoming the big hit that it was, starring Denzel [Denzel Washington] and Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson], Denzel Washington and Adolph Caesar. What an incredible company that was. We ended up going back abroad and taking 'Soldier's Play' back to Edinburgh, Scotland, to the big Edinburgh festival, touring that around. We mounted 'Home,' Samm-Art Williams play. Took that all over Asia and all over Southeast Asia with that play, Thailand. And we mounted, we had a small theater. We had moved from St. Mark's Place [St. Mark's Playhouse] in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] up to Broadway on 46th Street, we had an office on 46th Street. And from there we mounted about, let's see three seasons, about nine shows in a small off-Broadway house on 55th Street. Story_ID: 327064 Speaker 1: Now let's just give a little bit of history about the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company (NEC)]. It was started in 1967. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [sic. 1967]. [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, I think it was in '64 [1964] that he actually wrote an article ['American Theater: For Whites Only?'] for The New York Times about blacks in theater. And it got the attention of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. He was saying that black people needed to have an ensemble company. They needed to have the opportunity to really write the stories themselves and have them produced so that the world could see them. And the Ford Foundation read the article and gave him a big grant to create the Negro Ensemble Company. And he together with [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks, who had been a great actor who was in Washington, D.C., and Gerald Krone who was a producer and manager, kind of became the founders of the Negro Ensemble Company. In that first year they were able to bring together a group of actors and actresses and mount their first productions. They had a small theater over in the East Village [New York, New York] on St. Mark's Place. And it became the place to do theater in this country. It wasn't the first black theater company because there had been a theater company down in the South. I think it was--I don't remember where it was. But it was certainly the first ensemble theater company that had a cast of artists that were being paid to be actors and actresses. And they were developing the directors and the designers and the managers, and all the people backstage, the stage managers and the, you know, the property people. And so I mean working at the Negro Ensemble Company, you just had the opportunity to do all the theater. And the playwrights that were nurtured. They had a playwrights workshop. And so all these writers who were writing these plays, needed a place to be nurtured and developed and so I mean Lonne Elder [Lonne Elder III] and oh god, you know, [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison and Douglas Turner Ward himself. It was so interesting too because I was actually in college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. And on a--I think it was like a public channel or something. I was clicking through the channels and all of a sudden I saw this black person in white face. And I stopped on the channel and I started watching it. And it was all about this town where all the Negroes disappeared. Speaker 1: 'Day of Absence' [Douglas Turner Ward]. Speaker 2: 'Day of Absence.' And I just remember when I scrolled the credits, the Negro Ensemble Company. And I was like what is the Negro Ensemble Company? You know and I'm black power, what is the Negro Ensemble Company? Speaker 1: I think in 1968 or '69 [1969] it was at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The theatrical group put that play on, and it was awesome. Speaker 2: Awesome. And that was my first introduction to them and I--soon as I got to New York [New York] I was looking for the Negro Ensemble Company. So was every other black artist in the world. Dancers, actors, singers, whoever you were, you were trying to get to the Negro Ensemble Company and meet Douglas Turner Ward and get a chance to work with the company. Story_ID: 327065 Speaker 1: Well tell me (cough) how did you actually end up getting reconnected and then getting into the production or the upper management position with them? What's the story behind that? Speaker 2: Well when I was working with Ashton Springer, I brought a young man in to work with me directly. His name was Larry Walden. Kevin, Larry Kevin Walden, Kevin Larry Walden [sic. Larry Kevin Walden]. Anyway, when I left and went out on the road with 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow Is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] and then got off into my road shows, Larry had gone to work with Leon Denmark [Leon B. Denmark] who had become the general manager of the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward was still the artistic director. Leon Denmark was the managing director. And Larry Walden had come on board to work with them. And I had just gotten back off the road and I had to have some minor surgery done. So I was actually supposed to take a show with Lena Horne and I ended up not being able to take because I had to have this minor surgery. And while I was kind of recuperating, Larry came to see me 'cause he was--had gotten very close to me. He was one of the best assistants I've ever had. And he said, "Stephanie [HistoryMaker Stephanie Hughley], you really need to come back and you gotta give back. You know you've been out on the road. You've done all this commercial theater, you need to give back. The Negro Ensemble Company really needs you and you know you worked with them a long time ago and they need a general manager." And I was like oh, no, they're struggling, you know. I've been sitting on the top of the pile here, you know. But he convinced me. I went over to talk to Leon Denmark and they'd never really--well I won't say they never had a general manager, but they created a position of general manager for me and I agreed to work. I said, "Okay, I'm just gone do this for a couple of years now." And I ended up staying about three years with them. But it was, it was a great time. I mean we, we revived a lot of the old classics and we were gonna--we were just kind of in this process of trying to get some of the, some of the former alumni to come back and take on some of the old roles again. But a lot happened in the transition. We did get up 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III] we did do that one. And that was gonna be the first of the black classics that we did. But a lot of things happened and unfortunately, I ended up having to leave and move to Atlanta [Georgia], actually. So that was my last job in New York [New York] was with the Negro Ensemble Company before I moved here in 1986, at the end of '86 [1986]. Story_ID: 327066 Speaker 1: So in 1986 I was living in New York [New York], happy in New York City. And I was married [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] to this man who was from the South. I never wanted to live in the South, I had bad memories of the South. But he was from Atlanta [Georgia]. And he woke up one morning and said, "I think it's time to go home." And I said, "Home? We're home." We had just finished restoring the most beautiful brownstone in Harlem [New York, New York] that we had purchased about five years earlier. It had the most beautiful wood everywhere. We had redone all the floors. We stripped all the wood. We had seven fireplaces. We had ceilings on the parlor floor, seventeen foot double folding doors, mahogany wood. My God, I could not believe it. He said he wanted to go home and I thought my God, I don't think so. I can't do it. And so I had a talk with God. I had a lot of talks with God in those days. I still have a lot of talks with God. But he wanted to come home. And so I just decided it was--he was my husband and just to stay married I needed to come with him. So in October--it was so funny too because we were trying to sell our brownstone. We had made a great investment in Harlem. Harlem was a tremendous investment in those days. I wish I still had that brownstone. 'Cause I thought we had made a lot of money on it back in '86 [1986]. If I had that brownstone now, we're talking about a million dollars plus now. But he, he, he--I think he just--he never really liked New York. He liked New York, but he didn't like New York. He had--it was tough in New York. So you know it was interesting because a few months before he made this great announcement, my best friend, my best friend LaTanya Richardson had gotten a call from people here in Atlanta who had this idea of starting a black arts festival. And they asked her if there was going to be a national black arts festival, what should the theater component be? Now LaTanya had--I'd met her when we did 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] and you know she was married to Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] and Sam worked with me at NEC [Negro Ensemble Company]. And so we were very close and we lived around the corner from each other. And so she came over to my house and she had a whole bunch of notes all over these pads and she said, "I need you to help me type all this up and, you know, tell me--read this and give me feedback and tell me. They're trying to start a festival in Atlanta and they asked me to do a--what should a theater component be." And so we kind of put our heads together and I typed up all this stuff for her and we did this whole paper on the theater component for the National Black Arts Festival. Maybe about two or three weeks after we did that, we were going to see the opera 'X' ['X: The Life and Times of Malcolm X'] Thulani [Thulani Davis] and Anthony Davis had done opera 'X.' And at that performance, I met Tom Cullen [Thomas O. Cullen] who was the executive director of the Fulton County Arts Council. And so LaTanya introduced me to him. And she told him that we--I was about to move to Atlanta. And so they were talking about the Black Arts Festival and, and he said--she said, "Well, she should run the Black Arts Festival." And he said, "Well, come and talk to me when you get to Atlanta." And so I didn't really think much about it, you know. Story_ID: 327067 Speaker 1: I didn't know much about Atlanta [Georgia]. For me you gotta understand, Atlanta was like a B or C city on our touring circuit. Because you never could tell if Atlanta people were gonna show up. If it rained or if it was too cold. I mean, there was no guarantee. I mean, we brought shows that were grossing millions of dollars all over the world. They would come to Atlanta and die and nobody could explain why. So Atlanta was really this B/C city. And you know in my mind I'm thinking, what am I gonna do? I guess I'm gonna have to go do--have another career. 'Cause I just had no clue what I could possibly do in the arts in Atlanta. And I'm gone be honest, I really--I was never that impressed when I came. They had good jazz clubs. But that was about the best I could think about Atlanta. Speaker 2: But was that typical of the South for the shows or not? Speaker 1: Not necessarily. I mean we didn't do a lot of cities in the South. But you could pretty much know that if you had a really good gospel show or if you had good, you know, good music, you know you knew that you could do pretty well in any city. I mean, those were the first beginnings of what they call bus and trucks. Bus and trucks took shows to the smaller cities, you know, to the Birminghams [Birmingham, Alabama] and the Memphises [Memphis, Tennessee] and the--although we played Memphis, so Memphis was not, Memphis was actually on the A circuit. I mean, we did really well in Memphis. So you would think Atlanta, but it wasn't--you didn't know what would happen in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know. So you know I just--the thought of Atlanta. I really, I thought about just leaving my husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] just go and we just call it a day. 'Cause I never dreamed that I wouldn't live my life in New York City [New York, New York]. That was me. That is me. It's my energy. It's my, you know, it's my head. And Atlanta was exactly the opposite. Some days I still scream. Speaker 2: Like what are you doing in Atlanta? Speaker 1: What am I doing in Atlanta? I love Atlanta to live; I love living here. But working, the cultural--the attitudes about art and culture here are just--and the sad part, the irony is that so many people who live here come from the North. They come from the cultural capitals. They come from New York. They come from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. But they get here, and they get so comfortable. Speaker 2: They just don't bring that edge with them from the North. Speaker 1: My friend LaTanya [LaTanya Richardson] who was born here, you know, she said to me, "Just don't let them make you wear polyester." She said, "You gotta know the people here." She said, "There's three kinds of people. There's the people that'll tell you where the bridge is. There's the people that'll show you where the--how to get to the bridge, and then there's the people that'll go to the bridge and go across the bridge with you. If you find any of those, hang on tight." I really know what she means, you know. It's kind of like even within the black cultures, the inner circle of the inner circle of the inner circle, you know it's just unbelievable to me. Speaker 2: It's southern. Speaker 1: It's so black and white too, you know. Here you come out of New York, even Boston [Massachusetts]. Where even in Boston where they've got all these different ethnic communities, it's like everybody got one, you know. Here it's black and white. It's still black and white in 2006. Speaker 2: It's still the South. Speaker 1: It's black and white. And I guess I stay because I keep feeling like there's something is gonna break and we can help it, you know. I mean the world is living here now, when do we wake up? Speaker 2: You'll be that breakthrough. Speaker 1: I pray. I believe God, I believe God, I'm still here. I can't believe I'm still here. I kept--you know every, every year I kind of make my plan to transition and get back to New York, or at least to that New England corridor and I don't know. I guess it's not God's will. Speaker 2: It's on its way. It's on its way here, so-- Speaker 1: I don't know, you know I'm getting close to sixty now so I'm--I kind of feel like you know, don't--if it don't fit, don't force it, you know. Story_ID: 327068 Speaker 1: So with the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival], you met the Fulton County [Fulton County Arts Council] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so I met them, I mean several months before I actually moved here. And the irony is I was moving--I moved to--I was trying to move to Atlanta [Georgia] for one year. I tried to close on my brownstone [in Harlem, New York, New York]--I think we must have went to closing about five or six times. Every time we would go, there would be something else wrong and so we couldn't close. It was unbelievable. I think it was the--that was--that might have been God trying to tell me something. Speaker 1: That was your sign to stay in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: That was a sign. I think he was trying to tell me something. Speaker 1: But it finally sold. Speaker 2: It finally sold, and we packed up our bags and moved to Atlanta, Georgia. Now, we had come down a couple of times, obviously his [Hughley's second husband, Thomas Hughley, Jr.] family was here. And we started looking for places to live. And we couldn't agree, another sign. I should have known, right? Because Atlanta just had so many beautiful houses and, and you know in every little neighborhood and area, and I didn't know anything about Atlanta. So we just kept looking, but you know we couldn't agree. And finally the last time we came, the last hour that we were here this woman took us out to Stone Mountain [Georgia] where I was told that, you know, black people couldn't even live in Stone Mountain. That they, you know, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] rallied at the top of the Stone Mountain. There we found the perfect house, we both loved it. And we went--he went in one door, I went in the other door, we kind of met, passed through, came back, got in the car and went to the airport. But when we met in the room, we said this is it, this is it, okay. Got in the car and went to the airport. Eventually we closed on the brownstone and we moved to Atlanta on October the 16th, my birthday, 1986. Everything, I remember praying and asking God, telling him everything I wanted. I do believe you have to be very specific in your prayers. I told him everything I wanted. I said because we had spent five years restoring a brownstone while we lived in it. I said I don't wanna paint not a, not a wood, not a board. I don't wanna sandpaper. I don't wanna smell any kind of, you know, refinish--refurbishing oil, the stripping stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The hardwood-- Speaker 2: --I don't wanna smell anything. I wanna walk in and hang my clothes in the closet. Speaker 1: And that's it. So when you say that you refurbished this brownstone-- Speaker 2: We refurbished it. Speaker 1: You actually did some work yourself. Speaker 2: We did a lot of work. We scraped and stripped. We stripped all the fireplaces. I mean we had help doing floors and things like that, but we did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did a lot. Speaker 2: --most of it ourselves. We really did. And we lived--I mean and you know, we'd hire the people and they'd do it, they'd steal our stuff, you know. It was crazy, crazy, crazy in New York. We learned a lot, let me tell you. We learned a lot (laughter). I think when I built this house, I was like I know a lot. Let me just make sure-- Story_ID: 327069 Speaker 1: But we moved here [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1986 and not long after we moved here, I, I had said to my husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] I was not gonna work for a year. And that he needed to get a job and I was just traumatized. And like within three or four months, I went to talk to Tom Cullen [Thomas O. Cullen] about the black arts festival, and they had already hired an executive director. And they asked me if I would have a conversation with her and interview her, interview with her. And I feel like I did interview her. And she, she didn't really come from the arts, but she had a background in fundraising and, and she was good friends with Michael Lomax, who at that time was the chairman of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. And Michael Lomax had always had this dream to create this great festival, this celebration of the contributions that people of African descent had made. He always called it the black Spoleto. He wanted to have a black Spoleto [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy]. And they had done this when they were in college. He was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and I think, I think it was [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon of Sweet Honey [Sweet Honey in the Rock] Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, Bernice Johnson Reagon who's been really a great teacher for me. I think she used to have these penny festivals when she was a student at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I think that that was kind of the first germ of an idea that came into Michael's head. And he just wanted to do this great celebration with all the disciplines. And he actually did a feasibility study a couple of years before. He hired these consultants out of New York [New York] and they went all over the country and all over Atlanta [Georgia] asking people was there a need for a black arts festival. And if so, where should it be? And I guess 100 percent of the people, black, white, old, young, city, suburbs, said yes, and Atlanta. So he had everything he needed to appropriate a sum of money from the county to begin the planning stages of the National Black Arts Festival. So when I got here, they had hired Michelle Smith [A. Michelle Smith] to be the executive director. And at that time they thought they just needed a program manager, and of course I had come out of New York. So I called all my friends and said we're getting ready to have a party in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Maybe wasn't so bad after all Speaker 1: Let me tell you. But little did I know, I was in for the education of my life. Story_ID: 327070 Speaker 1: You talk about finally getting connected to my African centeredness. I think the National Black Arts Festival did that more than anything else in my life. Speaker 2: And how so would you say that occurred? Speaker 1: Well, there was a man by the name of Worth Long who lives here still. Speaker 2: And it's Worth, W-O-R-T. Speaker 1: W-O-R-T-H Long, L-O-N-G. He has since been named a Heritage [National Heritage Fellowships] award winner from Smithsonian [sic. National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)]. But I met Worth Long, and Worth Long started to teach me about African American history. He took me over to the Sea Islands. He took me down in the backwoods of Mississippi and Alabama. I met people that were playing spoons and one string guitars and I learned about shape note singing and lining in-- Speaker 2: What note singing is that? Speaker 1: Shape note singing and lining in hymn singing. Shape notes, do, do, do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do, do-do, re-re, you know, shape note singing. I learned about lining in hymn singing, that that's what my [maternal] grandfather [Ciscero Bradley] and all those people down in--on that Alabama farm in Luverne, outside of Luverne, Alabama. Rural route box number. And that old church when one person would start singing--and then everybody would sing right behind him. I learned so many things from Worth Long. From folks at the Smithsonian Institution [Washington, D.C.], you know, about African American history. I knew my grandmothers, but I didn't know my grandmothers' grandmothers', and where they came from, and, and I didn't under--I didn't know about the Great Migration, you know. I didn't know about--I didn't even care to know about all that history going back and how a slave owner had raped the enslaved women in the house and, and how my family went from dark, dark black to white. I didn't even care about any of that until I got into the National Black Arts Festival and I started to meet the people who were rooted and grounded in the history. And I was amazed at how many people who live in Atlanta [Georgia] have never been to the Sea Islands. They didn't know about the African retention of culture in those Sea Island people. And so I saw this incredible opportunity to bridge Africa and African American history in a way that had not been really done in this country before, through music, dance, theater, film, visual art, performing art, literary art and folk art. People came from all over the world, and they came from all over this country. And they converged around this incredible celebration. I started working March or March of 1987 and we did the first festival in July of 1988. It was the end of July, beginning of August. And boy, we decided the first festival was gonna focus on the Harlem Renaissance. And it was funny because when they decided to call the National Black Arts Festival, the only thing I would have still done differently with that title. A lot of people say you shouldn't call it black, you should, you know. Only thing I would have changed would have been the International Black Arts Festival. Because there's no way that you could tell the story about African American people and not begin in Africa. So I have these incredible opportunities to travel to Africa for the first time. I got off that plane and kissed the ground in Ghana and in Senegal where I saw the people who were looking like my [paternal] grandmother's [Zella Smith] people who I decided were from Sapelo Island in Georgia, all the way up to today. I saw the continuum of African people, and I realized that we as African Americans, we were the most ignorant about it all because we had been so brainwashed into believing that Africa was the dark continent. When I got there, it was the brightest continent I'd ever seen in all of my travels. It was the most colorful, the most brilliant, the most, the most incredible sounds and smells and, and I realized that this festival was important. That it was important for us to do it. It was important for us to have this moment in time to go back and reflect and, and build the bridge. And build the bridge not only from African to this country, but from this country into our everyday lives. To bring the art back to the people. And I realized that art was just this very marginalized term in this country. That art was a picture on a wall. An artist was a singer or a painter. But in fact art was just one expression of culture, and that this was really about culture and creativity. If you boil it all down to its basic common denominator, it's about culture and creativity. 'Cause everybody has culture and everybody has creativity. And art was just one manifestation of those two things. And so for me you know, that's why I took on the National Black Arts Festival and I guess that's why I'm still here. Story_ID: 327162 Speaker 1: I am Evelyn Pounds the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and we're in an interview with [HistoryMaker] Stephanie Hughley and with the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] in Atlanta, Georgia. This is the second taping, which is a completion interview from our first. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): February 15th [2006]. Speaker 1: February 15th, today is February 15th, and we're finishing up from February the 13th, 2006. Story_ID: 327163 Speaker 1: So tell us about the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] and how it came to be and how you became involved in it. Speaker 2: Well, I think I talked about Michael Lomax had this dream to create this celebration of people of African descent and had done the feasibility study and everybody all over the country said yes, we need to have a black arts festival, and everybody said yes Atlanta [Georgia]. So he had the, you know, that gave him the impetus to then go back to the county [Fulton County, Georgia] and appropriate a big chunk of money to start the National Black Arts Festival. They had asked people from all over the country who were specialists in different disciplines to write these white papers if you will, about if you were going to do a black arts festival, what should the theater component be? What should be the dance, what should the music component be? And I think I talked a little bit about helping my friend LaTanya Richardson Jackson [LaTanya Richardson] create the theater component. I was moving to Atlanta. My husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] was from here. And woke up one morning and said he wanted to come home and I was like what will I do in Atlanta? Little did I know that I would be doing more art than I had ever done in New York [New York] and Boston [Massachusetts] and all the other years I had done previous to that. So in October of 1986 we moved to Atlanta. I remember because it was October 16th, it was my birthday. And I got to move into my dream house with my swimming pool. And I know I was telling you about how because we had renovated this entire brownstone (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --and I'd lived with all of the sawdust and paint, that I had just asked God, I just wanna walk in and hang my clothes in the closet. And my secret desire, my secret dream was to have this big swimming pool on the side. And so when we found our house, last house we looked at, we were able to move into that house on my birthday. And it was so wonderful because it was, it was 75 degrees outside and I went swimming in my swimming pool on October 16th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In October, okay. Speaker 2: --nineteen eighty-six [1986]. Big difference from Harlem, New York [New York], you know, 142nd Street. Story_ID: 327164 Speaker 1: I also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now tell us a little bit about LaTanya Richardson. Speaker 1: LaTanya Richardson Jackson was born in Atlanta, Georgia, and she's now married to Samuel L. Jackson, who they met here at Spelman, Morehouse College [Spelman College and Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. They were in the theater department together. LaTanya was in the theater department and I think she wooed Sam into the theater department. And you know I mean we certainly know their history now. Speaker 2: Right, and she has a career in the theater. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: But she just hasn't been on the big screen as much as Samuel has. Speaker 1: Yeah, not yet. I think she's coming into her own right now. As a matter of fact, there's a big article in Ebony, they're on the cover of Ebony magazine, and the article is all about her making a decision to stay at home and raise their daughter, Zoe [Zoe Jackson]. And now it's her turn. Speaker 2: Excellent (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I think we're gonna hear more from her. Story_ID: 327165 Speaker 1: She [LaTanya Richardson] was very much a part of the first National Black Arts Festival. She was my--they were my best friends, still are my best friends. She helped us conceive the whole theater component. But there were other people around the country, I think Karen Spelman in Washington, D.C. did the music component. Let's see, I think maybe Adrian Stewart [ph.] and Worth Long, and really people at Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] James Early and some of the folks in the folklore festival [Smithsonian Folklife Festival] helped conceived the folk, folk arts component of it. So there were different people around the country that wrote these white papers that, you know, if you were gonna do a black arts festival, you have to have these ingredients. So when I got here, little did I know when I was helping LaTanya finish up her theater part, that I would actually be the person to implement all these different ideas and thoughts. But it was a tremendous opportunity because there was nothing like it in the country. We were looking all around, and there were, you know, dance festivals or at that time there really were not any major festivals in any major disciplines that focused on people of African descent. And so we were really a pioneer in that arena. Like I said, Michael [Michael Lomax] kept saying a black Spoleto [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy]. But I had been to Edinburgh, Scotland and to me that was the festival of festivals. And so I just saw a dance festival and a theater festival and a music festival, different musical festivals very much like Edinburgh. And I also saw the entire City of Atlanta [Georgia] being involved because in Edinburgh, Scotland, the entire city is totally transformed around this festival. They reroute the buses to go to all these different places and spaces. And the best part about Edinburgh in my mind was how there was this core festival that had maybe fifty, sixty events in it. But then there were four hundred fringe events. So anybody could go to Edinburgh, find a little space in any little corner, set up their little shop and do their show. And they would publicize it, print a newspaper every night and you could figure out how to go from place to place to see all these incredible artists performing from all over the world. So that was the picture I had in my mind. How to transform Atlanta so that every person would have to encounter the Black Arts Festival, whether they wanted to come or not. You know, almost like you bump into it, you know. Get on the train or go to the library or you know stop at your--shop at your corner grocery store. Something about the National Black Arts Festival would be there. So when I got to Atlanta and I met the executive director Michelle Smith [A. Michelle Smith], and you know, met Michael Lomax and started hearing about his vision, you know, my mind just went to work and I just saw the entire city of Atlanta participating. So I went everywhere. I went to all the major cultural institutions, all the artists. I had town hall meetings to talk about you know, what people wanted to see and what they wanted to do and you know I just wanted everybody to be involved in the festival. And I think that in 1988, everybody was involved in the festival. We got all the, all the stores. We took Peachtree Street, you know there's a hundred Peachtree Streets in Atlanta. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But the main Peachtree Street, and we, we created a parade, the opening parade. So we got all the stores on Peachtree Street, a wonderful visual arts coordinator named Crystal Britton. Crystal Britton went into all those stores and got everybody to dress their windows and celebrate the Black Arts Festival. So she got black mannequins and Macy's was right on Peachtree Street. Speaker 2: So this is the downtown part of Atlanta. Speaker 1: This is downtown, right downtown Peachtree Street. Speaker 2: Would it started at Auburn Avenue? Speaker 1: It started at like--no, it actually ended on Auburn Avenue because we had a big folk arts festival all the way down Auburn Avenue. We looked at all the historic landmarks, and did performances inside and outside of all of those places and spaces. We had about four, three or four stages that went all the way down to The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia]. Started up on the, on the west end of Auburn Avenue, up at Piedmont [Avenue], and went all the way down to Boulevard just in front of Tthe King Center. And it was, it was tremendous. Story_ID: 327166 Speaker 1: And I thought to myself--I don't know where I got this number. But I said if 50,000 people come, then that will make--I'll know it's a success. And at the end of that festival [National Black Arts Festival], they counted 500,000 people had shown had, you know, participated in the festival. I remember when we did the parade, a dear friend, he's passed now. His name was Paul Robeson. He was--no, his last name was Robeson [ph.]. But he was a, you know the moko jumbie, the stilt walkers from the Caribbean? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I can't call his name. But we--he lived in New York and we had called him and said you have to come and start my parade. It's gotta start with the moko jumbies. And I wanna start in Africa and then I wanna bring it all the way up to the boom boxes and the hip hop generation. And so I worked with a whole team of people to help me put that parade together, Don [ph.]--I can't call his last name. But he helped really coordinate the whole parade. And so Robeson and about four or five moko jumbies came and we had horse drawn carriages. And we invited all these incredible people. We did this celebration called Living Legends. We were looking for people who were seventy years or older. And had created these institutions that were, you know, still alive or they were the pioneers for who we were able to become at that time. And so I mean we celebrated [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, who was the legend of dance. And we invited Alvin Ailey was here to help celebrate her. Gosh, there was maybe ten or twelve people that we invited. And we did that each year to celebrate the contributions that these people had made. We had Ashton Springer who was the--one of the first black producers on Broadway. I think we had Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.]. We brought down [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs from the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History] in Chicago [Illinois]. We had--God, we had [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks that year for film. So we tried to find a person in every discipline to represent that discipline as the pioneer. And so in that parade we had them all in horse drawn carriages. It was a magnificent event. And I remember it was so funny because I think the parade was supposed to start at maybe ten o'clock or eleven o'clock. And at like quarter 'til I came out of my office, which was near the end of the parade, and I started walking up Peachtree Street [Atlanta, Georgia], and there was nobody on the street. And the parade was not in place and I thought oh my God, what is happening? And so sure enough, we went up into the hotel where all these artists were who were supposed to be in the hotel and be a part--I mean be in the--they were living in the hotel and they were supposed to be a part of the parade. And everybody was waiting on the moko jumbies because they were supposed to start the parade. And they were locked up in a room, you know because they have a whole ceremony and ritual. Smoke coming out the doors and stuff and we're like oh, my God. And so we--I ran and I knocked on the door and I said come on. We are having a parade. Let's go. So they came out on the street and by the time they got out there, all the other people had started to assemble. And everybody started getting in their, in their carriages and on their floats and I mean by the time I got to the beginning of the parade as I looked down Peachtree Street, the people had come from everywhere. I mean they were like ten, twelve people deep all the way down Peachtree Street. Speaker 2: Almost like Mardi Gras. Speaker 1: My goodness, it was magnificent. It was--I mean tears just welled up in my eyes when I saw all those beautiful black people. I had Africa, we had the African drummers leading the moko jumbies; they were out in front. And then we had African dance companies and then we had Caribbean, we celebrated Rex Nettleford for that year from Jamaica, who was magnificent. Rex was one of the pioneers of a dance. And he was here and so we had brought his company and they were--so there were people here from the Caribbean. We brought people from South America. We even had Native Americans. I mean we were just dealing with the whole African diaspora. All the way up to the last, the last young man was on roller skates. Had his big boom box and they were doing break dancing and stuff in the streets. And it was funny because it was kind of a pied piper because everybody got in on the end of the parade. And we brought all those people down and dumped 'em on Auburn Avenue. And when you stood at either end of Auburn Avenue, as far as you could see, the people were jam packed on Auburn Avenue. I was like this is what I'm talking about; this is it. Story_ID: 327167 Speaker 1: Now you had people coming from all over the United States. Speaker 2: All over the world. Speaker 1: Because of the advertising. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, we did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was highly publicized. Speaker 2: It was. We did the--we celebrated the Harlem Renaissance. I don't know why we kind picked that theme. We thought it was a good place to start and so we brought people from New York, from California, from all over the country to help us celebrate in eight different disciplines. Music, theater, dance, film, visual art, performing art, literary art and folk art. And it was the best of the best. It was magnificent. We premiered some new films. We had a whole theater festival within the festival. We had artists who came and taught. [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward came, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards came. They taught classes. We had LaTanya Richardson and Laurie Carlos taught performance workshops. We had a whole--I don't know the group, what the group was called, but Joan Lewis who was here at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], helped to coordinate with Margaret Wilkerson, who's know at Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. Margaret Wilkerson was a--at a university. But all of the black theater professionals in colleges and universities, they had an organization. And they held a conference during the first Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival]. So in addition to all these incredible people teaching classes, there were all kinds of workshops and panel discussions. I mean it was very, very serious, very serious. Crystal Britton who was the visual arts coordinator, she got almost every gallery in Atlanta [Georgia] to either feature works by artists of African descent, or related to artists of African descent. So all the galleries in Atlanta participated. The High Museum [High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], actually we got them to partner with the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. And we did this major exhibition called 'Ancestral Legacies' that was at the Studio Museum, and then it was here and then the High added a lot of their collection to it. The Symphony Orchestra [Atlanta Symphony Orchestra] performed and invited all these incredible musicians to perform in that classical music genre. We had a major jazz festival in the park, free jazz festival in the park in association with the Bureau of Cultural Affairs [Atlanta Bureau of Cultural Affairs; Atlanta Office of Cultural Affairs], the City of Atlanta. Everybody wanted to be a part of the National Black Arts Festival. And so after that first festival was over, I mean we realized that my grandmother used to always say success is finding a need and filling it. So by that definition, the National Black Arts Festival was a tremendous success the first year, 1988. Story_ID: 327168 Speaker 1: And what about the vendors? Speaker 2: We had the marketplaces of life, right. We have--still to this day, we have the most sought after artist market in the country. We had made a decision that we were gonna have this juried marketplace that the artists had to participate in. So they came from all over the world; some of the most incredible artists. That very first year [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett did our print. Crystal Britton went and took me to meet Ms. Catlett and we talked to her and she was honored to have been chosen to do our first festival print. And it was just such a great experience. She did a print for us. We had jury competition and we created the artist market. It started out at Greenbriar Mall [Atlanta, Georgia]. We wanted to do it in the community and we did it out at Greenbriar Mall. And people saved their check--they, they saved their little savings and brought their checkbooks down and they bought so much art, it was unbelievable. We also had a folk arts festival that first year as well and brought in some people that taught me all about shape note singing and lining in hymn singing. Cephas Wiggins [John Cephas and Phil Wiggins] was here. A brilliant man named Worth Long who I mentioned, who really introduced me to African American culture, much more so than anything else in my life. He created the first folk arts festival for us. We had performance artists. We did a piece called 'Nonsectarian Conversations with the Dead.' You know we did all these incredible things. We brought the Urban Bush Women before anybody knew who the Urban Bush Women were. Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about them. Speaker 2: This woman [HistoryMaker] Jawole Willa Jo Zollar, Zollar, she, she was a dance student in Florida and came to New York [New York] and created this company called the Urban Bush Women, which was really about not looking like your--not having to look like a typical dancer. So often in the dance community, we were always trying to look like somebody else. And Jawole decided that we look good who we are. You know we should be proud of who we are and dance the way we dance and have big butts and you know, broad shoulders and that was okay 'cause how could we move and how did that make sense. And so the work that she created is just, you know up to this very day, has been tremendous. And now they're one of the most celebrated companies in our country. But we had them first at the National Black Arts Festival. We brought [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's children. We brought her and her children's company from East St. Louis [Illinois] and learned all about all of her legacy that she left, including the Dunham technique, which is a major part of modern dance now. We learned a lot about her. We had a big celebration of her life. And just--I mean on and on and on. It just went on and on and on. Ten days of the most power packed artistic expression that exists. In those days, we did this major tribute to the copasetic, the old hoofers, the tap dancers. And Honi Coles [Charles Coles] was still alive. I had done 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] with Honi Coles and Honi Coles pulled together a whole team of people and they came down and did a wonderful tap dance celebration and talked about the history of tap dancing. That was the beauty of the festival too. We never just presented. We never just brought artists and put them on a stage. We always wanted to create a context to understand who they are, where they came from, what was the influence, how was it part of the continuum. And so we had wonderful panels and workshops and classes to help people really understand about the contributions that people of African descent have made to, not just American culture, but to world culture. Story_ID: 327169 Speaker 1: Now ballet, ballet is one of the dance forms that started in Africa. Now did you do anything about the history? Speaker 2: Well, ballet, classical--the perception classical European ballet really came out of Europe. Pointe dancing and all of that stuff came out of Europe. But African people, of course dance is at the heart of the culture. So everybody dances in Africa. Unlike classical ballet, where you are pulled up and it's all about lifting all the weight up out of your feet, African dance is down and it's all about the earth and connecting to the earth. African dance is a lot more natural moves, everything, all the movements of African dance are very natural to the human body. And the movements of classical European ballet are not natural. I mean that turning your legs out like that. I mean it's very, very different. But in classical ballet, there is a place, a center that you learn. And then with the African dance the center is different. It's more--it's a wider stance. But I think that the best dancers are the ones that study it all. I think the reason that Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] is such an incredible dance company to this day is because not only do they study classical European ballet, but they study African and all the modern dance forms as well. Story_ID: 327170 Speaker 1: Now from a financial standpoint, how did the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] do? Speaker 2: We did okay. We did--the first year we did very well. We, we basically broke even. We had gotten quite a few major grants, kind of one time startup grants that really helped us launch the festival. And so it was, it was relatively--it was successful on every level. I mean we didn't, we didn't lose money, let's say that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think it did very well financially the first year, 1988. Nineteen ninety-two [1992], we did run into a bit of a problem, but we had built on such a success that it wasn't too difficult to get us out of that hole. But we, you know, and we did get out of the hole pretty quickly. But in those days, we did a biannual festival. So it was every other year. So we did '88 [1988], and then we '90 [1990], and then we did '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So '90 [1990] was a, a tough year in terms of art economics. Financially we did not do as well as we had done the first year. And we were, you know we've always had this debate about was it too much? You know, did we give people too many opportunities so that a lot of people felt totally overwhelmed. Other people felt like it was really a festival, you know, and they had so many choices. I think we did compete with ourselves a lot. I mean we would have four or five events going on every night that was ticketed. You know, and even though there were all the people, they would all be hanging out in the hotel drinking and having a party, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it was kind of hard to outdo what you had already done the first year. Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: Was such a success, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think that people--it became more of a family reunion. People would come, you know all these artists would show up, you know, that weren't necessarily performing. They just would show up and just hang out. I mean the hotel, we would have these late night parties at the hotel and you couldn't even get in, you know. I mean they would be jam packed. And you know we'd be like well how come we didn't sell all the tickets for the theater performance, you know. And it was because everybody was hanging out at the hotel (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody was hanging out. Speaker 2: And sometimes people would be on their way to an event and meet their buddies and go eat dinner, you know. So we did decide maybe it was too big, or at last we needed to be more concerned about competing with ourselves. That maybe we needed to stagger times and maybe not do so many things every night, you know. Wait 'til Friday or Saturday. Pile them up on Friday or Saturday, but not compete with ourselves during the week. And I, I think we still grapple with that almost, you know, eighteen years later. We still--those are still big issues for us. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: In '92 [1992] we, we kind of repeated it. The festival itself, I don't think the festival has ever suffered from artistic quality. It's been the highest quality always. But in terms of the finances, that '92 [1992] year, '92 [1992] festival, we did end up with a deficit, which we quickly were able to, you know, make up the difference and, and move forward. The second festival was almost as big in--as the first. It was just as wonderful and just as many wonderful artists were here. By the third year, the managing director had left, Michelle Smith [A. Michelle Smith] left and a woman, Harriet Sanford who was running the Fulton County Arts Council actually stepped in, and so I did the '92 [1992] festival with her. She was pretty tough on the finances and made sure that we actually ended up in the black. We had money in the bank after the '92 [1992] festival. It was certainly a smaller festival than it had been in '88 [1988] and '90 [1990]. But it was still tremendously successful. I mean we were growing in our attendance. I think we were up to maybe six, seven, eight, eight hundred thousand people coming into the festival. And it continued to even grow after that. I, I left--the '92 [1992] was the last festival I did in my first incarnation. Speaker 1: And what was the theme of the '90 [1990], the '90 [1990] festival, if you remember, and the '92 [1992] festival? You started out with the Harlem Renaissance and then-- Speaker 2: Yes, and I can't really remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roots and Branches [Roots and Branches Folklife Festival]--no that was our folk arts, that was the folk arts festival. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't really remember. Story_ID: 327171 Speaker 1: All right, but you did leave after the second one [1990 National Black Arts Festival]. Speaker 2: After--no, the third one [1992 National Black Arts Festival] Speaker 1: After the third one. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Then what did you do? Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], I had an opportunity to go do the Olympics, the Cultural Olympiad, which is the arts festival that is a companion to the Olympics, to the major Olympics. Sports, you know, event. And the director of the Cultural Olympiad, I had met him when he came to town [Atlanta, Georgia] and talked about working with the National Black Arts Festival. And he had a desire to do a festival every year leading up to the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. So beginning in 1993 I think, yeah, '93 [1993], '94 [1994], '95 [1995], '96 [1996], Yeah. Speaker 1: It was the '96 [1996], yeah. Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996]. We did festivals every year. And so when I met him, I wasn't really thinking about going to work for the Olympics, but I was thinking about how the National Black Arts Festival could partner with them since he wanted to do festivals every year. And you know we just kept talking and you know I had done the National Black Arts Festival, it was in good shape. And so I thought the Olympics was a once in a lifetime opportunity, and here in Atlanta [Georgia], you know. And I was right, it was. It was a tremendous experience. I mean that is the most--that's the biggest international festival in the world. So-- Speaker 1: And Atlanta fought hard to get that. Speaker 2: It fought very hard and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was, was instrumental in that. Many people believed that it was the African delegation that really helped sell Atlanta, or helped Atlanta win the bid because no city had ever won the bid on its first attempt. Usually two, three, four times before you win an Olympics. But Atlanta won on the first time. And many people believed that it was because of the African delegation and Andy's relationship. You know, he had been the ambassador and so many people felt that it was. And Andy certainly attributed it to them as well. So the first year that I moved over to the Cultural Olympiad, we celebrated Norway. They were getting ready to host the winter games [1994 Winter Olympics, Lillehammer, Norway] in Norway, so we did an incredible festival. I'll never forget we brought this--you know we used to call these people Laplanders, which is a really derogatory term. It's like using the N-word for us. Story_ID: 327172 Speaker 1: That's my grandmother's--the last five of her siblings. That's my Aunt Bell [ph.], Uncle T [ph.], my grandmother Lola Mae [Lola Mathis Bradley], my Uncle George [George Mathis] and my Aunt Eva [Eva Mathis] who lived to be 101. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 1: This is my parents on their wedding day. That's my Aunt Dot [ph.], my mother's sister. That's my father Robert [Robert Smith, Sr.], my mother Lillie [Lillie Bradley Smith]. That's my father's sister Ernestine [ph.] and that's my grandmother Lola Mae on their wedding day, April 6th, 1948. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next. Speaker 2: And this is my first national company of 'Ain't Misbehavin.' That's Teresa Bowers, Clint [ph.], I can't think of his last name, Yvette Freeman, Ben Harney and Adriane Lenox. Why can't I think of his name? I'm sure he's on there. Okay I can't call it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I think his name is Clint Bowers [ph.], actually. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And next. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my entire family. My grandmother and my grandfather are seated. And all of their, their two remaining siblings, my mother Lillie Mae and my Aunt Dorothy [ph.] and their husbands and all their children and their grandchildren and their great-grandchildren. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's me and my grandmother Lola Mae Bradley. I was just putting us side-by-side to show all these features that we have alike. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's right, Lola Mae Bradley, 1908, Pigeonville, Alabama [sic. Pigeon Creek, Alabama]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: With me, that's Robyn [Robyn Austin], Lucas [ph.], Noel [ph.] and Leah [Leah Austin]. My son Jay [James Austin, Jr.]-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, say that one more time for me for the camera. Speaker 2: It's me and my mommy and daddy, Lillie and Robert Smith. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What year and any particular occasion? Speaker 2: No, just in New York City [New York, New York] with my friend Bert Andrews, the Broadway photographer. Probably in the '70s [1970s]. My dad's got--afro tells me it's probably the late '70s [1970s], mid-'70s [1970s] actually. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That date-- Speaker 2: Probably '75 [1975], '76 [1976], in there. Story_ID: 327173 Speaker 1: --Olympics (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the theme of the 1990 National Black Arts Festival was Roots and Branches [Roots and Branches Folklife Festival]. And we really were looking, tracing all the way back to Africa where all those--where those people went as enslaved people. And then in 1992 the theme was Origins and Evolutions, which still was kind of piggybacking on that idea of beginning in Africa and then where African people were disseminated and then how we ended up here in this country today. So we spent two festivals really kind of tracing roots and looking at the branches that had come off of this incredible tree of people of African descent. Speaker 1: All right. And then you went to the Olympiad. Speaker 2: Went to the Olympiad, Cultural Olympiad. And the very first festival we celebrated in Norway because they were about to host the winter games [1994 Winter Olympics, Lillehammer, Norway] in Oslo [sic.]. And so it was a tremendous experience. I mean I, I had an opportunity to bring--and I don't know if you remember the winter Olympics that year, but they celebrated this people that we used to call Laplanders because--and that was a very derogatory term. It was like using the N-word. These people were a nomadic people who herded reindeer and would move--they lived north of the Arctic Circle. And so we were able to bring a poet by the name of Neils Oslakvaluver [ph.]. I'll never forget him. I'll never forget him because when we started reading some of his poetry, they had to translate some of his poetry. He had written all these poems about where my heart is. My home is where my heart is. And when one of our education coordinators read the poem, she asked me did I think he would be willing to come and visit one of the elementary schools where the student population was predominantly homeless. And so she took his poem and read it to the students there. And the students wrote poetry to this man. So when he came, we took him there and he had on his traditional clothes, which were made out of reindeer skin. And we had a translator and we took him to that school and he read his poetry. And then the children read their poetry to him. And years after that happened, that event, they were still writing poems back and forth. Speaker 1: That was such an honor. Speaker 2: It was a tremendous experience because his whole--the whole--his whole point was how your home is in your heart. You might not have a house, but your home is in your heart. And he was talking about how their home, in their home they follow the reindeer wherever the reindeer you know were, were grazing, that's where they set up their home. And when the reindeer moved, it was time to move, they pack up their homes and put them on their backs and follow the reindeer. So it just gave these children a whole 'nother sensibility about not having a house, but having a home. That was, my goodness, that was one of the highlights of my entire career at the Cultural Olympiad was working with that gentleman. Speaker 1: Did they do any study afterwards to see how the children ended up turning out after this experience? Like how many might have changed their lives were changed or-- Speaker 2: I don't know, you know. I don't know technically if somebody followed up. But I certainly heard from so many of those teachers how the students were really doing so much better in their class work. There was just a sense of pride I think that had been instilled from Neils Oslakvaluver. Story_ID: 327174 Speaker 1: I loved the Cultural Olympiad because I had a chance to go all over the world. I mean I was in places like Poznan, Poland. I was looking for the art because every country wanted to send artists to represent their country, very much like the athletes. And so I found myself in places I had never heard of before. Speaker 2: How do you spell Poznan, Poland? Speaker 1: Poznan, P-O-Z-N-A-N, Poznan. Speaker 2: Poland. Speaker 1: Poznan, Poland. I saw an incredible theater company that I actually brought for the Olympics [1996 Olympic Arts Festival] that had done this piece on--during the, you know, Nazi invasion of Poland. There was a group of artists who had performed and there was actually a Nazi general that carried a saxophone in a case, but he also carried a gun in a case, a machinegun in a case very similar. So he would come in with these two cases and they never knew which case he would open. And the whole play was done in, you know, the Polish language. And you didn't need to understand Polish to know what was going on in this play. It was so powerful. But I had--I got an opportunity to, to bring the National Theater of Thailand. There was a whole study done, a brilliant professor here, Dr. Richard Long [HistoryMaker Richard Long]. Richard Long has traveled all over the world, and if you ever had a chance to go on a trip with Richard Long, you would wanna go because he knows about everything. I decided he knows about everything. He was studying--Richard Long had done a long year--many years' study of black dance in America. And so I knew him as this historian of black dance in America. Speaker 2: Now where is he from? Is he from Atlanta [Georgia] or was he out of New York [New York], or-- Speaker 1: You know I don't know where Dr. Long is from. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's just been here, he was a professor here for many, many years at, at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and then at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], which was the graduate school. He's most recently been a professor at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], you know. But he is the historian of our life. Anyway, he started studying east, Asian, Eastern Asian dance. And I started to be fascinated. I have to say that he's been a mentor for me forever. I used to sit at his feet. When I started--when I first got to Atlanta and was thinking about the National Black Arts Festival, I went and sat at his feet to just talk about it. And to this day, I still go sit at his feet and bounce ideas off because he, he just knows everybody and he knows culture in its, in its purest essence. He understands the value of culture and art. And just its place in our society and in our world. And he knows all the artists. So naturally when we did the Cultural Olympiad, I was still there at his feet and he started telling me about this art form called the Ramayana, which is this dance. It's very--it's a, it's a religious dance, it's a spiritual dance. It's done in many, many countries all over Asia. India does it, they do it in Thailand, in Burma [Myanmar], in Malaysia, and they all have their own versions and varieties of it. And there was--had been a Ramayana festival and he had convinced me I should maybe try to do something like that. And he ended up bringing the National Theater of Thailand. And boy I tell you, just the costumes alone are unbelievable. I mean every mask, every piece had their own boxes. So it was quite a, a spectacle, quite a pageantry if you will. And just how much, you know in some cultures, it's much--it's a, it's a religious affiliation. It's a, it's a moral, it's how they learn their morals and stuff with the Prince, Raman [sic. Rama], there's always the, the bad characters and the monkey kings and all of that. But it was a tremendous learning experience. Story_ID: 327175 Speaker 1: But we brought Alvin Ailey, you know. We commissioned a new work for the Atlanta Ballet with Donald Byrd. We had a very interesting experience. I, I met an incredible choreographer from Burkina Faso and I brought her here to set a work on a newly formed black dance company called Ballethnic [Ballethnic Dance Company], that Nena Waverly and--Nena [Nena Gilreath] and Waverly Lucas [Waverly Lucas II] had formed. They had come here from the Dance Theatre of Harlem. They had worked at the Atlanta Ballet and that didn't work out for the, so they started their own company called Ballethnic, bringing this whole ballet, classical European ballet tradition together with ethnic dance. And so I thought okay, I'll get them an African choreographer and bring her here and I had seen her company perform. I had had them here during our '94 [1994] festival. And I had decided she should set a work on Ballethnic. And so I brought Donald Byrd to work with the Atlanta Ballet and Irene Tassembedo to work with Ballethnic. And they both kind of started the same time. Well as the tradition in this country, the choreographer comes in, works with the company. Two or three weeks later, the piece is finished and it's done. Well Irene came in and two or three weeks later, they hadn't even started because number one she spoke French, and there was a breakdown in the communication. But also when we brought Irene in, we were supposed to bring her drummer with her. Well something happened with customs and it didn't work out. And so some bright people, I don't remember who, decided get the drummers who are here from South Africa. They can play with Irene. She's from West Africa. Africa is Africa. You know how we make Africa a country. So it's all African. Get the South African drummers. And I'm telling you like two or three weeks later, there's--they were still having an issue because they couldn't play the beat from West Africa. They--South Africa has a different beat. And not even just South Africa, but this particular nation of people had a different kind of beat than Irene was used to. And so I would say that that work probably took us six months. And we ended up having to send Nena and Waverly to Africa so that they could see what she was talking about. But that was one of the main lessons that I think I've learned--between the National Black Arts Festival and the Cultural Olympiad, is how we as a people in this country are so ignorant about Africa. We're so ignorant about the whole African diaspora that we would make Africa a country. That we would say African dance, like all of Africa fits in one little category of African dance. I mean I've had presenters say to me we've already done our African dance company. And the company would be from another place in the world. I mean who knows that in Ghana there are three hundred nations of people who speak three hundred different languages that we would lump them all into, you know, Africa. So anyway I mean those were tremendous lessons that I learned at the Cultural Olympiad. Story_ID: 327176 Speaker 1: The '94 [1994], in 1994 Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] wanted to do something to thank the African delegation that had helped us at the--win the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so I conceptualized a big festival called Celebrate Africa!. And we were going to do that in association with the National Black Arts Festival in the--for the 1994 National Black Arts Festival. And so we were able to have the Cultural Olympiads sponsor over--close to four hundred artists from twenty-three different countries in Africa. And we didn't just bring out artists, we brought historians and anthropologists and cultural practitioners. And we, we merged it into the festival on a variety of levels. We did a major festival in Piedmont Park [Atlanta, Georgia]. Now the Black Arts Festival always did this big folk arts festival in Piedmont Park. And so I was working with a brilliant woman by the name of Dr. Adrienne Lanier Stewart [ph.]. She and people from the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] who do the big folk life festival [Smithsonian Folklife Festival] on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.], they all came down. Diana Ji [ph.] was a part of that. The people that worked at the Smithsonian were all a part of that. And we juxtaposed African environments next to either Caribbean or African American environments to show people the continuity. So for instance, we divided the continent up into quadrants and we found people from Atlanta [Georgia] who were from those different places in Africa to work with us so that we would be culturally correct. And we decided to use northern Africa to talk about migrations and how people move. And in northern Africa, the nomadic people, we looked at the Tuareg people. We created a whole desert scene and we brought people from Algeria and Tunisia and Morocco. Speaker 2: Approximately how many people on American shores that--did you get for that quadrant to help you to work with that group of people? Speaker 1: Well what we did was we juxtaposed--we put, we put the northern Africa--well let's see. We did the western Africa with the Sea Islands here. We did the eastern African--we looked at religious traditions and so we brought, we brought religious leaders from every known religion we could find to actually not just talk about their religion, but to hold a service. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we had created this sacred grove that our wonderful curator by the name of Baraka Sele curated for us. And we had, we had imams, we had Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Christians from Ethiopia. We had, we had Yoruba traditions. We had different African traditional religions and all forms of Christianity and Islam and Judaism. And the one thing we asked everybody to do was talk about the things we have in common. Don't talk about our differences, talk about what we have in common. And we ended the whole festival with a tremendous religious ceremony that all of the leaders came, brought their congregations and it was--everybody wore white and it was magnificent. We brought, we brought people from southern Africa. South--the southern quadrant was the--they gave us the challenge. Everybody else was okay to be from western part of Africa or, or the eastern part or the northern part. But the southern group was like no, we wanna deal with our nations of people. As a matter of fact, they said we are not tribes, we are nations of people. So we couldn't just say South Africa, we had to deal with Ndebele and Xhosa and Zulu. And it was interesting because we brought some Ndebele women and you know how they paint the beautiful geometric designs on their homes. Well we actually created--we worked with a black architect firm, Stanley Love-Stanley [Stanley, Love-Stanley P.C., Atlanta, Georgia]. Bill Stanley [William Stanley] and his wife Ivenue [Ivenue Love-Stanley] helped to design all of this festival. And in the park we created a whole facade of the front of a, of a home in South Africa that these women painted for ten days. They brought their little feather brushes and it was interesting because we took them to Home Depot to get paint. And they had never seen, you know, paint like that. And when they went home, they went home with spray cans, spray guns and cans of paint. It was fantastic. And every day our newspaper would come and take photographs to document their progress. We put them next to the Gandhi dancers, you know the men, the African American men that laid the railroad tracks. And there they were singing their songs while the Ndebele ladies were painting. And then right behind them we brought graffiti artists from New York [New York], from the Universal Zulu Nation. When I met the young brothers that were running the Universal Zulu Nation in the Bronx [New York], I asked them had they ever met Zulu people and they said no. So we brought a group of Zulu people and put them together with the Universal Zulu Nation. They created a graffiti wall and the, the artists from the Zulu Nation from Africa, they performed in front of the wall. I mean it was just, it was just wonderful to see all of the--we, we created a tent. And in the tent we had basket weavers from Panama, Kenya and the Sea Islands. You didn't have to--I mean they were in there sharing. They had kind of smuggled these berries in, you know, and to show how they made the colors. And so they were trading secrets. I mean just unbelievable stuff-- Story_ID: 327177 Speaker 1: We had a tent where we called it Hair in Adornment. And every day there were these wonderful weavers and braiders doing anybody's hair that wanted to get their hair done. There was a group of young girls. When they got to the park [Piedmont Park, Atlanta, Georgia] the first day, they were real tough girls, you know you could tell. It was like okay, let's keep an eye on these sisters here, you know. But there was a woman, her name was Mama Konta [ph.]. Mama Konta was the most beautiful African woman you have ever seen, and she was into style. And every day, she met those girls the first day. And she won those girls over. And by the time the festival was over, there were probably a group of fifty young women following Mama Konta that every day she would braid their hair, she would dress them in African clothes. She would make their faces up. She would tell them how beautiful, what beautiful queens they were. She gave them all African names. I mean those girls' lives were totally transformed. I mean by the end, they were all crying when the festival was over. It was a wonderful, wonderful experience. And we had a hundred vendors from all over the, the world. That was our big outdoor international marketplace. And the same architects [Stanley, Love-Stanley P.C., Atlanta, Georgia] that created a whole beautiful facade for all of the vendors that year and it was just amazing. Down in the--down on another area of the park we had a whole children's village where they made big, huge sculptors and statutes. They had Native Americans performing, Africans performing, people from the Caribbean. So we had a real African diasporic festival with the National Black Arts Festival in 1994. One of my other really great highlights was that I brought an African opera. I had gone-- Speaker 2: Now what part of the country did this come from? Speaker 1: They were from Abidjan, Cote D'Ivoire, Ivory Coast. I had gone to a big African festival, and I had seen this company and I decided I was bringing this African opera. Well of course nobody knew what an African opera was. And people were so nervous. I mean even the great, wonderful people at the Olympics, they were having a moment. They were like well maybe--they even suggested that I have the reception before just in case everybody left. And I said absolutely not. I will not do it. Well I will admit that when that opera, when the curtain went up on the opera, my heart was pounding, I was sweating in the back of that house. First of all, I was so nervous that we weren't gonna sell tickets, but we ended up selling out. I had brought some of the artists in a little bit early and so they were able to do some publicity and you know we really were able to pump it up and you know the whole thing was have you ever seen an African opera? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Hello, so I had peeked the curiosity of much of the community in Atlanta [Georgia], and we were sold out. And by the end of that performance, the people leapt to their seats, I mean leapt to their feet. They applauded and they hollered and they screamed. And the artists came out and played some more and danced some more. It was amazing because it was, you know for me, I love opera. Opera is one of my first loves. And it's all--all we're doing is singing the songs, singing the words, right. We're telling the story with music. And that's what these incredible artists from Africa had done in their own language, their own instruments, their own traditional instruments. It was magnificent. And at the end, I was the Shero. And we had a taste of Africa was the reception afterwards. And we had gotten chefs from all over to create, to create these African dishes from all over the continent. And it was a tremendous success, it really was. Celebrate Africa! and the National Black Arts Festival in 1994 were-- Speaker 2: So the taste, the food taster, was that for people who attended the opera-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Or was this for people, okay this was for people-- Speaker 1: It was for all the people that came to the opera had an opportunity to come out have a taste of Africa. So we had drinks and food from all over the continent; it was magnificent, magnificent. One of the high--I think that was the highlight of my career. We actually had a maze in the park in that festival where we had fund all these photographs, another one of Adrienne Lanier Stewart's brilliant ideas. And we blew these photographs up. I think they were maybe eight feet tall, maybe four feet wide. And we created a maze so you really had to work your way through them. Speaker 2: And who were the photographs of? Speaker 1: They were of African people all over the diaspora, but you would not know where they were. You would be looking at a--maybe a young boy and his mother walking down a road. And then you'd walk to the other side and it would say South Africa, 1948. 'Cause you would say Mississippi, 1965. And it would be South Africa, 1948. And we did all these beautiful photographs of civil rights photographs. I mean you would immediately think Mississippi, Alabama, and they would be Johannesburg [South Africa]. It was wonderful. It was a wonderful experience. And I, I do think it was definitely one of the highlights of my career. Celebrate Africa! and the National Black Arts Festival in 1994. If you missed it, you missed it. Story_ID: 327178 Speaker 1: So we did Celebrate Africa! and then we got to the Olympic Arts Festival in '96 [1996]. Now interestingly enough for me, I had actually been doing some consulting work in New Jersey. Some people had called me to ask me if I would come and speak to some people about building an arts center in Newark, New Jersey. They had decided to do it. And I'll never forget on that first call I said, "Why? Why do you wanna build an art center in Newark?" Interestingly enough, there were some people that really believed that art and culture could help transform a city. Now I don't know if you know about Newark, New Jersey, but Newark had been, had had this horrible riot, I guess it was back in maybe the '60s [1960s]. And people took pride in saying they had not been back to Newark in thirty years and they were never going back to Newark. So I had been going up to Newark to consult because I really challenged the group. I remember the first meeting I went to with them, I walked in, it was a group of all white men. And I, I said, "You wanna build an art center in Newark and look at the composition of this room. This is a joke." And I left. And you know they--I thought that was the end. I was sure that I had, you know, ticked them all off. But they called me again, asked me to come back. This time the room was much more integrated. And I just, you know, they wanted to build an art center in Newark. So I spent probably maybe a year, two years over the course of those years, talking with them about building an art center and if they were gonna build it-- Speaker 2: Well what did they currently have? What was in place (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was nothing. There was nothing. Speaker 2: Just nothing. Speaker 1: No, they just had this dream. Some of the politicians and some people who loved Newark had this dream that they could build a major art center in Newark. You know and I also was thinking you're across the street from New York [New York]. Everything is in New York. Don't most of the people in Jersey go to New York? And that was the, the reason they wanted to build it was because they didn't wanna have to go to New York. They wanted something for themselves there. So I, you know I tried to tell them that you're, you're not gonna build an art center in Newark and not involve the black community; that's who lives in Newark. So all they talked about was Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]. I said, "You are not gonna build Kennedy Center or Lincoln--who's gonna come?" Because certainly the white community, and even the affluent black community, they didn't come to Newark. So I was so, you know I just was in awe that somebody thought they could build an art center in Newark, New Jersey. And I just constantly kept challenging them, you know, with the questions. How are you gonna service these people? Who's gonna come? You know. What's it gonna look like, you know. If you keep saying Kennedy Center, what orchestra--and, and besides that, if an orchestra plays in New York, they can't play here. They got clauses, you know. How you're gonna get through all of that? And interestingly enough as they kept moving forward, a brilliant man by the name of Lawrence P. Goldman, Larry Goldman was the president and CEO. He had hired another brilliant man, John Richards [sic. M. John Richard], who I, I mean I think that it was a dynamic duo that just--they had the persistence and the, the intelligence to not be intimidated by people who knew more than them. And so when it came time to start pulling staff together, they asked me if I was interested. And of course I said no, you know. Asked me if I was interested in programming. And you know I said no. I'm doing the Olympics [1996 Olympic Arts Festival], you know, and I still got another year, this is 1995. And you know we went back and forth and back and forth and in the meantime, I've pretty much completed the Olympic Arts Festival. I've picked all the artists, you know, I've got folks coming from Japan, (unclear), you know I got folks coming from Poland, I got folks coming from Germany. I had seen this incredible father and son team, theater team that we brought. And you know I had it all together, so I guess my mind started thinking well gee, could I do the New Jersey Performing Arts Center [Newark, New Jersey] when I haven't quite finished the Olympics and do I really wanna miss the last year because the first three years had just been life changing, I was traveling all over the world. But I had to make a decision and I had to make it pretty quickly because they were offering me--I mean I had said no like two or three times. And the headhunter that was talking to me, you know he was like, "Well what would it take to get you to change your mind?" And I was like, "Well, you know, they have to pay me a awful lot of money." "How much?" Well what else? Well they'd have to move me and you know, they'd have to give me an apart- they'd have to do this, they'd have to do that. And he kept saying well what else? What else, what else? Finally they made me an offer and I was like--I went to my husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.]. I was like I don't--how can I do this? I don't--how can I do this? You know and he said I think it's a tremendous opportunity 'cause you know the Olympics will be over and where will you go? And this is a great opportunity. And I was like yeah, but it's in Newark, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This-- Story_ID: 327088 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995] New Jersey Performing Arts Center [Newark, New Jersey] had been--I'd been consulting with them and talking to them about building an arts center in Newark [New Jersey]. And they offered me the job as the vice president of programming. But I couldn't quite figure out, you know, how to finish up the Olympics [1996 Olympic Arts Festival] and I had to make a decision. And so you know I, I think my husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] was right, you know. He, he was right that I--it was a tremendous opportunity and the Olympics, there was only one more year and it was done. And then you had to go find a job. So I mean I, I, I hated leaving because it was just such a incredible group of people. I mean Jeffrey Babcock was the director of the Cultural Olympiad and we had pulled this wonderful team of people together to just celebrate culture and art from all over the world. And you know we were working with all the big shots, you know, Billy Payne [William Porter Payne] and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and you know, Shirley Franklin. I mean they were all a part of the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and it just was such a once in a lifetime opportunity. But I had to think about my future. And I had finished all of my programming, I did all of the theater and dance and certainly helped, you know, in the other disciplines and we did a big festival of the South, of the American South in Centennial Park [Centennial Olympic Park, Atlanta, Georgia]. But I felt like I could leave it and I had my assistant who was a great manager, Carol Lloyd, she actually implemented the program for me and I just came back for the Olympics in--for my part of the Olympics in 1996. I came to see a lot of the performances that I had selected. Story_ID: 327089 Speaker 1: Let's just stay here with at the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] when there was the big scare when the bomb and-- Speaker 2: When the bomb went off. Wasn't that awful? Speaker 1: That was awful. Did that have any bearing or any effect on any of the programming that you had done? Speaker 2: It didn't have any effect on anything in all honest. I mean it was a, it was a dark scar on Atlanta [Georgia]. 'Cause otherwise it would have been a perfect Olympics. I mean it was perfect. So--and I think that Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was able to just step up on that stage and calm the whole world down. It was just one of those freak accidents, freak incidents, not accidents, incidents, that you know just left a scar. But it didn't' stop one thing. They kept partying in the park [Centennial Olympic Park, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean it was--people went--left the park and went to the parties, you know. I mean they went games and you know we--certainly was heightened and people had to pay attention. But it didn't really stop anything. I mean the--I think the energy of the city just carried it on. The people here were just so excited and the people who would come for the Olympics were just as excited as we were. Speaker 1: And to have Muhammad Ali carry the torch (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Light the torch, my God that was just magnificent. That opening ceremony was awesome, awesome, awesome. I mean I--you know I feel like it was a scar but it didn't, it wasn't deep enough scar that--I don't think people even hardly remember it. You know. When I think about the Olympics, I don't even--my mind doesn't even go there. Speaker 1: Where does it go directly when you think of the 1996 Olympics? Speaker 2: It goes back stage at the National Theater of Thailand. It goes to, you know, the Alvin Ailey's performance. It goes to the synchronized swimming that I got to see. It goes to the basketball game that I got to see. It goes to the soccer tournament that was over in University of Georgia in Athens [Georgia] where Nigeria won. My God. I mean you know I think about the people, I think about the, the excitement that was in the air in Atlanta. Atlanta was on fire. I mean, I mean it was way up there, way up there. And I think it, you know in the minds of the world. Look at all the people that have moved here since the Olympics. We showed, we showed off for those 1996 Olympics. Story_ID: 327090 Speaker 1: Okay, so you decided to take the offer with New Jersey. Speaker 2: I decided to go to Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Would you disclose what your package-- Speaker 2: No it was, no it was very lucrative. For me to move to Newark, I mean I actually moved to Montclair, New Jersey where it was a wonderful artist community in Montclair. I mean I knew Oliver Lake was there and his wife [Marion Lake] had a beautiful store. Lots of musicians and artists lived in Montclair. And certainly I had heard about it, you know, living in New York [New York] all those years. A lot of my friends lived in Montclair. So I just, you know, got in a car with a friend and she drove me to Montclair and I was like okay, let's find an apartment here, you know. It's a quaint, beautiful little town right down the street from Newark, maybe twenty minutes up the road. You know, New Jersey is all these little communities like you know every fifty blocks it's another community, another ethnic group. Pretty amazing. AS a matter of fact, I found New Jersey to be one of the most ethnically diverse, segregated communities I ever saw. 'Cause you know like right in Newark there's a community called the Ironbound, which is Portuguese speaking. I thought it was Portuguese, but it's Portuguese speaking. All these people have come from everywhere, Cape Verde Islands, Brazil. But you know there's, there's a Puerto Rican community and you know I mean down to the ethnic group, you know like people from Ghana, people from South Africa, people from, you know, who obviously you know, were clinging together because of their ethnic origin. Speaker 1: And you think that's because of New York and New York City and just New York being next door to it that this was a spillover from the ethnicity-- Speaker 2: But you don't find that in New York. There's not an ethnic separation in New York. Everybody lives together in New York. I mean you know at one time Harlem [New York, New York] was predominantly black people. But from where? I mean I suspect a large community as African American, but still African people from all over were living in Harlem. But I mean certainly in the years I lived in New York, it's just everybody lived everywhere. But in Jersey, they lived in ethnic communities. So you know when we started working on the art center, we would go out to these ethnic communities and you know, I had these young girls working with me. [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon from Sweet Honey [Sweet Honey in the Rock] used to always tell me you gotta have three generations at the table when you make any decision. So I always try to keep three generations at the table to this day. So I got a group of young people and you know I had them go out to all these different late night clubs in these communities. They went to the Haitian community and the Dominican community and you know, in the Ironbound, within the Ironbound all these different Portuguese speaking bars, you know the Cape Verdean bars and the Brazilian bars. And find all of these hot artists, you know, who's, who's packing the clubs up. And one of the things we were able to do in New Jersey, in NJ-PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey], we call it in NJ-PAC, was the design of the exterior in the front facilitated a kind of amphitheater if you will. So we actually started a series of happy hours on Thursdays, and we called it Sounds of the City. And we started bringing those groups from those clubs in those different ethnic communities together. And you know, I got a picture, an aerial view last year, I think it was last year Larry Goldman [Lawrence P. Goldman] sent me an aerial view that had like five thousand people at happy hour. I mean it was like they expanded the length of time that it goes on in the summer time. Story_ID: 327091 Speaker 1: But you know I felt like there were, there were two goals that I had in mind and I, and I'm very proud to say that I hear them all saying these things now from the presidents to the board of directors. And that is that they needed to build a great performing arts center like Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] and the Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]. But equal and parallel. It must be a great community cultural center where all those different communities felt like it belonged to them. And so I spent two years before that center opened, going into all these different communities to just say, what would it take for you to come? You know everybody knows five artists, so it's like okay. If I program them, would you come see these five? You know, what would you make you feel like you could bring your family? What do we need to do to make sure that you have a place in this art center? And I really, I will say that Larry Goldman [Lawrence P. Goldman], John Richard [M. John Richard], Philip Thomas was head of education. We had a wonderful African American sister Gail Thompson who was the design, vice president of design and construction. I had some colleagues, Bill Lockwood [William Lockwood, Jr.], Baraka Sele who helped me create the programming that just--I tried to bring something from--for everyone. They did a wonderful program. We had done--sold bricks at the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so somebody came up with the idea to sell bricks at the performing arts center. And so I mean down to little African American community people, everybody wanted to own a brick in NJ-PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey]. And when that facility opened, I mean I think it's a model for the country in terms of not just the programming being the most diverse, but in terms of the audiences. We worked with the symphony orchestra. We only had one resident company, the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra, who already were performing out in communities. But we were able to work together with them and bring artists, put them in residents so that their subscription just multiplied. But it's just--it was a magnificent performance space that just housed all of the community. I mean 100 Black Men named one of the community rooms. You know the lawyers got together and raised a million dollars to help pay for the facility. Everybody wanted a piece of it. And now they all have ownership and I just think it's the most tremendous model for our country. If I could, I'd close every arts center in the country and say go, let's go study the NJ-PAC and now let's figure out how to make our arts center function like this. Speaker 2: So that group of men had a great idea. Speaker 1: They had a great idea. And once I kind of said I'm not gonna talk to a room full of all white men, they knew who I was. So I figured if they were bold enough to hire me, then I would be bold enough to give them what I said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you can see that if it did not, if it had not reached out to that segregated community, it would not have worked. If it had been all white-- Speaker 1: I used to tease them. I told them that Amiri Baraka lived in Newark [New Jersey] and if they tried to make this be a Kennedy Center or a Lincoln Center, he would get that black community and come and burn it down. And I will probably help him. Because you could not come into a city like Newark that basically was still being held together by predominantly African American people, and ignore them. You couldn't do it. I told them if you wanna build Kennedy Center or Lincoln Center, you should go out to your wealthy suburbs and build it out there. You cannot do it in Newark, New Jersey. It's not possible; don't even think about it. And they didn't, they listened to me, they really did. I think it's to their success today. I mean they, they've already--they raised over four hundred million dollars to build the building and pay for the first season's deficit, which I was like a deficit, you have a deficit? How you have a deficit? I was never anywhere where you could have a deficit. But I mean they've got an endowment already. They're gonna--they're getting ready to be ten years old. They opened in 1997 and October of 1997. And so in '07 [2007] they'll be ten years old and they've already built an endowment of over a half million, I mean over fifty million dollars. I think it's more than that now. I mean people were giving them grants that build endowment and it's been a tremendous experience. Story_ID: 327092 Speaker 1: We created something. My, my, my really good friend Baraka Sele who was doing the Houston International Festival when I was doing the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival], that's when we kind of met and formed our friendship, decided we needed a support team. And I was able to bring her on board doing another project I had done with her called Africa Exchange. The Ford Foundation [New York, New York] had created this initiative where they were looking at Latin America, Africa and Asia. And we put a group of us together, there were five of us who were the primary partners, created this program called Africa Exchange. And what we were doing was actually bringing artists from Africa, which is how we met some of the artists that I had--you know when I had met them in the Olympics [1996 Olympic Arts Festival]. We were able to bring some of those artists here, working communities. Let them just come and be in the community. Introduce them to a whole cadre of artists. And then if they, if they found an artist that they wanted to work with, then we had some money to help them create some work. And we formed this network of partners all over the country, I forgot how many there were, I'm sure over twenty from universities to performing arts centers, all of whom were interested in Africa and the, and the continent, artists from the continent. And bringing them into their communities so we could learn. Speaker 2: Now how did you go about selecting the artist in Africa? Speaker 1: Well we all, the primary partners, Mikki Shepard was running an organization in New York [New York] called 651, an Arts Center [651 Arts] in Brooklyn [New York]. Mikki is who came to me and said, "The Ford Foundation is creating these initiative, and they wanna--they're interested in people who are interested in focusing on Africa." And I said to Mikki, I said, "Look, I--we've got the baptism by fire when I did Celebrate Africa!, I realized how ignorant I was. We don't know anything about Africa. We can't do anything about Africa 'cause we don't even understand who Africa is." I said, "But what I would be interested in doing is bringing artists who can help us understand more. Going to Africa. Going to different places in Africa, learning more about it. So I'm not interested in bringing artists to perform." I had had my baptism with Irene Tassembedo with Ballethnic [Ballethnic Dance Company] when it took forever to just get the language. So she agreed. And she thought well let's go talk to the Ford Foundation, Christine Vincent was the director of programs then, and talk to her about. And so we did that and a woman, Baraka Sele was in--who I knew had been traveling back and forth to Africa, she loved Africa. I said you know Mikki we should Baraka into this mix. And so the three of us kind of started. We eventually added another partner, Laura Greer who was up in Harlem [New York, New York] at Aaron Davis Hall. And then a woman named Sandy Smith [ph.] who was in Columbus running an art center there. And the five of us kind of created this program called Africa Exchange. And we did it for almost six years with the help of the Ford Foundation. We were able to convene some conferences and talk about our best practices. What did we learn about bringing artists from the continent? How do you educate your community? How do you execute your staff? Because we found that even when I did Celebrate Africa!, sometimes when you bring African artists you know into the theater, people, the stage hands had no respect at all, you know, and treated them really poorly. So we got into the nitty gritty nuts and bolts of how do we treat one another, how do we respect one another. We got into issues about customs and visas and you know, nuts and bolts. For over a six year period, we worked on this project with the Ford Foundation called Africa Exchange, which was really kind of the continuum of what I had learned from Celebrate Africa!. I was then able to bring some of that into the New Jersey Performing Arts Center [Newark, New Jersey]. So I actually had a relationship with several artists. The most lasting one was with a young man named David Abelio [ph.] in Mozambique. We were able to bring his, him and his company to the states. And he actually met Jawole [HistoryMaker Jawole Willa Jo Zollar] at the Urban Bush Women, and they formed a fast partnership. And Jawole went and created work over there and he came here and they had major exchange. And even after I left NJ-PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center], Baraka Sele who I had brought in to help me create this world festival, she carried it further and started doing technical exchanges where managers and technicians were going back and forth. Story_ID: 327093 Speaker 1: But I said all that to say you know, Baraka Sele had come to work at New Jersey Performing Arts Center [Newark, New Jersey] because I created this world festival because we had all these ethnic communities and I wanted to figure out a way to celebrate who they were. I had gotten into that whole celebrate thing form the Olympics [1996 Olympic Arts Festival]. Speaker 2: From the Olympics, yes. Speaker 1: And the first year we did a world festival, we celebrated the Portuguese speaking world. So we brought artists from Brazil, from Cape Verde Islands, from Portugal. We got the Portuguese government to get really involved in it and they brought artists. We brought the Gulbenkian Orchestra from Portugal, nobody had ever heard of them and they were magnificent, it was wonderful. We brought some of their hot pop singers over. Maria Joao and it was a group from Cape Verde, Sementara [ph.] came, who played these big, huge pots. I actually have one out on my porch that they gave me. But--and so every year NJ-PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center] was doing these world festivals that looked at different parts of the world and then the communities that were right there in Newark [New Jersey] so that we could bring all these people together and figure out how we could start to enjoy all the performances at New Jersey Performing Arts Center. So I feel like a lot of those people that came in for some of those different ethnic performances ended up coming back to the center 'cause once you got in the place, it was so warm and inviting and friendly and I think Larry Goldman [Lawrence P. Goldman] did a great job helping everybody feel so good about the place. You took such pride in it. I mean I felt like it was mine, my center. Everybody called it my center, you know. I think that's a tremendous testimony to the work that we did to prepare everybody before it ever opened its door. Story_ID: 327094 Speaker 1: And I'm seeing a continuing theme here. Wherever you go, you take Africa with you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a cultural warrior. I am a cultural warrior, I really am. I believe that culture and creativity are the basis of life. And I feel that if we could just get people into understanding about creativity and how everybody wants to be creative and they need to be creative, and then how they express that through their cultures. The beauty of culture is how it's not stagnant and how we're always influencing one another and culture's always changing and morphing, depending on where you are and who you're working with. I'm gonna be a cultural warrior 'til the day I die. Speaker 1: Do you think that that has been one of the main attractions for different--for the different positions that you've had in the past that has, you know, made you stand out as a person that would actually fit for that position? Speaker 2: Probably I'm sure. I just feel like, you know I feel like my life really belongs to God. He opens the doors, I just keep walking through them. I think from the early '60s [1960s], my college days when I became aware of my African-ness, there's been this hunger and thirst to know more about myself. And I learn the more I learn about myself, the more I learn about other people, the more I learn that we're all the same as God intended it to be. The same in our human-ness, but different in our cultural origins, yet even the cultural origins are all mingled together. So nobody's better than anybody else. Nobody's culture is better than anybody else's. It's all the same and we can learn so much more about one another if we just open up our hearts and our minds and have these experiences with people who maybe talk different or come from a different place in the world. How much more can we become as human beings if we can just open our hearts up and have these experiences? Story_ID: 327095 Speaker 1: So after NJ-PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey], what did you do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was having, I was living the life of Riley. I mean I was the queen of the castle. I mean I was--the people were coming from everywhere. NJ-PAC was proclaimed a tremendous success and I had this family here in Atlanta [Georgia] that was all saying you said you were only gonna be gone for a few years. Speaker 1: Now wait a minute. Did your husband [Thomas Hughley, Jr.] go with you? Speaker 2: No, he did not. Speaker 1: Or did he keep the house in Atlanta? Speaker 2: He kept the house. He was here. I will say that I don't recommend it. You know, inevitably we ended up getting divorced and I, I felt really bad about that 'cause I feel that a lot of that was because of that separation. Even though I was here a lot and he came to New Jersey a lot, I just feel that we grew apart while I was there and he was here. So I don't recommend that to young couples. I think you should stay together and live together. But you know I think--I mean he encouraged me to take the job in Jersey and I think he really believed that it was a great opportunity to me and it was, no question about it. But in the meantime you just--it's hard to be a wife and a career woman away from home. So--but at that time he really wanted me to come back to Atlanta and I had grandchildren who I had promised I would be back by the time they were eight. And as soon as they turned eight, they started reminding me, Grandma, you said you'd be back home by the time we're eight and we just turned eight. I had twin girls who had just turned eight years old and their brother was seven and the little baby girl was like three. And they were like Grandma, you--you know and I, and I really started to think about what was important. And I didn't want them to grow up without me 'cause I had been so close to my [maternal] grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley]. I just always wanted to be a grandmother like her. I wanted to have that same kind of relationship with my grandchildren. So I decided to, to give up my castle and come back to Atlanta. Story_ID: 327096 Speaker 1: Well soon as the word got out that I was even thinking about it, I started getting these calls saying you need to come back and, and do the, do the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival]. While I was gone I think the festival had just gotten off the track. They had gotten a couple of different artistic directors and you know I think Atlanta [Georgia], Atlanta's a very strange kind of city, you know. The people here are very clique-ish. It's all kind of inner circle of the inner circles. And it's hard for people to come from outside to really kind of win the hearts and favor of all the people on the inside. I just, I think it was God's grace for me. Everybody was so excited about the Black Arts Festival. I almost kind of snuck in, if you will. You know I kind of got into all the people's hearts and kind of convinced them all that it belonged to them. And so how do we make this work? I think that might be my gift from God. You know I have this passion and I'm able to kind of infuse that passion into people's hearts before they kind of even know it, you know. Even when they try to rebel I kind of get in there before they say no. Or if they say no, I say well what will it take to say yes? You know. But I felt like the festival I guess had kind of gone in another direction. That it wasn't--the foundation wasn't there to support it. Speaker 2: 'Cause you had been gone for how many festivals? They had only had like two after, after you left? Speaker 1: Yeah, '96 [1996] and '98 [1998]. And they weren't sure they could do the 2000, so I was gone about five years. From '92 [1992]--'95 [1995] to 2000. And you know I mean the, the board of directors was some powerful people at the festival. I mean [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones was the chair. Michael Lomax was still on the board. Shirley Franklin was on the board, who's our mayor now. Chris Manos [Christopher B. Manos], a wonderful producer here at Theater of the Stars. I mean this--Nancy Boxill who had been on the board since the beginning with Michael Lomax. I mean they--the determination of this group of people. Man named Erwin Carter [M. Erwin Carter]. I mean they just held this thing together. Everybody had gone away. They'd had a bad deficit a couple of years in a row, really bad deficits that they weren't able to really--they had worked their way out of the first one, and then they had another one. So at that time Ingrid Saunders Jones from Coca Cola [The Coca-Cola Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] was the chairwoman and I got a call from Ingrid and you know when you get a call from Ingrid, you can't hardly say no. I can't. And I, and I respect her and Shirley so much. I just--they're just two of my Sheros. And you know Shirley--she had--it wasn't the mayor, but she had been working with all the mayors, you know. And so she really had a good grip on city and they just all kind of got me in a corner and said you should do this. And you know it was funny 'cause I said to them well, you know maybe the festival has lived its course. Things have life cycles. Maybe it should--we should let it alone, maybe it should just die. And Ingrid said to me, "Let it die because nobody wants it. Nobody will support it. Don't let it die because it's just mismanaged." And that kind of--it's kind of said to me I had never run an institution before. I'd always, you know, been the artistic director or the programming director. So it was a challenge. I mean but certainly I felt like I birthed it. So it was kind of my child in a way. And you know I kind of said okay, I'll come back for a year. Let me just see whether or not I think it can survive. And well here I am six years later. I just realized how much--how important the National Black Arts Festival is. Not just to us as a people or to Atlanta, to this country, to the world. Where else do we have this? I mean certainly out of the Black Arts Festival came the National Black Theatre Festival. I remember Larry Hamlin [Larry Leon Hamlin] was at the first National Black Arts Festival and had this idea to do this black theater festival and I think he came here and just said okay, I'm gonna do it in the odd years. We would do the arts festival in the even and he would do the Black Theatre Festival in the odd. And you know I mean the black fine arts show [National Black Fine Art Show] in New York [New York]. I mean we didn't have that when we started the National Black Arts Festival. All of those things came after the National Black Arts Festival. But now coming back into '99 [1999], 2000, it's like well now we have all of these other things. Do we still need a National Black Arts Festival? And I guess we did because I think the people wanted it, the corporations stepped up to the plate; they gave the money, you know. I mean that was the first and only festival I ever remember where we had all the money in the bank before we did the festival. I think that was them psyching me to stay. (Laughter) I've been waiting on that. Story_ID: 327097 Speaker 1: So you know it was a matter of did we still need a National Black Arts Festival? And I had said to both Ingrid [HistoryMaker Ingrid Saunders Jones] and Shirley [Shirley Franklin] and all those people that were trying to convince me to take it on that, you know, we needed to see whether we needed to keep it. And I, I mean when you think about the history of the festival, I mean how important it is. I mean Cicely Tyson and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte were the spokespersons for the first festival. [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou has been to every National Black Arts Festival, and mostly performed at most of them. You know she said the National Black Arts Festival put starch in your back, you know. I mean people like that. [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover and Charles Burnett and all these great filmmakers, [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash. I mean Spike Lee, they all were a part of the National Black Arts Festival family. You just, you just know where else do you get all of this at one time? So I kind of, you know that first year that everybody put all that money in the bank and made me think that I was always gone have the money in the bank before the festival, you know. They, they gave me the time that I needed to really kind of go all around and say do we need a black arts festival? Should we still be trying to do it? And as I, you know, gaze across the horizon, I still don't see anything quite like the National Black Arts Festival where all these different disciplines surrounded by education and humanities. A lot of people think it's just a ten day festival. But the festival has expanded to year round programming. I mean not only do we do performances, but we have an education program. Most people don't know about our education program. An incredible woman by the name of Dr. Collette Hopkins, she came to me in 1988 and she said to me, "You cannot bring all of these artists and historians and all this culture to Atlanta [Georgia] and not involve teachers." And I said, "Well we're already planning to do this outreach for children, for students." And she said, "Just think about this. For every teacher you impact, you exponentially impact a community." And I had to think about that, you know. Speaker 2: Is that the reason why you had the training sessions incorporated into the Black Arts Festival? Speaker 1: We have a summer teacher institute [Summer Institute] that has been going on since 1988 where these teachers kind of come together and we expose them to all kinds of artists and historians and anthropologists and, and resource materials so that they can actually take the information and translate it into their own curriculum. Speaker 2: Now this is during the ten days? Speaker 1: It's before the ten days. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we work with them all throughout the year. The teachers actually create a unit of curriculum, at least one unit of curriculum. And as a result, I mean we now have a resource teacher, her name is Betty Jackson [ph.], Dr. Betty Jackson. She was a kindergarten teacher. And in kindergarten for, for--they, they use physical--for their physical education is games. And she has now compiled a resource book that's about that thick that we now do workshops for teachers, kindergarten teachers, to show them how to use African--this convergence of African, European, Native American games that kind of all came together to make these American games. So our teachers are now creating curriculum. We've got lots and lots of curriculum that we're now trying to figure out how to distribute and how to, you know make more accessible to many more teachers. We're also trying to figure out how to build this model because we can usually only facilitate about thirty teachers at a time, although the workshops that we do can house many more teachers than that. But how do we create the model so that other teachers can be exposed to it? We have a youth leadership forum where we bring about a hundred youth together. They work with our teachers. Speaker 2: And how often do you bring them? Speaker 1: Well they come together right before the festival and then they work with the teachers throughout the year. Right now in February every year we host a quiz bowl. And our high school students, high school and college students, actually--they do all the research, put all the questions together, and then they conduct the quiz bowl. They ask the questions, they're the timekeepers. And our quiz bowls, I mean they are like major sports events. They bring cheerleaders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where are they held? Speaker 1: In different schools. We do them in schools every year. This year I forgot what school we're in this coming year, but we've been in all schools in all different parts of the county. But the kids, you know it's K [kindergarten] to five. These little children learn. We don't give them the answers. We only give them the questions, we do it on CD-ROM. They get them ahead of time. They study and then they come and they compete. And you have to lose like, I don't like four or five times before you actually are out. But I'm telling you the parents come. We have to put parents out of the room 'cause they cuss and scream and holler at the little children, the timekeepers. "You didn't start the clock on time." I mean it's unbelievable. But the most amazing part of the quiz bowl are the children as they sit on top of these buzzers. And you say, "In what year--." Bzzzz. You know. I mean they answer the questions before they ask--they answer them before they ask the full question (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what type of questions are they answering? Speaker 1: All Black History Month. We focus--we decided when I came back in '99 [1999], that we would focus on African American history because Dr. Hopkins felt that there wasn't enough materials in the school systems. That they're just your usual you know, Frederick Douglass, you know just the, the same ten people that we study in Black History Month. Story_ID: 327098 Speaker 1: Well tell me when you decided to, to come back, what did you have as top priority on your agenda with the National Black Arts Festival? What was your vision this time? Speaker 2: Well to realize the vision that I'd had originally, which was to create this international cultural forum, if you will, where people would come from all over the world to participate in the conversations as well as the presentations. But also to then become an international touring program that could take parts of the National Black Arts Festival and bring them into the communities. I still have to realize that part of the vision. But we're about to establish ourselves as a major international resource where people can come together. We've tried--we're now trying to pull together a lot of the tapes and photographs to create an archive from. I think that's the one thing that we didn't do which is why I'm so happy that HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is doing this. We haven't documented well. And so we're trying to pull all of that back together and make sure that as we move forward, we document as much as possible. But we're about to have a twentieth anniversary. And I think that that kind of testifies to the fact that there is still a need. There's a need for us to come together with all the other communities to talk about the contributions that people of African descent have made and to celebrate those contributions. You know our symphony orchestra [Atlanta Symphony Orchestra] has performed in every National Black Arts Festival. We're talking about creating and collaborating to commission new works by our composers of African descent. You know our, our small theater companies are always looking for ways to participate in the festival. So I think that we, we still have a great need in this country to know more about people of African descent and the cultures that they represent and how those cultures have co-existed and co-mingled with all the other cultures to create what we call this great American culture. Speaker 1: And what was, is priority on your list when you, when you first came back? I know that you've had a chance to clear the slate of some of the issues that were confronting you when you came back, but what was, what was the deficit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a deficit. We had to eliminate the deficit, which we did. And I'm very happy to say that this is my sixth year in the--coming into the new years with a positive fund balance. Speaker 1: Because you started out with what? Over a $500,000 deficit? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was over. Speaker 1: And you were instrumental in getting rid of that? Speaker 2: Absolutely. We got rid of that deficit and you know, we owe no man anything but to love him now. I, I feel that probably I think it was restoring the faith back in this community and getting this community to rally around it again. Story_ID: 327099 Speaker 1: You know I feel we've done a good job now. I feel pretty stable in that people know that we are here and that we are annual now. We had to make a decision too about becoming annual. Speaker 2: And when did you become annual? Speaker 1: In two thou- well 2002 I would say we started. Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002], okay. Speaker 1: We did a 2003 festival [National Black Arts Festival]. But you know when I first came back, we pulled a lot of the marketing executives from the corporate sponsors of the festival to ask them, you know, what did we need to do? And so many of them were saying well we never know when you are. And you change the dates all the time. You know. The thing that we love about Essence is that it's the same time every year, same place, you know. New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival. Even the Houston International Festival or the Birmingham [Alabama] festival [Sloss Music and Arts Festival]. I mean all these festivals that exist, the fine arts festival [National Black Fine Art Show] in New York [New York], the Black Theatre Festival [National Black Theatre Festival]. Same time, well not the Black Theatre Festival is not the same time every year. But same time, basically same timeframe. So that they could make plans. And so this was in early 2001 that we decided okay, we've done the research. Everybody says same time, same place every year. We're gonna pick the third weekend of July. We're gonna do this every year, let's go. So we went back, started gathering all the people, had a great, great beginning. Then we said we would do 2002 and then coming out of 2002, we would be preparing for 2003. And then 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened. September 11th, 2001, who would have thought? Speaker 2: And how did that affect everything? Speaker 1: It affected everything. I actually was out of the country, I was in Amman, Jordan on September 11th at another conference of the Middle Eastern world. We were trying to figure out how to bring in more artists from, from the whole Middle Eastern world because we don't know anything about them, you know. There's this very you know, clouded mystique about so many incredible people. I mean the culture is so rich, you know, all over that whole Middle Eastern area. So I was at a conference in Amman, Jordan and happened to be out in a little city called Jerash [Jordan] at some Roman ruins, you know, just amazed at the history and you know this woman, this Italian woman came running over to us and said, you know, they bombed your country. And we were like oh my God, what do you mean? And she said I just heard--we just--I got a phone call, they bombed your country. And so we all were like whoa, you know let's--I was way out in the, in the ruins and so together with a few other colleagues we started back and you know heard the woman scream again, say they bombed you again, you know. So we all kind of huddled real quick, got back on our bus and headed back to Amman. And of course we were staying in this big, huge Hyatt Regency hotel [Grand Hyatt Amman], you know the Hyatt in Amman, Jordan amongst all these, you know, God this Islamic world. Speaker 2: About how many were you in your group? Speaker 1: There were about eight or nine of us from all over this country. And you know some of them didn't wanna leave 'cause they were afraid to go and then some didn't wanna stay 'cause they were afraid that they would come looking for the Americans. And you know it's a predominantly Palestinian state. But Israel had closed the airspace so we couldn't fly out. So it was a pretty intense moment. Speaker 2: So what ended up--how did you end up getting out and when? Speaker 1: Well it was interesting. I, I'd gone with my friend Baraka Sele and I, we were rooming together. And we went up in our rooms and said a prayer. Asked God to just protect us and we had a piece, we came downstairs and ate dinner. And we--all of our African brothers were there and they were talking--we were talking about move--going to Senegal with them, you know. It's like yeah, let's go to Africa, you know, we African. But the woman who was in charge of our, of our delegation, she was Italian. And so she was able to convince the government--we were the guests of the, of the king [Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein] and queen [Rania Al-Abdullah]. And so they actually got a flight for us the next--we couldn't leave that day. But that next early morning they flew us to Italy. And so we ended up in Rome [Italy] where we were there for I don't know how long. 'Cause they kept saying okay you can fly, but then they would cancel the flights. And so U.S. had shut down the airspace. They weren't letting anybody fly in, so-- Speaker 2: So how many days did you stay in Rome? Speaker 1: I think about five days we were--I think five or six days. I can't remember exactly, we--we kind of got up one morning and they were like okay, here's your ticket. Your flight's gonna leave at this time; you should be there. And you know we didn't know. I mean we had heard that they would, you know, were cancelling flights. They would say yes and then no, but we ended up going in the morning. And I'm telling you God just ordered our steps. It's like we got there and got moved to the front of the line. You can imagine the chaos at the airport. Just mass chaos. Speaker 2: But did they do like they were doing in the United States? Were you searched, were you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean it wasn't, it wasn't as bad as it is even right now. But it was pretty intense. Interestingly enough the night we got to Rome, the Roman people had a, a march where they all had candles. You know, in-- Speaker 2: And it was relating to what had happened in the United States? Speaker 1: Yeah, showing their--what do you call it? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Solidarity. Speaker 1: Solidarity with the United States. It was a huge march around the, the Colosseum. It was really--and I think that was when it really hit me that this was us. You know before then I, I--it was kind of so surreal. You know when we got back to the hotel in Amman, we cut on CNN and you know they kept showing over and over these planes flying into the towers. But we kept saying well maybe it's just some crazy whackos trying to, you know, got--they got fired from the airlines and they're, you know, doing crazy stuff. But then when the second one did it, you know and you just saw all the people running. You saw the people jumping out of buildings. It was just surreal. Story_ID: 327100 Speaker 1: And now here we are in Jordan, you know, and it's like wow. Should we go back or not go back or you know what should we do? It was a moment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how did this affect the relationships that you had with the Middle East? With the-- Speaker 1: It didn't affect them. Baraka Sele brought artists--she still has done a number of performances at New Jersey PAC [New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey] with a lot of the artists from the Middle Eastern world. And it was interesting because we had met a gentleman there who did a festival in Morocco called Fez [Fez Festival of World Sacred Music], which was a religious festival where he brought artists from all over the Middle East, all over the world. And had them all performing together. So there were Palestinians that performed with Israelis that, you know, the Arab world and the Islamic world and the Christian world all together in this festival. And she's been a few times to that festival. So I mean we know that our media hypes it up and they want us to always believe one thing. But if you get to the people, I mean you realize that you know, it's not what, what we think; it's never what we think. The world is, is all the same. People there feel the same way that we feel here. We don't always agree with our leadership or what they choose to do and, and you know you can't blame a whole country of people for what the leadership decides to do. So-- Speaker 2: So when you made it back to the United States from Rome [Italy]. Speaker 1: I made it back from Rome. Speaker 2: How was it? How did you feel when you made it back? Speaker 1: It was weird, it was so strange because the towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York] were still smoldering. We flew into Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] and you could still see the smoke coming up. And the airport was desolate, no one was there. There were not taxis, there were, you know I mean it was so strange. And we sat waiting on a connecting flight for hours and hours. And at one point they, they came and they made us all leave one area 'cause they had found--somebody had left their suitcase and you know and so the flight was delayed and delayed and delayed and delayed. And so now I'm getting kind of antsy sitting in the airport in New York [New York], you know. But eventually we finally got on a flight and got back to Atlanta [Georgia]. Still just kind of in a daze, you know. Just hard to believe. You know because war happens all over the world, except in the United States. You know we're so--you know we've been so protected and so consumed with ourselves. I think it's so important that we all are able to travel abroad and, and see the world because there's just--you know we don't know about--we can't know about ourselves until we know about one another. Speaker 2: It actually widens the scope. Speaker 1: It really does. Puts life in perspective for you, you know. I mean we--you know everybody wants the same thing in life. We all wanna be happy, we wanna be at peace. We want our children to be able to go to bed full and you know, warm. You know, we want them to be educated, you know we want them to learn about the world. So it's sad that war makes us afraid, afraid of one another. Fear is what keeps us bound. Story_ID: 327101 Speaker 1: So how did--when you got back to the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well of course it knocked every--all the money out of whack. Here we just made a decision to do the festival every year and you know everybody's money's now going to other things, especially all the marketing money. So we just pulled our belts real tight and just decided we were gonna go forward. We actually had a holiday festivity. It kind of kicked off an annual holiday celebration that we'd been doing. That year was called Collective Spirit--Diverse Voices, Collective Spirit. And we invited people from all different communities. From Islamic communities, Christians, Jewish, you know, African. All kind of communities to come and share with us how they celebrate that time of the year. And we had a big marketplace and it was very, very important that we did that, to just kind of bring the community back together and all we could think about is--originally we had planned to have this big holiday shopping party. 'Cause see the two things I know about Atlanta, Georgia. The people will shop and they will go to a party. So we said okay, let's have a shopping party. So we were all planning, you know, all prepared to have this big, huge shopping party. And you know after September 11th [September 11, 2001 (9/11)], we felt like we needed to turn it into something more important, you know. And we did, and it was good, it was good. Story_ID: 327102 Speaker 1: What happened after this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The monies got--that's right. We, you know the marketing, all the marketing people who had said yeah, you gotta do it every year, same time. We're gonna do multi-year funding. Of course none of that could happen and now the marketing dollars were the most volatile. So they didn't even know what their budgets were. So we pulled our belts real tight and we did a smaller festival in 2002. But we went ahead and decided once we made the decision to go for it, I just felt like the one thing that I realized when we did all the research on the other festivals, people knew about the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival]. Everybody knew about the Black Arts Festival. But they would say when is it? Did we miss it? Was it this year? So it said to me, and funders did it too. The funders were like is it this year? I was like no, no, we can't, we can't afford to keep falling off the radar. We've gotta be consistent. Speaker 1: And was that because you changed it to be annually. Speaker 2: That's why we changed it. That's why we made that decision. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because we kept falling off the radar for people. And you know, somebody would say well I meant to come, did I miss it? You know. No, it needs to be the same time every year, same place. So we just took a--bit the bullet and pulled our belts real tight, downsized and held strong, and came into--kept coming into each year with--in the black, positive fund balance, okay. Just made it, okay. One more time. Just made it, okay. You know but that was really important for us because I think that it has said to the country and to this community that we are strong and we are stable. We have weathered storms and now we're really ready now to take a big step. I really wanna see us leverage our twentieth anniversary and put together a stellar committee of national, international people who will help us raise $20 million for our twentieth anniversary capital and endowment. We have an opportunity to buy our building. We've been housed at the Studioplex [Atlanta, Georgia], right at the end of Auburn Avenue. Kind of an anchor for that whole Auburn Avenue corridor. Speaker 1: Will you give us that address where you are now? Speaker 2: Yes, 659 Auburn Avenue. We are right now in Suite 254. Right at the end of Auburn Avenue. You almost have to--people think Auburn stops at Randolph [Street], but you have to go one more block and you'll see this huge old cotton warehouse that they've converted to artist live and work spaces. And we were invited by the director of the Historic District [Historic District Development Corporation], her name was Mtamanika Youngblood. She encouraged us to come and move there when I first came back. And it was always with the assumption that we would be able to buy the space. And now that we're at that moment, we wanna buy the whole wing that we live in. Speaker 1: Now is that where Sweet Auburn meets Peachtree [Peachtree Street]? Speaker 2: No, no. That's way up on the other side of Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're way down on the south side. Actually it's really the--I would call it the east end, the last block of Auburn Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the BeltLine is supposed to be going around it. There's gonna be this train that goes all around Atlanta [Georgia] called the BeltLine. And it looks like it is definitely a go and we're right on that BeltLine. So we've decided that we should, that we should definitely dig in and buy some property and grow, grow there. Speaker 1: Now where were you before the Auburn Avenue address? Speaker 2: We were downtown. No, we were never on Auburn Avenue before. We were-- Speaker 1: Before that address where were you? Speaker 2: We were over on Forsyth Street. We had been, we had been in several locations before. But-- Speaker 1: Were you close (unclear)? Speaker 2: We were near Garnett Street Station [Garnett Station]. What was the--I think that was--maybe that was Garnett Street. It was Garnett and another street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yah, I think it's Forsyth Street was the address. But always somewhere kind of in that downtown area (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In that same vicinity, yes. Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 327103 Speaker 1: For the 2001, 2002, what did some--what are some of the themes that you picked up for the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] for the annual festivals? Speaker 2: For the annual festival, well let's see. I know in '03 [2003] I believe it was, it was the hundredth anniversary of W.E.B. Du Bois' 'Souls of Black Folk' ['The Souls of Black Folk']. So we called the festival the Souls of Black Folk that year, it was great, it was wonderful. As a matter of fact, that's one of the things that [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was working on. She had done a lot of research on Du Bois. She, she knew Du Bois and she collected all this papers and books and history on him. We're actually trying to figure out how to bring her back because in 2006, this year's festival, this will be the anniversary of the riots, a hundred years of the riots in Atlanta [Georgia] and Du Bois wrote a whole thing on that. So we're, we're trying to see if we can get Dr. Angelou to come and do her presentation on that. Let's see. We did a wonderful festival called Generation to Generation [Generation to Generation: Master, Mentor, Muse]; that was in '05 [2005]. Generation to Generation, and we were able to bring--like we brought Mario [Mario Van Peebles] and [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles. We brought Dr. Angelou and her son, Guy [Guy Johnson]. People don't even know that Maya Angelou has a son named Guy Johnson who's a prolific writer and poet just like she is. That was magnificent to hear them talking. We brought the Pinkney family. The Pinkney family writes children's books and the--[HistoryMaker] Jerry Pinkney the father actually does the illustrations, but it's a whole family of writers and illustrators. So you know we were trying to bring families to talk about generations to generations. We did a couple of festivals over at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] on the quadrant. We'd been looking for an outdoor home and we did it over there for a couple of years. I can't recall the themes of those festivals, though. Story_ID: 327104 Speaker 1: Now for the twentieth anniversary. Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006], I mean 2008. Speaker 1: Two thousand and eight [2008], and you're gearing up for that now. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You're getting everything in-- Speaker 2: I wanna leverage that anniversary season to just look at the best of the National Black Arts Festival. We're just looking at who are some of the artists that have been at the festival and done some major work and where are they now? What are they doing now? We might remount some old stuff that we had, that were big hits. Just a kind of taste of past festivals. But you know I wanna create a major pictorial history, as well as maybe a DVD and a CD of what the festival has been for twenty years. I'd like to get a lot of interviews from people about what it has meant. People who live here in Atlanta [Georgia] to talk about what has the National Black Arts Festival meant to you? Some of our teachers, some of the students. We've seen students grow up in the National Black Arts Festival. Start out coming with their mothers, you know, kind of little children. And then working as a--one of the high school interns, and then one of the college interns. Go off to college, come back every summer, work with us. And now teaching and doing all kinds of really wonderful things. I'd like to document some of their lives. We have a family where all the children in the family at one time or another have been working at the National Black Arts Festival, so-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. Is it gonna be longer than ten days, or will it be-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm thinking about doing a celebration for the whole year, like something every month leading up to the festival and then coming out of it, taking it around the world, around the country especially and around the world to--so everybody can have a taste. Story_ID: 327179 Speaker 1: Okay, so the institution builders we call them in the 1988 festival, which actually kind of laid the foundation for us every year to celebrate living legends. Every year we were looking for those pioneers. The people who--on whose shoulders we stood. So the first year, we had [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs from the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], we had [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis from the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts in Boston [Massachusetts], we had [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, who was this amazing dancer out of East St. Louis [Illinois]. We had Vinnette Carroll who had started the Urban Arts Corps, which was a theater company in New York City [New York, New York]. Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] who had a theater company in New York City. Ashton Springer who was a producer on Broadway, black producer on Broadway. We had Josephine Love [Josephine Harreld Love] who was with Your Heritage House in Detroit [Michigan] I think she was. And [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, who was with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. And that kind--those pioneers, we celebrated their lives the very first festival. And every festival since then, we've celebrated the lives of the pioneers, the people who have laid the foundation for the work that we do today. Story_ID: 327180 Speaker 1: Well is there anything else that you'd like to add? Something we didn't ask. Speaker 2: Well I was thinking about, you know, my family's history. And I've probably failed to say that my--on my mother's [Lillie Bradley Smith] family's side, both her mother [Lola Mathis Bradley] and father [Ciscero Bradley], we were able to trace that lineage back to the slave owners. That both my grandmother's father and my grand- my grandfather's father were both the children of the slave owner who had raped the enslaved African that was living on their plantations. So I thought that was important to add. Speaker 1: And you said that's how the land-- Speaker 2: Yes, actually how their land--how both of those--both sides of that family, of those families inherited so much land. I mean the hundreds of acres that are still outside of Luverne [Alabama] and Troy, Alabama for my grandfather's family was given to him by his father. In other words, his grandfather was given the land by his father who was the white slave owner. And the same thing for my grandmother on her father's [Henry Mathis] side. Her grandfather's side. He was the son of a slave owner and an African woman. Speaker 1: Okay. And this was the land in Alabama. Speaker 2: In Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Because they bought the land in Canton. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right in Canton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother's family was all in Greenville, Alabama. So that land was a part--that's my grandmother who had the father who was the herbologist. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He would have been an herbologist today. Who'd go out there and work those herbs for all the people in the neighborhood, and who also grew all the food and fed everybody in the neighborhood, including a lot of the white people. That's what happened in Canton too. They ended up feeding a lot of the, the farmers who lived in the--all the surrounding areas who were all white. They depended on my family for food. Speaker 1: It's amazing how food will feed anybody. Speaker 2: Isn't that amazing? And how you know when I was growing up, I didn't realize that--I didn't know about racism because for one, everybody in my family ranged from white, white to black, black African. And so I, I didn't realize that people didn't all get along together 'cause you know, until I got older, I thought--you know and all the white people depended on my family, you know, for their food and stuff. So I didn't realize that there was such problems in the world until after I got into, you know, elementary school. Started realizing that people called people names because of the color of their skin and I always had such an issue with it. And because my family always said that those people were just ignorant, I just felt like well it's a world full of ignorant people out here. Speaker 1: A lot of ignorant ones, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 327181 Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story? Speaker 2: Well because I don't think that my, you know, great-grandparents ever got to tell their stories. And it's just been hard finding out about our histories and our legacies. You know I, I knew my [maternal] grandmother [Lola Mathis Bradley] and she told me about her father [Henry Mathis] and mother [Mollie Mathis] and families, but she couldn't go back very far at all and I just think it's important because we as African Americans have so little documented history. Even with the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival], I feel that we've not done a good job documenting what we've done. So it's easy for people to write you off if you don't have a history, you know. I think that this whole desire to trace our roots all the way back to Africa, these DNA tests are so important because you almost feel like you've been disconnected. I think that's the worst thing that happened with the whole enslavement and slave trade. We got disconnected from our history. And so a people without a history and without a home, you know, it's just--we've been so ignorant for too long and it's time for us to know about ourselves, and the rest of the world to know us. It's time for us to take our rightful place in history in terms of the contributions that we've made. Story_ID: 327182 Speaker 1: Now for those going into the field of arts, into the arts, dance, you know that whole industry, what suggestions do you have for them? Speaker 2: Well I, I would--I tell young people all the time you have to follow your passion because your passion is gonna lead you to your gifts and your talents. If you, if you're passionate about the arts and you wanna be a part of that, you're gonna need it because it's tough, it's tough to be an artist out here. I mean there's the world of art and then there's the world of entertainment. And I mean entertainment is where all the money is. But there's so much co-op, you know, that gets co-opted in the entertainment industry. Particularly as it relates to culture. But you know I feel like people have to follow their passions and I feel like if you've got a passion to do it, then you're gonna do it. I mean they tried to make me be a doctor and even though I like science and math, I was destined to be over here an artist in all of these wonderful--being surrounded by art and culture. So I would just say you have to follow your passion. Story_ID: 327183 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well you know I'm also doing this--I also wanted to tell my story for my grandchildren because I want them to grow up understanding who they are and where they've come from so that African Americans can be proud of themselves and their heritage. And that we can raise ourselves up out of this place that we've been suppressed into of thinking that we're not good enough or smart enough or able to or couldn't do it because somebody else wouldn't let me. You know I have such great hopes for this generation. I'm so into hip hop. I'm really into hip hop because you know in a way between technology, computers and hip hop, the playing field is getting a little more level, you know what I mean? They're becoming the entrepreneurs. They're owning their own. My parents [Lillie Bradley Smith and Robert Smith, Sr.] were trying to--they did their best to give me a good career so I could get a job, that was their whole thing. You gotta have a good job. I talk to my grandchildren about owning their own. Making it up and creating something that nobody else has done that everybody needs. Owning it. So that's my hope for the African American community. I think as we learn more about ourselves and get our pride and our, and our understanding about the importance of supporting our own and building our own and owning our own, I think that God has a plan for us to, you know. Maybe not in our generation, but one day the field will be le- level. Story_ID: 327184 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Wow that's a good one. I want them to say she loved God. That she believed that God was love and that she manifested that love everywhere she went. That she believed in people. She loved people. So wherever she went, whatever she did, she thought about people. She was concerned about other people. And she did the work that God called her to do. She finished the course. She ran the race. And He said, "Well done my good and faithful servant" [Matthew 25:21]. Story_ID: 327185 Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well that the art and culture of people of African descent gained a profound respect in the world. And you know, was given equitable exposure, equitable funding, you know equitable access with all the other cultures in the world. That would be a good legacy. The National Black Arts Festival will be a great legacy, you know, if we can stabilize that and, and move it into that institution category. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That would be great. Story_ID: 327186 Speaker 1: Well thank you and thanks for being so gracious with your time. And thank you for the life that you've lived. Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank The HistoryMakers for taking the time to, you know, to document all these lives. How important this is for us as a people and for us as a country. We need to have our stories told and we need to tell our stories. Everybody's told our stories for us all these years. It's time for all of us to tell our own stories now. So thank you HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 327187 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who, when and where for this photo. Speaker 2: Okay, that is my oldest son James. James Malcolm Austin [James Austin]. He was born June 14th, 1969. And this was his first year in the [U.S.] Navy. He was in the Navy in the early '80s [1980s]. Actually was a part of the Gulf War. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Next photo. Speaker 2: And that's my first husband James Lee Austin [James Austin, Sr.] with our two sons, James Malcolm and Dana Jasua [ph.] Austin [Dana Austin]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That was our Christmas photo. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is myself and my sister Sharon Lee Curle [Sharon Smith Curle]. She is--we are--I'm a senior in high school [Canton McKinley Senior High School, Canton, Ohio] and she's a sophomore. This is our prom in, gee that was in 1966. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Okay go ahead. Speaker 1: That is myself with Mayor Shirley Franklin not long after she became our first African American female mayor of Atlanta, Georgia. She's a great friend. She's part of the reason I came back to the do the National Black Arts Festival. Speaker 2: And this is in 2000-- Speaker 1: This was in 200-- Speaker 2: Three [2003] or '4 [2004]. Speaker 1: Yes, '3 [2003] or '4 [2004]. In her second term now, yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, go ahead. Speaker 1: That's actually me introducing our second world festival at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center [Newark, New Jersey] which was going to be focused on Africa and different--Western Africa. Speaker 2: This was another photo actually taken at that same event where we were celebrating the life of Babatunde Olatunji, who I actually had danced with back in my earlier dance days. But we were celebrating his legacy as one of the first African drummers to come to this country and teach us about Africa, and particularly Nigeria. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay go ahead, next. Speaker 1: This was in the National Black Arts Festival when we were located at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] on the quadrangle between Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. That's [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones, the vice president of corporate affairs and the president of The Coca-Cola Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia]. And in the center is Dr. Collette Hopkins, who is our--the coordinator of our education programs. And that's a big Coca-Cola fan because they were sponsoring our educational component, which they've done in every festival. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This was actually at the end of a parade. I believe the parade was in 2000, and those young people are with a dance company called Batoto Yetu, a group of children out of Harlem [New York, New York], run by Julio [Julio Leitao], forgot Julio's last name. But the company is Batoto Yetu. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That is a picture of Ingrid Saunders Jones from Coca-Cola, vice president of corporate affairs, and president of The Coca-Cola Foundation, together with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, who has been with the festival each year. I'm not sure what year that was. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me and my friend [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, the artistic director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 1: I don't know when that was. That's I would say probably in the, in the '90s [1990s]. That could have been at New Jersey Performing Arts Center where Ailey was our resident--one of our resident companies. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my family. Those are my siblings and my parents. My brother, Robert L. Smith, Jr. [Robert Smith, Jr.], my father Robert L. Smith, Sr., my mother Lillie Mae Bradley Smith, my sister Sharon Lee Smith Curle. That was at the--that was at the National Black Arts Festival when we were at the Clark Atlanta University Center, either in 2003 or '4 [2004]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me at the Cultural Olympiad when I worked there in 1994. Was that--yes. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my father, his siblings and his mother. That's my Uncle Herman Smith [ph.], my Uncle Ivory Clayton Smith [ph.], my Aunt Ernestine Gordon [ph.], that's my grandmother, my father's mother Zella D. Smith [Zella Smith]. Then my Uncle Ernie [ph.], who was the twin of Aunt Ernestine. On the other side of my grandmother, those are her two twins. Then my father, and then his oldest sister Noreen Mosley [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is my mother's mother's father, Henry Mathis. And that picture was taken sometime in the early 1920s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Now who is this? Speaker 1: That is actually me as a baby girl taken in 19--Christmas, 1940--I think it was '49 [1949]. I think I was actually a year old in that picture. My uncle had just come home from the service and brought me that big teddy bear, my Uncle Cephus [ph.], my mother's brother. Speaker 2: And that was a big teddy bear. Speaker 1: It was, right. Could I have been only a year? Could that have been in 1948 as a baby? I might have just been a--does it have a date on the back? That might have been in 1948. I might have only been three months. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's recorded on tape. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother's mother and her sister. It's her sister on the far side, and I'm afraid I don't know the name. That's her oldest daughter in the middle, and that's my grandmother's mother Mollie Mathis. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And that's my father's sister Aunt Ernestine Gordon and my father's mother, Zella D. Smith hanging out and having a good time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And that's me when I was the student council vice president. I think I was probably in the ninth grade. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], '3 [1963], '2 [1962]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That is me with Vinnette Carroll from the Urban Arts Corps in New York [New York]. That's during a period that we were working on 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God' back in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, great, next. Speaker 1: That's when I was working as the company manager of a show called 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf' by [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange. And the women are Beverly [HistoryMaker Beverly Ann Teer]--I can't remember her last name, Barbara Alston, Jonette O'Kelley, LaTanya Richardson Jackson [LaTanya Richardson] is in the center, Brenda Davis, Paula Larke and I'm afraid I don't remember the last girl's name [Gloria Calomee]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, fair enough. Next. Speaker 1: Beverly Ann, what was Beverly Ann's last name. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me performing the role of Mary in 'Black Nativity' at the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts]. And that probably was done in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great, next. Speaker 2: That's another picture of me in my illustrious dance career. I was actually preparing to teach a dance class in Roxbury, Massachusetts [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts]. Probably in the mid-'70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: That is a picture of the priest in the production of 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God.' I believe that's the New York company. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Year, roughly? Speaker 2: Let's see. Probably 1978, '9 [1979]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. I'm sure they can look it up. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's another production, another shot of the same production of 'Your Arms Too Short to Box With God,' with Paula Larke, Beverly Ann, LaTanya Richardson Jackson and Jonette O'Kelley. LaTanya was the woman in red. Speaker 1: And this one is gonna really be from left to right, but it looks like it's from top to bottom. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's my mother Lillie Mae, she was Bradley then. My grandmother Lola Mae Bradley, my aunt, Ladortha Mae Tavaris [ph.], I mean I'm sorry, Ladortha Mae Bradley in those days, and my uncle, Cephus Bradley. See I got to same them anyway. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Best guess is probably the '40s [1940s]. No, the '30s [1930s]. No, my mother was born in 1930, so I would say maybe 1939, 1940. Speaker 1: Early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: She looks so young and she had--she would have had me about eight years later, though. Speaker 2: And that's me and my first love, my second husband, young Thomas Hughley, Jr. That picture was probably taken in 1980, '79 [1979], '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Do you remember where? Were you in New York, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were in New York. We--I don't think we were living in New York 'cause we were probably touring in New York. But I know that picture was taken by Bert Andrews. Bert Andrews was the black photographer of all the black shows on Broadway. He did all the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] and all the Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] shows. And I know that, that look in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: That is my--me and my grandbabies, my three oldest grandchildren. Lucas [Lucas Austin], Emanuel [ph.], Leah [Leah Austin], and Robyn Imani [Robyn Austin]. Leah, what's Leah's middle name? Janae, Leah Janae and Robyn Imani Austin. Speaker 1: Did you give a year? Speaker 2: I'm guessing that probably was in 1990--they probably were maybe two and three, three and four maybe. Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Close enough. Speaker 2: There's no picture of my daughter and my son and my, and the other girl. Is there a picture of all of us? Isn't there a picture of me with all of them? Speaker 1: Okay this is me at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center. The background is the model of the arts center, and the foreground is the model of Newark [New Jersey] on the rise. The plans. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my, this is my mother's father and his siblings. There are--and their parents. The parents are sitting right in the front, and that's Jim and Sarah Bradley. And do you want me to try to name? I'm not--afraid I can't name all of them. Their names are actually on the back of that picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I know that that's Uncle Henderson, so that's William Henderson Bradley [ph.]. You just want me to say their names? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you can even just do, you know, William--'cause we'll have all the full name from the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so that's, that's Aunt Ruth [ph.], yeah. This is Aunt Ruth. This is my grandmother [sic. great-grandfather] James Bradley. That's my grandmother [sic. great-grandmother] Sarah Bradley. I believe this is Auntie Flora [ph.]. Then that was William Henderson [ph.]. That is Gus, Uncle Gus Ulysses. That's my grandfather Ciscero Henry [Ciscero Bradley]. That I believe is Sudie Bell [ph.]. Next to Sudie Bell is--I think that's Uncle Harvey [ph.]. This is Aunt Toxie [ph.], that's Aunt Margie [ph.]. Let's see. I'm not sure, maybe I'll get back to him in a minute when I deduct this. I believe that's Uncle Osborn Green [ph.], this is Uncle Milton, Milton Labor Bradley [ph.]. And who's left. That was Uncle Gus, I said that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Willie James [ph.]. So one of these is Willie James. He might be Uncle Willie James I think. And I might have got somebody mixed up. Who's Uncle John? That looks like Uncle John, I'm sorry. I should have had these--I should have talked to my aunt and had her label those, but that's about the best as I can do. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, those are my grandchildren. Noel [ph.] is in the front, Leah and Robyn and then Lucas is in the back in the center. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: This is my family, my siblings and mother and father. That's my sister Sharon, my father Robert Lee, my baby brother Robert Lee, and my mother Lillie Mae. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What approximately date would you say? Speaker 1: I'm gonna make that 1952, '53 [1953]. Actually it had to be along that, maybe '55 [1955]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 1: This is my son and his wife, Barbara Jean. My son James and Robyn and Leah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is my baby granddaughter Noel. Speaker 2: How old is that one? Speaker 1: Noel is probably about five in that, so let's see. That's probably 1998, '99 [1999]. No, more than that, it's 2000. She's-- Speaker 2: That's my grandmother's last, the last five of her siblings. That's my aunt--God her name just flew out my brain..