 Story_ID: 146202 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Curt Champagne. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, my full name is Beatrice, B as in boy, E-A-T-R-I-C-E, middle name, Loretta, L-O-R-E-T-T-A, maiden name, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, and last name, Hines, H-I-N-E-S. Speaker 1: All right, and, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Williston, Florida, that's in the, in the Northwest Florida and that was on February 12th, 1938. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Right now I'm a retired journalist but I, I do freelance work for the paper that I worked for since 1966. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Today's date is September 11th, 2014. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the present time, we're in my home in-- Speaker 1: (unclear) Okay. Speaker 2: --Miami Gardens, Florida, in my living room. Story_ID: 146203 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two favorite foods, chicken and watermelon. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That tells you who I am, right? Speaker 1: Right, well, yeah, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, I like red, I like yellow and blue and I like browns, all shades of browns. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yeah, I like, I like, in the springtime, I like to go to Savannah, Georgia because the dogwood flowers and trees in bloom and the azaleas in bloom. I usually go around Easter time and I also like to take cruises to the Caribbean in the summertime, that's a favorite spot of mine. I have a lot of friends from the Bahamas so I'll get a chance to see them. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I like the spring and fall, what, in about two weeks from now, we'll start, I can feel it, nobody else can, but I feel the nip in the air and I tell my friends that and they all crack up because they're sweating but I said, you have to be a Floridian to know when the nip comes and so they all tease me about that. We get on the phone, I felt a nip this morning. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so I'm going to ask about your family history now, your, your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother was Ida, I-D-A, second name, B-E-L-L-E, Lawton, L-A-W-T-O-N, Johnson, her maiden name was Lawton. Speaker 1: Okay, and, okay, oh, I did forget one of the questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the five questions. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: God willing and the creek don't rise. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I say that almost all the time. Story_ID: 146204 Speaker 1: So your mother's Ina Belle Lawton. Speaker 2: Ida, I-D-A. Speaker 1: I-D-A. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Ida Belle Lawton. Speaker 2: And B-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lawton, L-A-W-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth, I mean her, place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Plant City, Florida. Speaker 1: Plant City. Speaker 2: In 1919, March the 27th. Speaker 1: I know the Cincinnati Reds used to have their farm team there, I think, Plant City, Florida. So, in 1919? Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Not too much. My mother's mother [Suzy Lawton] left home when she was about twelve years old and she married a man who we are told was, was like, had a lot of Indian in him. He was, he was about six, six, and my grandmother was barely five feet tall. So all of her children, he died when my mother was about fifteen so I never knew him, I just know the stories that they told me and, but all of my grandmother's children, they're like stair steps that, you know, some are tall and some are short, you know, they go up and down. My mother was almost six feet tall and she had one other sister who was as tall as she and the others, she had one tall brother and then the others are short, like, not as short as my grandmother, but, but shorter than she, my mother was. We, we know that we have some relatives somewhere on my mother's side, on my grandmother's side, in Florida, but when she left home, it severed the ties with her family and they, they, when my aunt, one of my aunt's found her, her uncle, and she went to see him and he wouldn't even let her in the house because when she told him that she was Suzy's daughter, he would have nothing to do with 'em. So I never met them. Speaker 1: Hum, so something traumatic happened-- Speaker 2: Yes, she-- Speaker 1: --caused her to-- Speaker 2: --my grandmother ran away from home because I understand she was, she was being abused and-- Speaker 1: She was only twelve years old? Speaker 2: She was only twelve years old and she took up with, there was a woman who sheltered her and took her in until she met my grandfather and married him. Speaker 1: Hum, okay. Speaker 2: And she had, from him she had eleven children and five of them lived to adulthood. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Suzy, Suzy Lawton. She married a Lawton, John Henry Lawton and, but then when my mother was in her late teens, just before she got married, my grandmother remarried to a man named, oh my goodness, I can't remember his first name but he was, he was the only grandfather we knew. His last name was Stevens and he was from Plant City. He was a widower and she was a widow and they got together and they had one child who was two years older than me and he died and he was a police officer and he died in the line of duty in nineteen, I had been a reporter for about two years when he died, when he died. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, so, so your mother, did she grow up in Plant City? Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in Plant City and went to school in Plant City and played basketball for a while and then she dropped out of school and she was in the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Yeah, you said she was about six feet tall. Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she was five, eleven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In those days, you didn't see too many tall women but one thing I liked about my mother, as tall as she was, she had a beautiful figure and she walked with her head high. You know, most tall women sort of slump-- Speaker 1: Slump. Speaker 2: --'cause they don't want to be that tall. Momma walked with her head high and her shoulders back and so people, a lot of people thought, she thought too much of herself because that was the way she carried herself and I was always proud of her because, you know, she, she did a lot with what she had. She left an abusive marriage, our father [Adam Johnson, Sr.] was, you know, an abuser and she was twenty-four when she left with two little children. She, she didn't care. She wasn't going to live like that and she found a better life for us. She left us with one of her sisters until she, until she could, in Palatka [Florida]. We left Williston [Florida] and she took the bus to Palatka and left us with her sister who had five children of her own at the time and we made seven and she never acted like we were her niece and nephew. She treated us like her own children, she and her husband, and about six months later, momma came and got us. She had gotten a job in Miami [Florida] and a place for us to stay in Overtown [Miami, Florida]. Story_ID: 146205 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Ida Lawton Johnson], was she able to finish school in Plant City [Florida]? Speaker 2: She, you know, she went back to school when I was a senior in high school and she was taking nurses assistant, 'cause I used to help her with her homework. You know, I would go to the library for her and look up stuff for her and she graduated. I was so proud of her and she did that work for a long time and then she decided that she didn't want to be out of church 'cause the nursing, she took care of baby, she was what they call a wet nurse where she would go to the homes of new mothers and stay with them for like two weeks. The doctor would send her there and she made really good money and she would take care of the babies for two weeks and then she would go to another job but they kept her away, and mom was very religious and so it kept her away from church. She did that for a good while, made good money, and then she decided she'd rather be a housekeeper so she could be off on Sundays and attend church and she worked for almost forty years for this family in Miami Beach [Florida], you know, before she left them and later died. Story_ID: 146206 Speaker 1: Now this is an important relationship with this family, right? Speaker 2: Well not, this is not-- Speaker 1: Not, this is one-- Speaker 2: --the family, this is not the family that I grew up with. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I went, I was working for this family while my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] was, was working as a wet nurse and I was working as a maid. When I graduated high school in 1956, I got a scholarship in voice which my mother wouldn't let me take. Somebody told her that, you know, she should, I wouldn't get a job or something and she did the best that she thought that she was doing the best for me. So I didn't take it but I didn't go. I had sent my room and board to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] and everything and so I had to write a letter and tell them that I wasn't going to be coming and I was so despondent, I think that's why I married so early because Jimmy [James Hines] was back home from the war, from the, not the war, he went, he was in the service [U.S. Military] but there was no war going on in that time and we, we decided to get married and so the money that I was saving to go back to school the next semester, we used that to have a little wedding and that was in 1957. Story_ID: 146207 Speaker 1: I'm not, I don't want to get too far ahead 'cause-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --I'm still asking about you mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] and father [Adam Johnson, Sr.] so-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, yeah we could go back. Speaker 1: --I want to go back to, so did you mother have any stories of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she told us, she talked a lot about when her dad [John Henry Lawton] died and how my mother, my grandmother [Suzy Lawton] was cute and little and a lot of men were after her, even though she had a house full of children and she said, my mother, grandmother wasn't afraid of anybody and they knew it and she, they would walk through the woods and she would have a shotgun on her shoulders, across her shoulders and nobody bothered them. Nobody bothered them because they knew my grandmother would shoot. She was a real Madea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my grandmother also told stories about her mother-in-law who she said was really half-Indian [Native America] and was very strong and she, she said, you know, people didn't, didn't bother her either. Speaker 1: Now was she Seminole or Creek or-- Speaker 2: I don't know if she was Seminole or what. I should have, I should, I guess I have one, I have one aunt who's still alive and she's, she's ninety-eight and she, well, might have been ninety-five, no she's ninety-seven, she's ninety-seven this year and so I was, I went to see her about two months ago but she got ill and had to be put in a hospital so I didn't get a chance to talk to her. That was mainly why I went to go see her, to fill in the gaps, of the things 'cause she, she had a good memory but, my grandmother would talk about things and I'm so sorry I didn't record it because a lot of it I've forgotten now. Story_ID: 146208 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father was Adam Johnson [Sr.] and I don't know too much about his side of the family because we left so early and we, my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] broke ties with that side of the family. She didn't want him to know where we were. We didn't see him again till we were almost adults. Speaker 1: Okay and I was-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, in fact I wrote a column that's going to be in Sunday's paper and I mentioned that. You may be able to pick it up on-line already. I was talking about the, the [Ray] Rice situation and the abusive, how he beat up his then fiance [Janay Palmer Rice]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Ray Rice the football player-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Ray Rice, right. Speaker 1: --who's in the news now [September 2014] for punching his wife in the elevator. Speaker 2: And I've mentioned how we can't seem to get beyond that, that abuse thing in our country, you know, men beating their wives and some wives beating their husbands and so I mentioned, and, I thought about, in the column I said that I was so thankful for my mom who had a strong, she was very strong and decided, you know, she wouldn't live like that and she and a woman who we call Madea, was her good friend, helped her plan her escape from my dad and she got up that morning like she always did, cooked his breakfast, made his lunch, kissed him good-bye, had washed and ironed all his clothes and had them hanging in the closet and watched him leave, turn that truck, turned the corner and she turned, turned around and did some turning and Madea came over and helped her get my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.], who was two at the time ready and get me ready and they had made arrangements for a man who drove a lumber truck to come by and take us to the bus station and that's how we got away from Williston [Florida]. And we never heard again from my dad. I was eighteen and I was graduating from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida] and my mom had already bought my class ring the year before but I thought, I'm going to ask him, see if he'll do this, and I told him the ring didn't cost for twenty-eight dollars, and it's gold, you know, and so I said that I want a class ring, I'm graduating high school and I would like to have a class ring. And to my surprise, I got the letter, a special delivery letter, about three or four days later, with thirty-eight dollars in it and I, we were going, I was a majorette in high school and we were going on a football game, to a football game in West Palm Beach [Florida] and the band and majorettes were going and they let us get out early so we could get our stuff and get lunch and come back to the school. And when I got there, there was this letter, it had been delivered special delivery for me. So I wrote a note to my mom and left the money in the envelope under her pillow in the bedroom. And we were so shocked that he would do that 'cause we never heard from him. He never supported us and maybe-- Speaker 1: Did he know where you were? Speaker 2: I think he knew 'cause his sister had come to visit us, you know, when I was about fourteen, she came down from Williston to visit us and I believe she knew but, because she and my mother were very close even after they, you know, the split, and Aunt Leola [ph.] came down. I'll never forget that. There was a trunk full of homemade cakes and pies in the trunk of the car. She had made them before coming to Miami. Momma, my mother was never one for the kitchen. She was an impeccable housekeeper. She would keep the, I taught her how to cook a lot of stuff because when we lived together, after my husband was killed, we lived together until my sons were thirteen and eleven. I did all the cooking, from breakfast, whatever. I'd get up on Sunday mornings at like five-thirty and cook dinner for Sunday before we went to church. So I was the cook in the house. Story_ID: 146209 Speaker 1: But, oh, what were we talking about, I forget? Speaker 2: Well, I was going to ask you about your father [Adam Johnson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: I'm just rambling. Speaker 2: Yeah we were, I need to ask you like, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: Dad was born in February but he was, let me see, he died two years before my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] died. He died in 2000, I believe. It was either '98 [1998] or 2000, he was eighty-six when he passed. He had cancer. We had been to see him like ten days before he passed. Speaker 2: So he was born in 1914, I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah, about that year 'cause he was, momma was, let me see, she was born in 1919. I think she said he was six years older than she was, I believe she told me that. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: But it was a sad situation because when we, when my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] and I decided, you know, I, it was I that decided that we would have a relationship with him and I told my brother, I said, we just have to forgive him and get to know him, you know, he's our father and so we did. He, my brother would listen to me and he was home, he was a career man for the [U.S.] Air Force, and he was home one year and we went to see him and he was, my dad didn't know what, he was so proud that we would come to see him and then, and I was already a mother and I had two little children but we did, my brother and I took the trip together. But every year after we, after I became, after I started working at The Miami Herald, I would, I would take my children to see him, every year, every summer, so they would get to know their grandfather. Speaker 2: Now where was he from? Speaker 1: At that time, he was living in Eatonville, Eatonville, Florida, was Zora Neale Hurston. Speaker 2: That's where, that's-- Speaker 1: Zora Neale Hurston. Speaker 2: --where, Zora Neale Hurston. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was living there but he-- Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: --dad, my mother said he was from some part of Alabama but I don't know. He was, he was from Alabama. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now what did he do for a living? Speaker 1: Dad was just a common laborer. He worked with road gangs and, you know, whatever he did but he worked, always had work. Story_ID: 146210 Speaker 1: Did, is there any, was there ever any discussion by your mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] or by him [Hines' father, Adam Johnson, Sr.], I guess, as to why he was abusive or what it was about? Speaker 2: No. You know, I told mother, I told my mother things that I remembered. She thought somebody told it to me. She would never say things, you know. I guess she didn't want to say how hateful memory of him but I remembered. I remembered him fighting my mother, you know. I remember, I've seen some pictures in my mind even now and when I was writing that column yesterday for, that's going on Sunday, I had to take some things out because it was even painful for me to read, you know, but she didn't want us, she didn't want, I remember one year she wasn't with us at Christmastime because her mother [Suzy Lawton] was sick and I can hear my grandmother, my dad's mom saying to my daddy, you don't have, that's when I found out there wasn't a Santa Claus, that was just before we left, you don't need to buy them anything, just buy them, no toys, just get them some fruit and coloring book. My brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] was two years old and his, my dad's sister, had a son who was living with my grandmother and he got all the shiny toys and I can remember my little brother crying because he couldn't play with that red truck. You know, those things have been in my memory. And so when my mother came back from, from seeing about her mother and learned that we didn't have toys or anything at Christmas, I think that helped her to make up her mind to leave. She used to, I heard her tell someone that my grandmother used to hold me while my dad would beat her. His mother did that and you know what I was-- Speaker 1: And she never tried to stop him or-- Speaker 2: Umm-um, she would hold me while he beat, that was, well they were living in Williston, Florida, in the country, you beat your wife. Speaker 1: Well, was she used to that herself? Speaker 2: I guess she was. I guess she was. Speaker 1: I've heard that said-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that people who-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, the kind of advice you get, well, you shouldn't have made him mad or something, you know, that type of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, when my mother, when that happened, and, and my mother was, she decided that she would leave, people thought that she had done something to cause him to fight her. But she decided that-- Speaker 1: Was he as tall as her? Speaker 2: He was as tall, he was taller. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was not that much taller. They were probably, if she wore heels, he would probably be, she'd probably be taller. But I forgave him because he didn't know any better and so we tried to have a relationship with him and one Father's Day, when my brother was stationed in, in Cocoa [Florida], we took the children to see him. My brother had two children, a girl and a boy, and we, I drove from here to Cocoa and we drove over to see my dad and he kept his head down the whole time we were at dinner. He was teary. He didn't want us to see him crying. He, he never did anything to deserve that but we wanted him to know we loved him and we forgave him. He was our dad-- Story_ID: 146211 Speaker 1: And I understand that as I grew older and I was in an abusive relationship, I understood. My husband [James Hines] was, never knew anything but, a man beats his wife. His daddy beat his mother, his grandfather beat his wife. So that's all he knew but that's not how, a way to live. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: So, you know, you have to make a choice (simultaneous). Speaker 2: It's a tragic situation. Speaker 1: It was, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You have to make a choice. I wanted to live like a human being, you know, that wasn't right. He told me I was a dreamer, that nobody lived like that 'cause that's all he had ever seen. That's what he said to me-- Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: --you're dreaming, nobody lives like that. Speaker 2: You know, I'm, so many things that, that we do are, the negative things are remnants of slavery, holdovers, but this-- Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: --we can't even blame that on slavery 'cause so many white people do the same thing. Speaker 1: But you know the frustration people take, sometime their frustration out on the person who loves them more, you know. I couldn't understand why my husband would hit me. I loved him so much. I didn't want to fight him back. I didn't want to hurt him, you know, but then as I got old and when I got out of the relationship and I was looking back on a lot of things, he was so frustrated because he was not making a lot of money and he wanted to go back to school, which he did, excuse me, but he, but he dropped out and then he became, and he got up and joined the police force. He was a very smart man, very handsome guy but he just, he, I don't think he believed in himself enough. Story_ID: 146212 Speaker 1: So, you did get a chance to be around your father [Adam Johnson, Sr.] and to know him in his latter years? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm so glad, I'm so glad that we did. Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] encourage you all to do it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was so funny too. She kind of got a little jealous one time. I said, "You don't have to be jealous. You know, we, we always love you and we've always been around you. We just want to know who he is." And then she understood. That was so funny. We laughed about that. Speaker 1: Okay, well when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take after, mostly my grandmother [Suzy Lawton], really, my mom's mom. Grandma was so funny. She, and she was smart. She taught herself to read 'cause she only had like a third grade education but she knew what was going on in the world. She knew more than my mother knew and she, she was creative. She understood that I loved the arts and that when I was taking, when I was going to school, I couldn't tell my mother I was studying journalism because she thought I wouldn't get a job. She didn't know any black reporters. She had never seen one. So I had to, she was really stuck in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], you know, but my grandmother understood and she, whenever she would see me after I became a reporter and sometime, one time I used to be on a TV show with Carl Hiaasen and some other people called 'Issues and Answers' that was on television-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --when I did the column, and my grandmother wouldn't miss a Sunday. She would be right there, glued to the TV, calling all her friends in to see her granddaughter. Well, and my mother later, begin that she was proud of the fact that I had become a journalist but I couldn't tell her that I was studying journalism. Speaker 1: She just couldn't see it. Speaker 2: She thought I was studying to become a teacher because I could get a job as a social worker or a teacher or a nurse. She really wanted me to be a nurse but I, I couldn't do that, you know. I loved caring for my mother and I said to her before she died, I said, well you got your wish, I'm your nurse (laughter). She wanted me to be a nurse, that's what she wanted to be and didn't have the opportunity as a child growing up. You know, they all had to drop out of school when the dad [John Henry Lawton] died to help support the family. Everybody had to pitch in. That's what blacks did in the rural areas of, and also in Miami [Florida]. A lot of guys in my class, not a lot but some of them graduated, they were in their twenties because they had gone to the [U.S.] Army to send that money back home to the family, to help their families, to help support their family. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: So I think I took more after my, I think it skipped a generation and I got my grandmother's, I got all the lovin' the arts and plants and stuff like that. I got that from her. She had a garden until almost just before she died-- Story_ID: 146213 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Now what, tell us, can you name your brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother. Speaker 1: And, okay, and, you know, from the oldest to the youngest? Speaker 2: Just one. I'm older. I'm the older, there's two of us. Speaker 1: All right, and just one brother? Speaker 2: And I had one brother, his name is Adam Johnson, Junior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he lives in Melbourne, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, how much younger is he? Speaker 2: Three, three years. Speaker 1: Three years, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And, he's a career [U.S.] Military man? Speaker 2: He was. He grad--he got out after about twenty-eight years. He got out of the Service and they, he had been stationed in Cocoa [Florida] and they liked the area for their children. Their children were young, Cocoa, Florida, and so they moved to Melbourne [Florida] and bought a house there. They have a lovely home and their children are grown and they have children now. Yeah, they're grandparents, doting grandparents. Story_ID: 146214 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact I do. I remember the day my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] was born. He was born in Clewiston, Florida where my dad [Adam Johnson, Sr.] was then working and I remember the sand. It was not dirt, it was like white sand where our little house was. I guess it was the project that they had for black people there and my grandmother [Suzy Lawton] had come to care, to help momma [Ida Lawton Johnson], the midwife, my brother, we were both born at home, and my grandmother had come to help the midwife, when my mother, at her, to help deliver my brother. And I remember the dress I was wearing. It was a little blue and white flower, print dress, that had a bonnet to go, that would, matched it, and I remember being outside when my brother was being born, eating white sand, but all children ate the sand. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I ate sand all the time until they spanked my hands. And my grandmother came to the door and said, "Come on in and see what the bunny brought you. The bunny rabbit brought you a new brother." And I remember that so well. I was three years old. Speaker 1: How--(simultaneous) Story_ID: 145825 Speaker 1: Now, so your first few years is spent in Williston [Florida], I guess, right? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And then you moved to Overtown [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we, first we moved from Williston to Palatka, Florida-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: --where my, with my aunt and uncle and we were there for six months before we, my mom [Ida Lawton Johnson] came and got us and we moved to Overtown on 9th Street, right off 2nd Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, can you, well, considering these places, can you describe for us the sights, sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. We lived, the area that we lived in Overtown, first of all, the house was owned by a brother and sister, a couple, and they were mulattos. Their father was white and I'm told that when the Watkins [ph.], when he died, he left that property to them. It was a beautiful house, three stories with mahogany bannisters on the stairs and they turned it into a rooming house, the brother and sister did. Nellie [ph.], I think her name was Nellie Watkins and I don't remember her brother's first name, but that's where we had our first home when my mother, they turned it into a rooming house and we were on the third floor, right next to the bathroom, which was great for us, and I can remember Sunday mornings walking to church with my little patent leather shoes on and smellin' fried chicken as we, chicken that was fried for Sunday dinner as we passed different houses and listened, hearing the music spill out of the windows from the radio of the gospel shows, the gospel music shows. There was a group called, I can't think, the Southern, the Southern Gospel Singers, or the Sutherland Gospel Singers, but anyway, they would sing, they would be on, on live, on the radio on Sunday mornings and then I can remember hearing Sister Rosetta Tharpe-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --coming out of the, you know, those sounds coming out of windows because we didn't have air conditioning and people had their windows open and the, and Mahalia Jackson, you could hear all the gospel music, and one of, one of my favorite memories of growing up in Overtown was the, when we laid the cornerstone for Ebenezer [United] Methodist Church where we were members, that was in 1940, I think that was the winter that we left here, before we left to go to Texas, that was in '48 [1948]. And prior to that, they were raising money for the church, for the new church to be built, and Mahalia Jackson came to town and we were having service at the St. Agnes Parish Hall on 17th Street and 3rd Avenue and Mahalia, I remember my mother walking fast from Ninth Street to, to hear Mahalia Jackson, with my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] on one side and I was on the other side, and I had, well she had bought me this cute little dress, one side of the top was pink and the other side was black and a little skirt. She had a big black and pink bow on my hair and we were going to hear Majali-- Mahalia Jackson live. Speaker 1: Now Mahalia Jackson, it was the, it was considered, in those days, the greatest gospel singer-- Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yes, and people were all outside the windows 'cause they didn't have air conditioning in the building and so they were glued to the windows and I remember her singing, 'Move On Up A Little Higher.' I can remember that like it was yesterday. That was a good memory. And then our other memories I have were taking number 21 bus on Sunday after church, driving, riding to Liberty City [Miami, Florida] where we later moved because the housing projects in Liberty City was the only park that black children could go to at that time and we, I remember waiting in line just to get on the swing, you know, because there were so many children. We all wanted to play and have a chance on the swing and so that was a Sunday afternoon outing for us. And other memories of my teenage years were going to Virginia Key Beach, because it was the black beach and dancin' and swimmin' and bringing our own lunch although they had snack bars and stuff there but we just, we had some great times. And I went to Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida]. Story_ID: 145826 Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to get you there yet. Speaker 2: Oh, you're not there? Speaker 1: I want to ask you about, now, well, when you moved to Overtown [Miami, Florida], tell us a little bit about Overtown. Now this is the black section over there-- Speaker 2: It was a black section. It is still there. It's not the same anymore because it was destroyed when I-95 split the neighborhood, then they had this thing called urban renewal, you know, and that property is prime property there and they're just waiting for all the black people who own property to die. That's my, that's my opinion, to down there, they've taken it, it's going to be a place where black people won't be able to afford to go any more but now, thanks to [HM] Dorothy Fields and The Black Archives, they have refurbished the old Lyric Theater, the first black theater in Miami [Florida] for black people. It's on 8th Street and 2nd Avenue and they have great things going on there all the time. In fact tomorrow night, they're going to have a, they're going to show a documentary on Willie Clark and Johnny Pearsall who started the first record company, black record company in Miami and for a while, I don't know if you know who Betty, Betty Wright is-- Speaker 1: Betty Wright the singer. Speaker 2: --she did the song Clean Up Momma-- Speaker 1: Right, right, 'Clean Up Woman.' Speaker 2: 'Clean Up Woman,' I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Willie Clark gave her a start and he was her manager for a while but Willie was a year ahead of me in high school. His sister and I were good friends but Overtown had a diverse, the people there were from all over the country, mainly Bahamians. They settled, those who didn't settle in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida], settled in Overtown and it was, it was, the street in front of our house was paved but right, but if you walked off the paved street, across the street, it was a dirt road and there was a wooden tenement building where people lived and a little mom and pop grocery store that we got milk and, and bread, you know, and, you know, things that we needed and there was a red, a Red Top Supermarket that we walked to that was, at the end of Overtown on about 4th Street, I think, 3rd or 4th Street. And, but, but in the day, Overtown was a real jumpin' place. There were black businesses and people were dressed beautifully. If the, I remember, this picture here on the wall here, my momma [Ida Lawton Johnson] when she was twenty-seven, she was dressed in a formal gown because she was going to see Louis Jordan and his Tympany Five. Speaker 1: Louis Jordan, right. Speaker 2: You remember him? Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: You remember the name? Speaker 1: I remember the movie, I mean the name. Speaker 2: And that-- Speaker 1: What was his famous song? He had a couple. Speaker 2: I know he, one of them was, "Hit 'Em With The," "Hit 'Em With The" something "and the frying pan." 'Run Joe,' 'Run Joe' is one of 'em and, anyway, he did a lot of stuff that I can't remember right now but he was very popular. Speaker 1: Yeah, Louis Jordan. Speaker 2: And people, the women looked gorgeous. They would dress up. I mean, they would wear their long dresses. We're talking the '40s [1940s], when women really, I mean, they really dressed, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Jordan had a comic act kind of. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was, it was musical band, and he had a comedy kind of. Speaker 2: Yeah he, he did. He was funny and also the other one they would dress up to go see was Buddy Johnson, Buddy and Ella Johnson, and they would always be at the Rockland, I mean at the Harlem Square Garden and then during the classic time, that was when Florida A&M College [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida] would come to town and play football in the Orange Bowl and they were the only black team that would play in the Orange Bowl at that time. And then they would have a big parade and it would march, come down 2nd Avenue. We would go and momma would get us there early and we would sit on the curb. Speaker 1: Now the band, Florida A&M band set the tone-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for all the rest of the black bands-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the country. Speaker 2: We called ourselves the "Little Rattlers," our school, our high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida], and we tried our best to be like them and when they would come, the parade would always start from Booker T. Washington High School and they, FAMU would lead the parade and Booker T. would bring up the tail end because we were the host school. But, those were great times. Those were wonderful times. My mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] used to take us to dinner at a restaurant that was called O'Dell's and O'Dell, Ed O'Dell used to be a, he was one of the first black men on TV here and his dad owned the restaurant but I, Ed is much younger than, I think Ed is about ten years younger than I am, so I didn't know him. When he was, when I was growing up, he wasn't born. My mother would take us to, dress us up, and take us to O'Dell's for dinner. They, it was a lovely restaurant with, that had white linen tablecloths and carpets on the floor and the, and the waitresses all wore these beautiful crisp uniforms with these pretty flowered handkerchiefs in their pockets and they were always so beautifully made up. They were just, it was wonderful. We didn't know we were living in the segregated time because we had everything we needed right there. We had our own theatres, the Ritz Theatre down the street from, around the corner from us, the doorman wore a fancy uniform, you know, and it was a lovely theatre. It was smaller than the Lyric's [Lyric Theater, Miami, Florida] but it was lovely and we had a wonderful time. We had a wonderful time. Story_ID: 145827 Speaker 1: Now Overtown [Miami, Florida] is a, there's been a movie ['I Am Ali'] about Muhammad Ali-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --made for Public Television about his training for the [Sonny] Liston fight [in 1964] in Overtown-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and his interaction with Malcom X when he came to visit-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --with his family on vacation here in Miami [Florida]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember a parade with, he was Cassius Clay then. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, right. Speaker 2: And he was riding down, it was a classic parade and he was on one of the cars waving and everybody was just screaming when they saw him. Speaker 1: Now you, now you were grown by then, by this time? Speaker 2: By then I was a young woman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --A young woman -- Speaker 2: --young woman. Speaker 1: A young woman, yeah. But-- Story_ID: 145828 Speaker 1: But Overtown [Miami, Florida] is one of the classic, you know, black neighborhoods-- Speaker 2: Yes, and I'll tell you a little story about the name Overtown. We call it over town among ourselves and it wasn't like it was a name, it was what we, in Liberty City [Miami, Florida], if you asked somebody where you were, where did you live and you said, "Oh, we live over town." That's how we said it. We live over town. And so among, among blacks, it was just, we live over town, not in Overtown, but we live over town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I was, when I started writing, the first story I did about the neighborhood growing up black in Miami, 'cause they were so curious, I mentioned that I lived over town, and so the editor took it out and he said, they were calling it the Central Negro District at the time, the C.N.D. on the second reference, and so I said, "Why did you take Overtown out of my story?" And he said, "Because nobody knows what you're talking about. We call it the," I said, "You call it the Central Negro District, but if you ask any black person in Miami [Florida] they would know where you're talking about." So he, then he agreed, he said, okay, we will say, you can't say you live over town because it's bad grammar, you live in Overtown. I said, okay, that's, that'll work and so from then on, we were calling the area Overtown in the newspaper. They stopped calling it the Central Negro District. Then the radio stations picked up on it and the TV stations picked up on it and then we got on the news in a bad way for the riots, the Overtown riots [in 1980]. They showed, that's when, what's his name, [Arthur Lee] McDuffie, was killed. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they showed the same burning car a trillion times on television so you think that-- Speaker 1: That was in 1980. Speaker 2: --it was a burning car every night. Speaker 1: Now I'm going ask you about that later when we get to that but, but that's, that's good-- Speaker 2: But that's how Overtown's name came to be. Speaker 1: So you played a role in-- Speaker 2: I played a role in that. Speaker 1: A major role. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they didn't, they, in fact when we dedicated the 9th Street corridor, which is the street where I was, our first home was there, one of the publisher of the [Miami] Herald was on the platform at the time and, and they asked me to speak and I mentioned that I'm responsible for having the name Overtown be a national, you know, people recognize it all over the country because I was the first person who wrote about Overtown in the paper 'cause I said, the white peopled called it the Central Negro District and when I would say that, they would take it out of my story until I protested and we made a little compromise how we would, how we would say it. And I don't think Alvah Chapman, who's publisher at the time, I don't think he knew that. He sat there and he looked so strange. He didn't know how it came to, he just knew that it was in the paper. Speaker 1: This is interesting. Very interesting, you know. I find it, having the power to name things is part of being in the press, right? Okay. Story_ID: 145829 Speaker 1: So, now, where did you start grade school? Speaker 2: I started at Ms. Powers Private School. When we moved to, the Miami [Florida] school had already started and so I was, momma [Ida Lawton Johnson] enrolled us in, in Ms. Powers, in Ms. Powers grade, private school, which was across the street from where we lived. And then the next year I started the second grade at Douglass Primary School [Frederick R. Douglass Elementary School, Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: So how, how old were you when you, you're six I guess when you started? Speaker 2: I was six. Speaker 1: All right, so this is 1940-- Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], okay. Speaker 2: I should have been in the first grade. When I was in the second grade, I really should have been in third grade because momma didn't have any school records and I had gone to Ms. Powers Private School when I first came here because school had started. So they put me in the second grade instead of the third grade when I started going to public school. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, all right. So, so what public school did you start in? Speaker 2: I went to Douglass Primary and then in the fourth grade, I went to Phillis Wheatley Elementary School [Miami, Florida] and then that is the year I was ten years old, I turned ten that year, and in the meantime my mom had remarried. She had a brief marriage to, to a man she met and he was, he was in the [U.S.] Navy and he was a fine man but they just didn't make it. He, he loved me and my brother and was very kind to us but for some reason mom and he didn't make it and, but, what was I saying? I lost my train of thought. Speaker 1: Now you were talking, I was asking you about school-- Speaker 2: Oh, school, okay. Speaker 1: --so you went to Phillis Wheatley-- Speaker 2: So I went to Phillis Wheatley and then because mom was married to Mr. Stevenson [ph.], we moved to Texas where we stayed for a year but the weather out there was so bad that year, my momma said she would never leave Florida again, even though Florida had hurricanes. That year we had a very cold winter, our first winter there. Speaker 1: Were you in Houston, or-- Speaker 2: We were in Ft. Worth [Texas]. Speaker 1: Ft. Worth, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, and then that Spring we had a bad flood but we were on, we lived in the Hollywood Hills [Ft. Worth, Texas] area of town so we didn't get the flood waters. People were driving over relatives of other, other people's relatives. You could hear the cars coming in all night running from the flood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then we came back to Miami [Florida] when I was in the sixth grade and I went to Liberty City Elementary [School, Miami, Florida] where I was the vice president of the student council and Thirlee Smith was the president of the student council who later became the first black reporter at The Miami Herald. Speaker 1: What's her name again? Thir-- Speaker 2: It was a he, Thirlee-- Speaker 1: Oh, Thirlee. Speaker 2: T-H-I-R, T-H-I-R-I-L-E-E, Thirlee Smith. His sister is [U.S.] Congresswoman Frederica Smith, Frederica Wilson, Frederica Smith Wilson is Congresswoman in [Washington] D.C., that's his sister, his baby sister. So I've known them all my life, too, and then when he came to work, and see after I left, we were at Liberty City Elementary and I had always wanted to attend Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida], which was in Overtown [Miami, Florida], and because I had my heart set on it, so, and they didn't have school buses to take us over there so, but it was eighty cents a week for, for a card. That was kind of expensive for us, you know. My mom was a day worker at that time but she did it because I had my heart set on it. So we lived in Liberty City at the time and I took 21 bus and transferred to another bus to go to Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Now Liberty City is a, a housing project? Speaker 2: It's, it was, it's named, the man who named Liberty City worked for, I think it was a Jewish man who had, who had property out there and built, sold it to black people like [HM] Garth [C.] Reeves', it was his first home, was, it's on 13th Avenue and about 60, I think it's 68th Street, and Mr. [Alonzo] Kelly, who they put a little park up in his honor, named that area, Liberty City but the housing project was named Liberty Square and there's a debate on whether it is the oldest one in the country or if the one in Atlanta, Georgia is the oldest one. They were both built the same year and I think it was like a few days apart before they opened and it's been a debate for years, which one was the older. Story_ID: 145830 Speaker 1: Okay so Liberty City [Miami, Florida]-- Speaker 2: But then-- Speaker 1: --well what did Liberty City look like? Speaker 2: Liberty City-- Speaker 1: I mean the projects there. Speaker 2: Well the projects was a good place to live. Remember I told you we used to take the bus from, from Overtown [Miami, Florida] to come to the only park, playground? That was Liberty Square and so we, it had grass. You know, a lot of the, the little shotgun shacks in Overtown didn't have grass or yards, it was dirt, and so when we would ride out there, it was like going to a really nice place and we were so happy when I was, I think I was thirteen when my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] was qualified to move into the project and she fixed that little apartment up like it was a little, like she was getting it ready for Better Homes and Garden. You know, she, she was that way and she liked things pretty. Speaker 1: Okay, so now, now were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: I was average. You know, I loved school. I would go to school sick. I was a good artist back then. I loved music and I loved, I loved being in the choir and I loved to draw and if we were having an assembly, and I could skip assembly to draw, I would do that until my homeroom teacher would send somebody for me. I had to be in the assembly with the rest of the homeroom. Speaker 1: So what did you like to draw? Speaker 2: Everything. I did, I did portraits and I, and it's a funny thing, my momma never saved anything that I drew. She didn't want to encourage me that way. I never understood that until I was a grown, old woman. She did not want to encourage me. She didn't think I would make money being an artist or a singer. I had, I was twenty-eight, I believe, I was twenty, no, I was, it was right before my husband [James Hines] was killed, I think I was about, I was twenty-four when he was killed so it was right after. I was twenty-five when I bought my first sewing machine on time. I'm living with my mom and she's having a fit because I'm wasting my money until she saw the clothes that I was making and then she would make me sit up all night long and sew a dress for her. But she didn't want me to do anything creative because she didn't see where I would make a living at it. So sewing became a very lucrative hobby for me. I've sewn weddings and prom dresses and everything and I took a year off every, I mean a week off every year to make my little girl, my granddaughters, I had four granddaughters, I've made all their little fancy dresses. I did that, and my goddaughters, I have lots of goddaughters. So in a week's time I would have made sometimes eight dresses. Speaker 1: Did, did you learn how to sew in school? Speaker 2: I learned on my own because I loved fashion designing and stuff like that and then, and God has always been so wonderful to me to put me, whereas my mother didn't mentor me in those areas. When we lived in Texas, we moved right across the street from a woman who was an artist. So she taught me how to mix oil paints and how to shadow things and, oh, she was wonderful. Ms. Daisy [ph.] was just my mentor and I couldn't wait to do my chores to get over there, to her house, to, and I could still smell the oil and, you know, the oil painting in her house. She was very creative. And so when we moved back, I didn't have that but I was always a classroom artist, you know. I always would draw the pictures for the seasons on the bulletin board and when I wanted to sew, we lived next door to a woman who had two little girls and she made the most beautiful dresses for her little girls and when she found out that I liked to sew and that I had this, I wanted to do that, she would let me sit at her feet and when we had our seniors in the spotlight at my high school, I made a lot of the costumes that I cut out on paper. I had no pattern and I made them and they were cute. They were really cute. And then I made my dresses for my, like my, I had to have a white dress my senior year. I designed that and made that and then passed it on to my best friend in junior, who's a junior, who loved the dress. And my mother bought me eight yards of organdy, white organdy, and I had the cute little gold skirt and the baby blue sash. It was very pretty and my friend, Jerry [ph.], who became a pharmacist, who died some, very young, she wore it, and also my prom dress. She wore it 'cause she was a year behind me in school. So, I was always, I always was blessed with mentors. And then when I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida], my art teacher knew I loved to draw and he was a great mentor in terms of showing me what to do and how to mix different kinds of, of paints, Mr. Clark, his name wasn't Clark, it was, anyway it'll come back to me, but he was a wonderful teacher. And then I had a wonderful homeroom teacher who encouraged me. Story_ID: 145831 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other mentors in school? Speaker 2: Mirian Chanin [ph.], who was my journalism teacher in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida]. And I just sort of took that because I, it was a creative writing class and Marian always saw that I had some talent but back in that day, you had a lot of girls who were teacher's pets and I wasn't one of 'em, and so when it was time to write an essay for the Zeta Phi Betas, they give a Final Womanhood Award every year, Miriam said, Miriam Chanin said, I want you to write an essay for this contest and I said, why, 'cause they gonna give it to the same girls over and over again? And so I didn't go. I was in the auditorium practicing for the Seasons Spot-Ice. She sent for me and threatened to come up with a belt if I didn't come. So I did go. I didn't want to be embarrassed at that age. So I did, I wrote an essay, and to my surprise I won the award, The Final Womanhood Award. It was a hundred dollar award at that time. Speaker 1: That's a good, that's a week's pay in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 145832 Speaker 1: So, now did you have, what were your thoughts about college? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to college. That's, when I got the scholarship, you know, I was so thankful and I was saving my money and I don't know who talked to my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] and told her that, it was an older woman who, I think, talked to her and told her that she shouldn't let me take the scholarship and so momma being a, you know, she was a relatively young mother and she took that advice and I didn't go. I was so hurt. It took me years to get over that. I had bought my luggage. I worked that summer at Burdines [department store]. I had bought clothes, skirts and sweaters and I was, I was ready to go. I had sent my rooming board deposit and everything. So, but, you know, disappointments, sometimes things happen in your life to make you grow, make you a better person. I never finished college. I've been to college, I've been going to college for a long time but I never finished and I have a lot of life experiences that edged me on and when I got the job at The Miami Herald, that's, I'm going ahead of myself, we'll go back to that later. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, but, all right, at the time though, so you're in a dilemma, you, your mother told you you shouldn't go to school. Speaker 2: She said, she sat me down, she said, "I'm not gonna let you go" and she said, "I won't be able, I'm afraid I won't be able to keep you," that's what she said. But at that time, you could go to college for like forty dollars a month and I had a scholarship but she didn't understand how that worked. The other person who got the scholarship out of my class was a man, a guy named Willie Buoy [ph.], and he took the scholarship and went all over the world singing with the choir. So, I missed that but I still sing. I use my talent. I sing in church, at weddings, at funerals. I just sang Saturday at my friend's funeral. So, it, I don't see it as a talent that went to waste because I've been able to use it to the glory of God. When, when my friend, when [HM] Dorothy Fields' uncle died, we called him Uncle John [ph.], I think Uncle John was 101 or a hundred when he died, and Dorothy asked me to sing at his funeral, and I did my tribute by Andrae Crouch, 'To God Be The Glory,' and there was another, a lot of attorneys, because he was a judge, and H.T. Smith, that's a name you should interview too, he's a black attorney, very prominent, he led the boycott in Miami [Florida] when they snubbed [Nelson] Mandela, but his name is H.T. Smith. I think I have his phone number. I tried, and if I don't I can get it for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But H.T. was in the audience and he said that we were on a program not long ago together. He said, "When I saw, I looked at the program and I saw solo, Bea Hines," he said, "They made a big mistake here, she must be the speaker 'cause she can't sing, she's a writer." He said he was so shocked 'cause nobody knew. Story_ID: 148101 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I forgot to ask you about something before. We had you graduate without, you know, on your way to, you know, almost on your way to college, before I ask you about the Fine Arts Conservatory [Miami, Florida]. Now, there's a story there, isn't there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was, that, Ruth Greenfield is my friend and she started that but, but that was, when she started that, I couldn't go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I, here again, that was not something, you know, my mom [Ida Lawton Johnson] needed me home after school to take care of the house and stuff. So that was something that she wouldn't have, she wouldn't have agreed to my going. Speaker 1: So you wanted to go but you couldn't? Speaker 2: I wanted to go, I wanted to do a lot of things and, and even my mother said I was a dreamer but Ruth Greenfield and I met years later when I was a reporter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I knew who she was because Jimmy Ford [sic, Mary Ford Williams] who was my principal and when I was in, at Douglass Primary School [sic, Liberty City Elementary School, Miami, Florida], she had, my principal had two sons who were, who were both geniuses and Jimmy Ford [James Ford] was really a musical genius, he's still living, and she had me over and had Jimmy over for something, I forgot, we were over for lunch or something and we started, Jimmy started playing around on the piano and I started singing and she was just, I remember we did 'Summertime' and she was just blown away. And so then she started the Lunchtime Lively Arts Series where professional people would come to the Gusman Theater downtown at lunchtime, there was a whole program, and I appeared on that program and, with my god brother who was an excellent musician, Dr. Walter Richardson. He's another one you should interview, Walter T. Richardson. Speaker 1: Gee whiz, this is something, exactly. Speaker 2: He is a, he is the director of the Community Relations Board now and I think he's still on the board of directors for the Miami Dade College [Miami, Florida] and he's a pastor, well he's not a pastor any more, he's a minister. He retired from Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church. He grew that church from just a handful of people to like three thousand people, before he retired. Speaker 1: Gee, okay. So you are-- Speaker 2: He's ten years younger than I am. He's sixty-six. Story_ID: 148102 Speaker 1: So, so what did you do? You couldn't go to college? What did you decide to do? Speaker 2: Well, I was working my first job, I got this job the day after I graduated, the Burdines department store, which was like a good job back then if you didn't go to college. And there I met other women, Lois Forbes [ph.], the late Lois Forbes, who was the valedictorian of her class and she went to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida] every summer. Her husband kept her children while she went to summer school every summer and she went to, they had satellite schools in Miami 'cause she would go every summer for like a week on her vacation or two weeks and she would take classes at FAMU in Tallahassee [Florida]. Speaker 1: So now why couldn't she go to college? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause she was valedictorian of the class. Speaker 2: Because they didn't have any colored colleges around at that time. You either had to go to FAM[U], to Tallahassee or Daytona [Beach, Florida] and a lot of families couldn't afford that. You, when I graduated, the year after I graduated high school, they opened up a, Miami Dade was opened to blacks, Miami Dade Community College [Miami, Florida], but I was already married then. I think it opened the year after I graduated high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida]. And so I was married and my plan was to go back to school. Speaker 1: Now, now, before we get you, you know, that far, okay, so you're working in-- Speaker 2: At Burdines. Speaker 1: Burdines, right, and-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, I'm working at Burdines and I'm writing my friends who had gone away to college that year-- Speaker 1: And, and you're working, you couldn't be a sales or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, I was a maid, I was a maid. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: I was a maid but it was a good job for black people if you didn't go to college. The pay wasn't bad and one of the things I liked about Burdines was that they had a lot of people who were prejudice working there who were just, they really were racist but they couldn't let anybody know it because they would have been fired and that was one of the things that, that was a policy of the store, you couldn't disrespect anybody because of their race. And so although I was a maid and we had separate fitting rooms, we couldn't try on clothes in the big fit, you know, in the white fitting room. We could take 'em to the black fitting rooms and try them on but we were not, they were not allowed to disrespect us openly, you know, but that was just a time, a sign of the times. I remember when Sugar Ray Robinson's wife came to town, the boxer, and she was so pretty and they were too embarrassed to send her to the black fitting rooms so they took her to the bridal salon and she tried on her stuff over in the bridal salon. They were too embarrassed to let her know that we had segregated fitting rooms. I remember that so well and different ones. We would take our little broom and our little dustpan and we would pretend we were working 'cause we wanted to see her and she was so pretty and she was buying underwear that was, the slips would cost like seventy-five dollars back then. You know, silk, beautiful, fine stuff and so, of course, they're going to let her go into the salon, the bridal salon, because she's spending all this money and she was a beautiful woman. I remember so well. I was eighteen. Story_ID: 148103 Speaker 1: So were there lots of celebrities in, in Miami [Florida] in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I remember seeing Nat King Cole on the way home from school one day. He had just had his process done and he was parked in this blue Cadillac in front of Nat's Barbershop, and my friend Ruby [ph.] and I, she said, I said, that's Nat King Cole and she said, no it isn't. And Ruby was so cute and she was fresh. She walked up to him and she said, "Hi, Nat." He said, "Hello young ladies." He was such a gentleman. He was so nice. We were so excited. We just went and sat and talked to him but, of course, we had to leave, our bus was coming. We had to get on the bus but I saw Nat King Cole and then one of the things about living in Overtown [Miami, Florida] and having a principal like Charles L. Williams at Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida], he was a very cultured man. So whenever big celebrities like Lena Horne and, and Nat King Cole and Roy Hamilton, at that time, and they would come-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Roy Hamilton, right. Speaker 2: --to town to perform, they came to Booker T. They--he would always have them come to Booker T. and so we got a chance to see them. We would save our lunch money, which was like thirty-five cents then, and we would go and the money would go to the student council after we, you know, the money that they collected. So we were able, and then they would walk and those children who couldn't go to the, to the show, the celebrities would go around to the, from classroom to classroom and that's how I saw Lena Horne. She did, she wasn't, didn't give a show but she walked around the school and met all the students in all the classrooms. She was so pretty. I remember she was wearing the pageboy with the bangs and about this length and beautiful woman. Her, she had skin about the color of you. She was like, I call it the Georgia pecan (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's not too bad, I guess. So, so they were, so that's good. I mean, so in high school, so celebrities would come-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were exposed to all of that and then the other thing that was good for us is that like, what was, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], incidentally, I was like the last person to talk to him, reporter, before he died, but his wife, Hazel Scott, pianist. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, great pianist, right. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. She came to town and back then they would have a jam session on Sunday afternoons and teenagers could go and they didn't serve any liquor. So we would go to the Mary Elizabeth Hotel for the jam session. So Sunday afternoon like at four o'clock, go to church in the morning, we'd go to the jam sessions in the afternoon. So we saw a lot of people. I saw Hazel Scott. I saw, I believe I saw, I believe it was, I saw, what's this woman, 'What a Difference a Day Makes,' Dinah Washington. Speaker 1: Oh, Dinah Washington, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, oh, who else? So many I can't, I can't think of it. And when the, when the road company for 'Carmen,' [Georges Bizet] the opera came to town-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: --they had a show at Booker T. Washington so that we could see that and I had a classmate who could sing, she had that real high soprano voice and she, she sang that, "dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah," she would sing, I can't remember the name of it but she would sing that and she could have done something with her voice but she didn't go to college. Story_ID: 148104 Speaker 1: So, so anyway, so you're working in the department store [Burdines] now, you met your husband [James Hines]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to school together. Speaker 1: Oh, you went to school together. Speaker 2: In fact, we were, we were children at Ebenezer [United] Methodist Church but we, I always had a crush on him when I was young. He said he always thought I was that little girl so he didn't, he was only three years older but, back then, that was kind of a lot, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: --'cause I was in the ninth grade, he was a senior. He didn't give me, he didn't give me the time of day 'cause I was, I was too young but then, then we started going together when he came home from the service [U.S. Military] and, I think I was a senior or I just got, graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So, is there, so just, is there a story about how you first started going out? Speaker 2: We started, really started being serious about each other at a, at a Valentine's [Day] dance and I loved to dance and he had no rhythm but he thought he could dance. He was a good looking guy and so we just sort of clicked and it was so funny because he liked my sense of humor and he liked the fact that I was creative, but then after we got married, he thought I was a dreamer and that nobody lived that way. I'm thinking, I was confused. Story_ID: 148105 Speaker 1: Yeah, that was interesting. Everybody around you seems to have this notion that you can't have-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --you can't be creative, you know. Speaker 2: I know, but, but it's something about, if you are determined to do something, you will find a way. You'll find a way to do it, you know. I wrote poems and, and when nobody else was around, I would write poems and I would write little stories. In fact, I started writing stories for my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] to keep him quiet when I was a child and he loved my stories, especially ones about bunnies, bunny rabbits. He loved it. He was quiet to hear me tell him. And so when my teacher in the sixth grade learned that I was doing this, she would make me stand up in school and, and tell my stories that I had written, to the classroom. So that got me into the habit of writing. And then my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] would bring books home from the people that she worked for, and when they got through reading these novels and stuff, she would bring them home and my favorite pastimes, especially when it was raining and we couldn't go out to play, I would sit in a quiet spot, sometime it was under the table, you know, because you got the tablecloth and I would read, I would read, and so I said to myself one day, I can do this, I could write a story. I have a story that I'm waiting to have published. It's, it's a story about a woman, it's really about me, and this woman who used to live, she had a little mom and pop store, the house that I grew, that I lived in Overtown [Miami, Florida], next to it was an open lot and then there was this little, this little store and she didn't sell anything but like cookies and bread and stuff like that but she was a fine woman and she dressed beautifully all the time and I wanted, she had come from up North, we don't know where, I heard the white, the old people saying, she came from up North. So whether that was, it could have, must have been New York [New York] 'cause everybody from the North was from New York, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So anyway, she took a liking to me and I couldn't wait to go over there to talk to her and she just started out, was the sweetest thing and she said to me one day, she said, when I'm well, she, I didn't know she was sick, she said we're going to go out to dinner, just the two of us and she died before that happened. And so I pay tribute to her in this little story that I wrote about this little girl who didn't think she was pretty, who was me, and this woman who loved me and thought I was beautiful and wanted to be my mentor and she was in many ways and so I wrote about this, the name of the story is 'The Ugly Feeling' and the ugly feeling was the jealous feeling she felt and didn't understand what, that it was jealous, jealousy, when somebody complimented one of her other little friends who might have been lighter complexion and had curly hair and she doesn't understand why she felt that way and she realized her mother told her one day. I think it was her mother or the lady who told her that it was, it was called jealousy, that feeling. So she called it the ugly feeling, the little girl called it the ugly feeling. So my grand--my daughter-in-law, my son, my youngest son's wife, has done all these beautiful illustrations for the story and so we're now waiting to get it published. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, but she's an artist in her own right, she has had shows in New York [New York] and in [Washington] D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, she's, she's an excellent and accomplished artist and she teaches art in a private school in New York. Story_ID: 148106 Speaker 1: Now just to catch us up on the chronology, you graduated from high school, from Booker T. Washington [High School, Miami, Florida] in '56 [1956]-- Speaker 2: Right, married in '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Married in '57 [1957], okay. Speaker 2: Became a mother in '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Okay, '58 [1958], okay, all right. This is when Fredrick, Junior was born. Speaker 2: My first son was born in--that was James Fredrick [Hines], Junior. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then, and Shawn was born in 1963, '61 [1961], I'm sorry, and my husband [James Hines] was killed in '63 [1963]. I believe it was '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay, and your husband ends up joining the Miami Police Department? Speaker 2: The police, the Miami police department. He dropped out of school at Kentucky State College [later, Kentucky State University, Frankfurt, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so he went away to school after you were married or before? Speaker 2: Yeah, after we were married, he went away to school and I was working. Speaker 1: Now had he served in a-- Speaker 2: That was common. Speaker 1: Had he served in the [U.S.] Army at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was out of the service and that was a common thing. A lot of, a lot of women worked and helped their husbands go to college and get their education and then they, the deal was, he was going to finish college and then he was going to send me to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's, that's what we had planned and then, but he dropped out and then he became a police officer. Story_ID: 148107 Speaker 1: And we were saying before that he [Hines' husband, James Hines], he was abusive-- Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: He was abusive and, you know, it's kind of hard to talk about that because he's not here, you know, to defend himself or anything but, but it wasn't that, I think what happened is, he didn't know that marriage was going to be the responsibility that it was and when there was not enough money, he would kind of get, drink too much beer or whatever he drank at that time, and I could tell the difference in his personality when he walked in the door and then I learned not to say anything but sometimes I didn't have to say anything. And then one Sunday we were talking after, I had made a nice dinner and I said to him, "You know, I don't want us to live like this, you know, fighting all the time. I want us to have a loving relationship and let our children see that this is how you liv"e and he said to me that I read too much and nobody lives like that, I'm living in a dream world and then he said this of which I said to my mother-in-law later and she was shocked, he said, and "My mother has taken it for twenty-five years and you're no better." And what he was, and what he meant was, that's when I found out his daddy had been abusive to his mother and when I said that to her when I told her what he said, she said, "I don't know how he would think that." I said, "Because you," he was dead by this time, I said, "Because you stayed there and had thirteen children and he just thought that's what you wanted. So he, that's how, what he thought, that's what he thought was the way you treated your wife. So, and I didn't want to live like that. Speaker 1: So, so you split up? Speaker 2: We split up and then we went back together and then when he was killed, we had, we were split at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was back and forth your relationship? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was back and forth. It was only five years that we were married but in that time we'd been split up like two or three times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I kept thinking it's going to be better, you know, he's gonna, he's learned his lesson and, and my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] and his mother said, "Well you know, he, you all are young and he's got to learn" but I didn't want him to learn on me, you know. And then one time, my mother told him, she said, "You're gonna hit my child, an unlucky lick, and it'll be too late" and I'm thinking to myself, all of 'em are unlucky. Every lick is an unlucky lick but she was so hurt that he would, he would do that to me and she told him, she said, "You're hittin' her like that, you're gonna, it'll be an unlucky lick one day." What she meant was, he could hit me and kill me, you know. And he would always be so sorry after he had done that. Speaker 1: Did he drink or something? Speaker 2: He, drinking, he could not drink and that's what it was. We had a fine time when he wasn't drinking. It was only when he was drinking that his, it changed his whole personality. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We got along well and we laughed and joked and had a good time but then he'd take one beer and that was enough to set him off, you know. It would just change his personality. Speaker 1: It's a common story, unfortunately. Speaker 2: It is. I learned that it's common. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't know then that it was. Speaker 1: So, so one Friday you were at church and he's actually killed in a bar fight, right? Speaker 2: Uh-hum, and I would always say a prayer. Whenever I would hear the siren, I didn't know it didn't have to be him or whatever. I would always say, Lord, wherever Jimmy is, please protect him, and I said that prayer in church. And he got killed on November 30th, and on November 1st, another cop got killed right in front of our church. And I remember my pastor just praying over him to, you know, asking God to spare his life. And so when we went back to church, I think it was that Sunday, I got up in church and I asked the church to please pray a special prayer for my husband 'cause I felt he was going to be next. And after it happened, one of the sisters, the older sister in the church, came and she said, "Did you know you prophesied your husband's death." I said, "How did I do that?" She said, "Remember when you stood up and asked the church to pray for him because you thought he was going to be next?" Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: And then it hit me, but I had no idea, I just worried about him, you know. I didn't want anything to happen to him and so he was next but he wasn't on duty. He just got in a fight in a bar. It was, he was supposed to be back at work that night but he had called in sick and that's what happened. I just feel like if he had gone to work like he was supposed to, he probably would still be alive, but it was just, just the way he was supposed to go, I guess. Story_ID: 148108 Speaker 1: So, here you are, now you're, you're married, you got two children-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and your husband's [James Hines] gone, I mean, did you, I mean, did you-- Speaker 2: I never felt sorry for myself but I did wallow a little bit, you know. I just kind of wanted to mourn, you know-- Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: --and my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] wouldn't let me. She kept saying, "Do something with your life, do something, you know. I, you're a maid now, but I didn't, I didn't raise you to be a maid." And so I didn't know what to do and then one of my friends was signing, she had registered at Miami Dade Community College [Miami, Florida]. She said, "Why don't you come, go with me, and we'll take some classes together." So I talked to my mother and she said she would keep the children at night and that's how I got into Miami Dade. And then there was a man who was the Vice President of Development for Miami Dade. He was also the book editor for The Miami Herald, his name was Fred Shaw. And I would, Fred and I became friends because my, my supervisor in the library, where I was working as a clerk, would allow me to arrange my working hours around whatever schedule I could get at the college and so I, that meant I worked many nights because I was going to school in the day and Fred said to me one time, I would ask him to read my papers for me before I turned them in and he said, "What are you studying?" I said, "I'm studying to be a teacher." He said, "You should change your major to journalism 'cause you can write," and I laughed at him. I just laughed and he said, "I'm serious, Bea," he said. I said, "Well Fred, they are not going to, I call him Mr. Shaw, Mr. Shaw they're not going to hire me, I'm black," like he couldn't see. He said, "Yes, but they're going to have to change. Things are going to change and you need to be ready." So I took his advice. Story_ID: 148109 Speaker 1: I took his advice (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Did it look like things were changing then? This is 1960, what? Speaker 1: This was 1967-- Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]-- Speaker 1: --because he told me to change. Speaker 2: Okay, now this is after the March on Washington [1963]? Speaker 1: Yes, but it wasn't-- Speaker 2: It was after Freedom Summer [1964]. Speaker 1: But it wasn't much of a change. Speaker 2: It's about, and I know Florida from what I read, Florida was rough. Speaker 1: We were, we were locked up. I mean when we started rioting in Miami [Florida], all the people in the rest of the world had stopped. We were late. Everybody else was going on about their business and we were just getting, you know, we were just beginning to riot, you know. Speaker 2: It's not the 1980 riot? Speaker 1: No, this was the 1968 we had the first riot in Miami. Speaker 2: Okay, '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: By that time, we had one black reporter, he, Thirlee, my friend Thirlee Smith, he was the first black reporter. We had a, a young man who worked at the University of Miami [Miami, Florida], he was a student, he was, University of Miami, and he was a stringer for the sports department but he wasn't full-time, Thirlee was the first full-time black reporter. Speaker 2: He, he was hired after the riots of '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: He was hired before the riots. Speaker 2: Before the riots, okay. Speaker 1: Just, months before the riot of '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Okay, but it was in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but that, that winter, I guess, before. Speaker 1: And we were so happy to see each other and when he found out I was in the library and poor Thirlee just couldn't take the racism in the City Room. He would come back and cry on my shoulders all the time and I said Thirlee, hang in there because you're the first one that, if you go we won't have any black reporters and finally he couldn't take it and Thirlee was a teacher at heart. Speaker 2: Yeah, what did they do to him? Speaker 1: Well, they just did all kind of evil things like they did for me when I became a reporter. You know, they knew me. I had been there for four, four years and all the reporters and the, and the editors and all knew me but when I became a reporter and I'm black-- Speaker 2: So what did you do--(simultaneous) Story_ID: 148110 Speaker 1: --I'm black--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So what did you do before you were-- Speaker 1: I was a clerk in the library in the morgue. Speaker 2: Okay, so, all right, now-- Speaker 1: I was a file clerk. Speaker 2: --let's kind of go back and just recap this now. You were, you were in Dade, in college [Miami Dade Community College, Miami, Florida], right? Speaker 1: Not then. Let me, let's back up some. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right, right. Speaker 1: When, when I got the job at The Miami Herald, I was a maid. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I was working as a maid and the people that I was working for, what really made me think I really need to do something with my life, the family that I was working for, they went on, they went to Europe that year for four month, four weeks, and they left me stranded. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I had no income because I was a day worker. I worked for them four days a week and I had-- Speaker 2: Okay, so you worked for them and then you worked for The Miami Herald? Speaker 1: Not then. Speaker 2: Not then, okay. Speaker 1: I was working as, strictly as a maid-- Speaker 2: For this family, okay. Speaker 1: --solely as a maid, and I had worked for this family-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --for four days and then I had another family I worked for on Mondays. So I had five days of work but then the four days was where I got the bulk of my income. So when they left and went away, I didn't have work and I said that when they come back, I'm going to have another job but, of course, it wasn't that easy and so I had to go back to work for them but what I did, and they didn't know why I was doing it, it is hard to look for a job on the weekend. So I asked her if I could work on Saturday and have a day off in the middle of the week, like Wednesday. Well she thought it was because Rick [Hines' son, James Frederick Hines, Jr.], Rick had started school. I think he was in the kindergarten at the time. She thought it was because I wanted to be active in his school and I didn't, I didn't tell her any differently. And she was happy because then she had a clean house for the weekend, you know. I would be there, do everything, and it was shiny and all. And so I would, I would go on, I would take my children to school and then I would go, by now Ricky's in the first grade, and I would circle all the ads in the paper that said we are an equal opportunity employer. I would do that on Sunday after church and then some of them would have phone numbers, in fact, most of them, and I would call them and some of them would just have an address, you had to come in. And, of course, once they saw I was black, the job was just taken or if I said it on the phone, oh, that job was, as of right now, that job has been filled. So when I saw the ad for The Miami Herald, they didn't have a phone number, they had a post office box number, you had to write, and I think they wanted to know if you could write or read or whatever. So I wrote a letter of application. Thank God for Jane Lewis [ph.], my eighth grade business teacher, she taught us how to file income tax, write your own letters and your application, write a resume, I knew all of that from the eighth grade. So I sat down, I didn't have a typewriter and I put a piece of lined paper underneath a plain sheet of paper and I wrote, and I have a nice handwriting so I wrote a, I took my time and wrote a nice letter of application, I'm applying. I think I still have a copy of that letter somewhere. I'm applying for the job that you advertised in the paper on Sunday and I had on my resume I could type forty words a minute from my business class from nine years ago when I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida], hadn't typed since then, and all, you know, my marital status and my family and everything and I think it impressed them that, first of all, I could write a letter of application and secondly, I knew what a resume was. And to my surprise, they called and asked me to come by for an interview on my next day off. So the next week I went in and they were so nice to me and then they tested me all day long, all day long. I went through all kind of tests. So when I was done, they told me, they called, they would call me and then the next evening I came in from work, from school, I had been to school that day, I came in and the phone rang and it was The Miami Herald calling me to tell me that I had the job and I was going, I could start like the next Monday. So I, this was in December, just before Christmas, so I said, well, I'd like to give the people that I work for a, a notice, can I start the first in Jan--week in January and so they said okay. So I started my job the first week in January as a file clerk at The Miami Herald, 1966, first Monday. Story_ID: 148111 Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at The Miami Herald, this is 1967? Speaker 2: Six--I started in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay. Speaker 2: I got the job in '65 [1965] but I asked them to let me give the people I worked for, two weeks' notice. Speaker 1: Now the people you worked for are significant, right? Are these the ones that-- Speaker 2: They live here now. Speaker 1: Yeah, are they the-- Speaker 2: They're, they're still, the woman is still alive. Speaker 1: Okay, but is this the people you were showing me the picture? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: This was another family. Speaker 1: All right, well let's forget that. Speaker 2: But this, the woman that I was working for used to say, "Maids are a dime a dozen" and she was really cruel. And so when she left, and left me, you know, stranded for four weeks, so when I got the job I didn't really, I didn't have to give her a two weeks notice but I wanted to do the right thing. And so, when I called, went in that morning and I called and I told her I wanted to talk to her, she thought I wanted a raise, I was going to ask for a raise. "What do you want? What do you want?" And I said, "Well I just want to tell you I'm giving you two weeks notice," and she flopped down in the nearest chair. She was so shocked because she had been saying, I can't tell you how many times she said that to me, "maids are a dime a dozen." And so, and back then probably they were because there were not too many openings in other professions for black women. So, so then she, she had tears in her eyes when I told her that I was leaving 'cause I trained her baby, the baby boy was, I diaper trained, potty trained him. He wouldn't eat for anybody but me. I, I fed, and they were Jewish people and I didn't know at that time that Jews didn't eat bacon (laughter). I would fix, I would fry bacon and crumble it up and eggs and that baby would smack his little lips, he loved it. She said, "He's eating, what are you feeding him?" I said, "Bacon and eggs and grits, what I feed my children." And she said, "Oh," and she just walked away. But he was eating and he was growing and she never cuddled him when I was there. I would get there in the morning and I would wake him and I would bathe him and I would cuddle him and play with him and then I'd say, well I'd hear her coming down the hall, I said, "Uh, oh, here comes, here comes mommy," "uh, oh, here comes mommy." And I think he thought her name was "Uh, oh." So when he started talking, he says, "Bea," he would hear her coming, he says, "Here comes Oh" (laughter) and she thought it was funny and I thought it was so sad that this baby didn't know that that was his mommy. I thought he wanted to, I think he wanted to call me mommy but he could see there was a difference but I was the one who loved him. I gave him the love and affection. And then he had two older siblings and the little girl was kind of mean, like her mother. And I was giving her a bath one day and she was about five years old at the time and she, I was trying to say sweet things to her so, can bring her out of that little mood she was in. I said, "You're such a pretty little girl and you got beautiful hair," and she says, "And you're ugly and you have ugly hair and I, and you're black," and I said, "Okay." And she had a birthmark on her tummy, about this size, and it was about this color. I said, "Oh, my goodness." She said, "What?" I said, "That thing is getting bigger. You may be, after a while if it keeps growing, you're going to be my color." And she told her mommy and her mother told her, she says, "And mommy said I'm going to have plastic surgery and they're going to take this away," and I said, "But it's a birthmark and it can come back." I was hoping her mother would say, would confront me but she never did 'cause I wanted to say, why would you do that to your child? Why would you teach them ugly things about black people, you know. So one day when the, remember when they had the, there was a picture on all the papers in the country of this little black girl and a little white girl, the school had been integrated, and the little black girl was crying and the little white girl had her arm around her. They had it on the front page of, I think of every picture in the, paper in the country. And I was reading the paper at the counter that day and there was a woman who lived in, she was black and we were talking and I said, "Oh, look at this." I said, "If they would leave the children alone, they would get this thing straight," you know, busing and integration and all that. I said, "Children will get this, they will get this right," and I said, "They wouldn't be prejudiced." And so the little girl was listening, she said, "Bea, and what is that? What does prejudice mean?" And I said, "Well that's when you don't like somebody because of their color or their whatever, maybe their age or whatever." And she said, "Well mommy teaches that to me." And I looked at Liz [ph.] and she looked at me and I said, before this baby," 'cause the baby was about a year old and I said, before he can get up, grow up and call me a nigger, I'm out of here, I said, 'cause I don't, I could take it from her 'cause I wasn't there when she was a baby but he was my baby and I said, I can't do this. I can't be here and let him call me a nigger. And I started really looking for a job then and that's when I got the job at The Miami Herald-- Story_ID: 148112 Speaker 1: So you were a file clerk, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was a file clerk. That's when it happened. Speaker 1: Were there any other black file clerks there? Speaker 2: No, and that was so funny. I was the first black person in a white collar position at The [Miami] Herald 'cause the other people who, blacks who worked there, they, they were either the domestic worker, who cleaned the buildings, building, or the press--the guys who worked in the pressroom, mixing the ink. I was, I was the first, and the black guys were so proud of me. They were so happy to see me there they didn't know what to do. They would, I mean they were so protective of me. They were just proud of me. And the first time I went to the cafeteria to eat, because we had our own cafeteria in the building, I had been bringing my lunch 'cause I didn't want to eat alone and the guys in the pressroom, they would take their lunch, they would buy their lunch because their uniforms were dirty, they would go back to their locker rooms and eat. And so I was, at that time, they had a, they rented out the top floor, the sixth floor, to the Social Security Administration [SSA], and there was a black woman who worked there and sometime we would eat together but the first day I went into the cafeteria by myself, there was a Cuban man behind the, the steam table, and he could barely speak English and he said to me, "You work here?" He was so surprised that they had hired a black person, a woman, you know, in nice clothes, and I said, "Yes, I do." And he smiled, he was happy for me. And then, when I went to sit down, everybody stopped eating, all the people in the cafeteria, it was all white, and they stopped eating, and they were all looking at me. So I sat down and I bowed my head and I said my grace and I kept my head down there for a couple of minutes after I said my grace, I just wanted to see what they were, you know I just wanted to see what their reaction would be. So when I looked up, they were all looking at me and I'm thinking, and I said, they must be thinking I have prays, some prayers for them, you know. It was so funny and I ate my food but then I didn't go in the cafeteria too much that time. I would like to go and meditate on my lunch hour because we had the, we were right on the [Biscayne] Bay and it was beautiful and I would go and sit on the Bay and meditate and thank God, you know, for what he had done for me. And then I had a little woman in the library who worked with me, her name was Hazel Ashmore, she was from Alabama and she was the sweetest thing and she wanted to befriend me so she says, "We're going to lunch together today and you're going to sit at our table." And so when I went there, all the other ladies got up and left. They were all white, just left me and Hazel there and she was so embarrassed and it didn't bother me because I understood what it was all about, you know. So they finally caught on to me, you know. I would see 'em on the streets. Sometime I would walk over to Jordan Marsh [&Company] on my lunch hour and they wouldn't speak to me outside the building but they would speak to me once we were in the building. Story_ID: 148113 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's, that's the way it was. That was the way of life, you know. So I understood. I always, I used to tell the editors, I'm so glad I was a maid before I came here because, you know, I don't believe in myths that you have about us 'cause I know better and I, and then besides, I know how dirty you are 'cause I used to wash your clothes (laughter), and I did. I ironed the shirts and I washed the clothes and the linens, so I knew that, you know, it wasn't like everybody was saying, you know, that you may be white but you're not, you're not that clean, you know, not everybody's that clean because I knew. I had worked in many homes and I knew how clean people were and there were, and I'm not saying everybody was dirty, but some people were really clean and some people were really dirty. And then I worked for a woman on that Monday, the Monday work, she was, she was from Mississippi and she was as sweet as she could be. She was a Christian woman and gave part of her tithing into my church but she liked me because I'm just a girl and you want me the, she wanted me to stay in my place. So in the mornings when I came to work for her, she was an executive secretary and she would tell me, clean the bathroom last, Beatrice, that's what she called me. And I knew why she wanted me to do that 'cause she didn't want to use it after me. So when she went to work, I cleaned the bathroom first 'cause I didn't want to use it after her, okay. And then she would give me, she put out a, a dish and a cup and a glass that was cracked and chipped and all and the tarnished silverware and that was what I was supposed to eat my lunch off and then I would use her nice stuff, you know. I'm somebody, you can't do that, you know. And when I, she recognized herself when I became a columnist, the managing editor wrote this column about me and how I'd come up through the ranks and everything and after then she called me and she wanted me and my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] to come to lunch at her house in Coral Gables [Florida] and I would have come but momma had, was working on Saturdays and it was hard to get time off and I was real, that's one regret that I have that I didn't allow her the opportunity to say I'm sorry because that's what she wanted to do. She was very sorry for the way she had treated me and she wanted to let me know and my mother. And I, I didn't know, I liked her because I, I understood that was the way she was brought up. So I, I understood that and so I could deal with it, you know. She liked me as much as she could and she was really, she thought she was a real Christian because she sent part of her tithing into my church every month and I appreciate that. And when my husband [James Hines] was killed, she told me that, not to, he was killed on a Friday and when I called her to tell her, she said, "Don't bother about trying to come into work." She said, "I'm gonna send your money special delivery" and she sent me more than, she paid me more than the other woman paid me anyway but then she sent me enough to buy my outfit for the funeral and everything. She was very kind, you know. So she didn't know she was a racist. Speaker 1: Different dynamics in different situations. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 148114 Speaker 1: So now, tell us about your path to becoming a writer. Now you're in the file-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm in the file clerk and I'm studying to become a teacher and Fred Shaw says to me I should change my major to journalism and I laughed and said "They aren't going to hire me 'cause I'm black" and he said, "But you got to be ready 'cause things are gonna change." And so I, I did what he said to do. I changed my major and he told me what teacher to look for and to get in her class, her name was Barbara Garfunkel, who died about five years ago and she was ninety-something. I went to her funeral. And I didn't know it but after I was in there for about a semester in her class, she wrote a letter to the managing editor, who was Larry Jinks at the time, and told him that she had this mature woman in her class who had two children and who could write and that he should give me an opportunity. Well, for, Larry never said anything to me and I didn't know that she had written a letter until after I had become a reporter but then she told me to join The Falcon Times [later, The Reporter] which was a, the school newspaper and so I did and I went on my first, the first interview I did was with a new cafeteria manager. I was so nervous and so it ran on the front page of The Falcon Times and then all of my stories that I would write for the paper, I would bring them back and I had made friends with a woman by the name of Juanita Greene who was the environmental writer and the woman who was the assistant editor in the women's department was my age and she was just a, we became friends. So when I would write stories and they would appear in the paper, I would show them to them, I would share them with them. Story_ID: 148115 Speaker 1: One day Juanita [Greene] came and she said, "Bea, do you have any of your stories from The [Falcon] Times with you today?" And I told her, I could bring one tomorrow and she said, "Well bring me some tomorrow." And to my surprise, I didn't know this till much later, she and Helen Coram, who is now dead, Juanita's about eighty-nine now, and she lives up in, near Tallahassee [Florida], but Helen, Juanita and Helen went to Larry [Jinks] and showed him my articles and told him that, you know, you say you're looking for a black reporter, you got Bea right here in the library, why don't you hire her? And so he did on a three months trial basis but the funny thing about it, Larry, is that everybody in the building knew that I was going to be the next writer, black writer there but me 'cause Thirlee [Smith] had left by now. And Hazel [Ashmore], my friend called me on my day off, which was Monday, and she was livid because I hadn't shared this wonderful news with her and she was my best friend. And I said, "What are you talking about?" She said, "Why didn't you tell me that you'd been promoted to a reporter?" And I said, "But that's not true, Hazel, I haven't been promoted. I'm still going to school." She said, "Oh, no, it's all over the fifth floor and it's all over the building and everybody knows that you're gonna be a reporter." So I said, "Well let me call Louie [ph.]," he was our supervisor, I said, "Let me call him because I don't want him to think that I've been going over his head looking for a job without consulting him first." And so I called Louie and he said, "Oh, no, Bea, it's true." He said that Larry called me on Friday and wanted to know all about you. I said, "What?" He said, "Yeah," he says, "Eemember when I came back to the desk," 'cause we shared, his desk was in front of mine, he said, "Remember I said, oh, boy, more problems." He said, "I was depressed because now they're taking my best worker out of the library." I couldn't sleep that night. I was so excited. So I told my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] and the woman next door was a missionary at our church and I told her, I said, "Please pray for me 'cause I've got to meet with the managing editor and I don't know, they said I'm gonna be a reporter," and she did. So the next day I went and I met with Larry and, pardon me, and he said, "I understand you can write and we'd like to give you an opportunity but you understand that it's just gonna be on a three months trial basis and if it doesn't work out, you go back to the library." And I said, "Okay, that's fair enough." And he said, "We'll just give you a ten dollar raise." I was making $110 a week by then, which was a good salary, and he said, and I'm saying to myself, I'd take this for nothing, you know, because I didn't know he was going to give me a raise. So that raised my salary to 120. Okay, I start, he said, "you're gonna start," this was the first of June, he said, "We want you to start in two weeks." I guess he had to give the, the editors the notice and everything and so I asked him I said, well I was off on Mondays, I said, "Could I start on Tuesday," which would have been June the 16th, "because I'd like to have a day during the week to go to the schools to see about my children." Story_ID: 148116 Speaker 1: He said, "That would be fine, keep the same day off," and don't you know, Larry [Crowe], the riot of '68 [1968], I mean '70 [1970], 1970 riot started the night before I went to work on, my first day on the job, my first assignment, was to cover the riot. So people say I started the riot so I could have something to write about but that's not true (laughter). I didn't even know the riot was going on until I got to work the next morning and Larry [Jinks] met me in the City Room, he says, he said, "Bea," he said, "do you know about the riot in Liberty City [Miami, Florida]?" I said, "No," I live there, I didn't hear about any riot but we didn't have the TV on, we didn't have a TV, and we didn't have the radio on, so I didn't know. He said, "Yeah, it started last night." He said, "Would you, you afraid to go out there?" I said, "No." I'm saying to myself, is Br'er Rabbit scared of the briar patch 'cause that's where I live. And so I went to cover the riot with no credentials, I didn't have a press card or anything and I had to go up to all the police officers and tell them that I was from The Miami Herald and this, and write Larry's number down in case they needed to call him to verify my being on the street. And here I am in my bright yellow Sunday school teacher's dress and my white high heel shoes and I don't look like I'm covering a riot, I look like I'm going to church, and it's hot and I'm wearing polyester, Polly and her sister Esther (laughter), it was steaming hot. But my first story, I passed a pool hall and I heard a guy saying, "Man, this riot is hurting my business" and I backed up and I said, "What is your business?" He was standing in the door and he said, "I'm a hustler." I said, "What's your name?" He said, "Iceberg Slim [ph.]" and I wrote the story about Iceberg Slim and the business, the riot was hurting his business and they put it on the front page of the paper the next day and so with my first story went on the front page of The Miami Herald and I remember Larry saying it was a bright spot in a dismal time and it was a funny story and he said we needed something like that because everything else was so serious. Story_ID: 148117 Speaker 1: Now what was the cause of the '70 [1970] riot? Speaker 2: There was a woman named Gladys Taylor who was trying, she had to cash her welfare check at a, at a local supermarket on, it was on 27th Avenue and 54th Street and they wanted to charge her a lot of money to cash her welfare check. I can't remember for how much and she got in an argument with the guy who owned the store and some black guys heard it and they jumped in and they, and they started to fight and from then on they, you know, they started tearing up things and, Georgia Jones-Ayres, she was Georgia Jones at the time, was a community activist and somebody called her and she came up there and was trying to calm everybody down and I think in the, in doing so, her arm got bro--I think the cops broke her arm but they didn't mean to when they were trying to, they thought she was part of the riot. But anyway, Georgia went on to found the Alternative Program for first-time offenders and she and I still are great friends. She's going to be eighty, she's going to be eighty-seven in October and so we, that was the riot, just escalated from that, you know, the people, other people were tired of the high cost of cashing your check. You know, it was in a black community so they were charging women a lot of money to cash a welfare check and they had a lot of children to take care. You go into the store all the time, why would you charge that much money? And these were two white brothers. I believe they were brothers who owned that store, A and G Supermarket, I believe it was called, but they, they literally burned the supermarket down. So now there's a bank there and it's a little strip shopping mall there. The Bank of America is there where the A and G Supermarket used to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's, that's how that riot started. It went on for about two weeks. Speaker 1: Two weeks! Speaker 2: Well, it had been on for about a week and then like the second week they were calming down and they were having meetings. The black community was having meetings about what to do and they would send me to the meeting, they didn't want any media there but because I was black and nobody knew that I was a reporter, I was able to get in. But the same Gladys Taylor was not a dumb woman. She would wear these outlandish, awful looking wigs and she'd talk like this but she was very intelligent and she kept noticing me. One story I wrote, I remember hearing when I went to the meeting the next day, I didn't, they didn't have a byline on it because they didn't want nobody to, not that they would know my name, but they didn't put a byline on it and I heard one of the guys saying to another fella, "Man, we got a spy in here because, did you see that paper in the story this morning? It was word-for-word," and I had memorized everything and dictated it to the person who, the copy guy on the desk, and he, he wrote it and I didn't want my name on it anyway and they didn't put it on there. And so I was so happy to hear that. I thought, oh, boy, that meant that I was accurate, you know, and I wanted to say, hey, I did that but I didn't. But Gladys Taylor kept looking at me and she knew I wasn't from the streets so she kept saying, "What agency you from?" And I said, I'm not from an agency. And then she'd ask me, "Well where you come from, you know, every day," and finally I told her I was a reporter." "I thought you was with them, the establishment". Well we later became friends. We later became friends but she was the one who blew my cover. Speaker 1: So in that situation it was better to not to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it got, but then after about the second week of covering the riot, Larry [Jinks] met me in the City Room and said one morning, he said, Bea, if you want the job, it's yours, forget the three months trial period and that's because I had been doing such, you know, good work for the riot, covering the riot, and so, you know, a lot of black people became writers because of the riots in their cities but I didn't, I had gotten the job before the riot. Speaker 1: Right, and we've interviewed quite a few that-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --one was a police officer [HM Joseph Boyce]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --during the riot-- Speaker 2: During the riot. Speaker 1: --that was brought in to become a reporter. Speaker 2: That's right, that happened a lot, lot of papers. Speaker 1: And lots, of-- Speaker 2: But mine was different. I was, I was a repor- I had been hired before the riot. Story_ID: 148118 Speaker 1: So, so now did you, were you basically a general assignment reporter? Speaker 2: I was. I was a general assignment reporter for a while and then the guys would send me on a wild goose chases. One time they sent me to the dump, the county dump, and again I went, Polly and her sister, Esther, and it's hot and I have no air conditioning in the car and my tires were slick and that, now they have grass, they look like little hills, mountains, you know, but back then it was just a mound of gray, black dirt with the buzzards flying overhead and everything. And I said, "Oh my goodness, they sent me to this place." This is not an address, this is the dump, and so I said, "Okay, now what am I gonna do Lord?" So I decided to go up the road where the dump trucks would go to dump their stuff and then I was praying that my tire, I wouldn't sink down in the, and they would never find me because I thought it was, it wasn't that packed, you know. So I came on back down and I was really upset because, you know, I'm, now I've got two children. Ricky [James Frederick Hines, Jr.] is already twelve years old. I've got two sons to support. I don't want them playing games with me but they didn't know what to do with me. I'm black and I'm green and I'm a woman, okay. So they don't know what to do with me. So they would send me out just to get me out of the office. So I could have come back mad and fightin' and everything, but I didn't. I came back, I got me a gospel song in that car and I sang it all the way back downtown. So by the time I got in the building, I was feeling okay. So I came up to the desk, I said, "You know, somebody made a mistake on this assignment. Did you know that's the county dump?" They couldn't look at me. They could not look at me. Story_ID: 148119 Speaker 1: And then there was one guy named Ben Burns who was so kind, he was 6'9. We used to call him Gentle Ben and he would, he saw that I could write and he would send me on sensitive stories. I remember one of the stories he sent me on was a, a young, a child who was, who was five years old, had this strange brain disease that was, had rendered him helpless. He was, he was gonna die. It started when he would bump into things, you know, and so they were coming to take him away from home that morning. It happened to be the day that school started. And so my lead was that, you know, while his little friends were having their first day of school, he was leaving home to die. And, of course, I was crying while I was doing the story and I didn't want the TV people to see me 'cause I thought they would call The [Miami] Herald and say, you know, you got this softie out here, she'll never make it. So I thought I would beat them to the task and I would tell Ben when I got back to the paper. I said, "Ben, I'm sorry but I had to shed a few tears." He said, "That's what makes you the writer that you are, the sensitive writer that you are 'cause you have feelings." So it never bothered me anymore. If I went to do a story and the people were crying, it was sad, we'd cry together, you know, and then I'd do my story. And I did a story on the Reynolds. I think they were in the aluminum foil business and all, the aluminum business. Speaker 2: Yeah, Reynolds [Consumer Products]. Speaker 1: They were Russells [ph.] but they were in the Reynolds, the business. Speaker 2: Russells, okay. Speaker 1: Their daughter died in the 1972 plane crash in the Everglades, their only child and in honor of her, in her honor, they donated, I think it was a quarter of a million dollars to start the Michael-Ann Russell Jewish Center in North Miami Beach [Florida]. So I had an editor who did not like me and she tried so hard to fire me so many times but she wanted an interview with the Russells and they said they would only let me interview them. So she played around for the longest and then she decided that I would go and she thought I knew them. I never had met them before and they had read my articles and they liked the touch that I had and that I was sensitive. And so I got, we sat and cried together when they talked about their daughter and I got a really good story out of them and then it ran the front, it was the Living section at that time, the Living Today section, the feature section, and it ran on the front page, the bottom, and jumped on the inside but that was, it helps to be sensitive, I think, but people used to say to me, have you ever had any problem because we had a lot of Hispanic people coming over at that time, you know, when I was a, my early days. And, but I never had a problem, even with people who didn't speak the language. For some way, reason, we communicated. We were able to communicate, and I don't speak Spanish. I understand a few words but I, I never had a problem and I never had a problem with people not wanting to talk to me because I'm black. Story_ID: 148120 Speaker 1: Now, all right, so, you're writing your column, this is in nineteen, you're in the '70s [1970s] here, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], and I'm, I, oh, they, I started as general assignment, general assignment reporter, and then Larry [Jinks] decided that because of my sensitivity, that I should cover the schools. And we had two school writers, Heath Meriwether did the business side and I did the feature stuff and I went out to a school every day and I would find stories. I would tell parents what their children were learning and how they were being taught and if I saw a picture I would call the photographer in and he would send, you know, a photographer out to get a picture and on the first day of school I remember I was in this third grade class, which I followed for the whole year, and this little boy was, I noticed him doing like this with his hand and I looked around, there was a puppy. He was a stray, had come in off the street. So I went to the office and I called the paper [The Miami Herald] and I said, "You need to come here before this puppy leaves" and it's the cutest picture and they got a beautiful picture of this little boy trying to look serious while he's playing with the dog, and then they took the puppy out but they let him stay in until the photographer got there and took his picture, John Panae [ph.], I think, was the photographer. And I used to get some good photo assignments because I would, you know, I, I have a, you know, a sensitive touch and I could see things that maybe somebody else would probably overlook. Somebody else would probably just ran the dog out but I thought this would be a good picture. So I followed that class the whole year. I went every day, like I was a teacher and one day I became a substitute teacher, for a day. Man, I was hoarse when I left that day. They treated me differently. Before I was Ms. Hines from The Miami Herald and all of a sudden I'm a teacher now. Boy, they were terrible. It was so awful. It was so funny. We had a good time, though, and I got pictures somewhere of me on the playground with them. You wouldn't know it was me 'cause I was like this. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was real thin and-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: West Little River Elementary [later Dr. Henry W. Mack/West Little River K-8 Center, Miami, Florida], West Little River Elementary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the teacher of that class, her name was, her last name was Semon [ph.], I don't remember her first name. She was a young teacher. I think that was like her only, her second year as a teacher. She was so cute and she was so nice. She was a little Jewish girl, really nice. Story_ID: 148121 Speaker 1: So after I, after I covered school, oh I got the School Bell Award. That was my first award and they, I had, I was covering the convention and then they called me up for, they have an awards program, they called my name. I was so shocked and they put a little story in the paper the next day, the Sunday paper, 'cause it was a Saturday, and I came back to the paper and I said, "Look what I got." And they were so impressed and they put my picture in the paper the next day and a, and a little story that I got this award. It was my very first award doing anything for the Miami Herald. Story_ID: 148122 Speaker 1: Now, nineteen, end of the '80s [1980s], well 1980 is the big [Arthur Lee] McDuffie riot in Liberty City [Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a sad time for us. Speaker 1: Yeah, so were you involved in covering that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I went out on the street. Mainly what I did was I, I would give my stuff to somebody else. They had people who were writing on the desk and you know we had a lot of people covering and we would just feed information to them. So I don't know if I had a byline, so I might have had one byline story but most of the time I was feeding stuff to the, to the reporters who were really sent out to cover it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was on the street. Speaker 1: All right, so it must have been a terrible time, you know-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a sad, sad situation, a very sad situation. People were, people, we thought we had moved beyond that rioting. Speaker 1: Now McDuffie, from what I understand, he was on a motorcycle? Speaker 2: He was on a motorcycle-- Speaker 1: And, what happened? Speaker 2: --and people who live over there, near that, say you could hear his bones cracking when they were hitting him with those sticks. It was so horrible. Speaker 1: So this is pre-Rodney King [1992] but without the video? Speaker 2: Without, that's right. Speaker 1: But with the description and so it was-- Speaker 2: It was so sad. And then after that, they shot two guys on a motor, on motorcycle, on a motorcycle. Story_ID: 148123 Speaker 1: Out, by that time, I was not writing the column anymore and if you don't mind I wouldn't like to get into that because it was so terrible and I wouldn't want, I don't want, I don't want the paper [The Miami Herald]--I've had a good career at the paper and when you put somebody up as a, as an editor or whatever, you kind of got to stand behind their decisions. This is the woman who didn't like me who was trying her best to fire me. I was invited by the United Nations to go to Africa one year and she wouldn't allow it. Everybody, all the editors were saying, you know, this would be good for the community, this is good for the paper, you need to let her go, and she wouldn't sign off on it. And her reasoning was that I may have to interview somebody from the Miami, from the United Nations one day and it would be a conflict of interest. And I was so despondent over that but I said, I'm not going to let her see how this hurts me. So the day that I had to call the United Nations to let them know that I wouldn't, not to send the ticket, I'm not going to be able to go, they were disappointed and she walked from her office, about three or four times that day and she would stand where she could look at me. She wanted to see if I was crying and I would look up and I'd say, "Hey" because I wouldn't let her know how much that hurt me. Then two years later, another journalist who was white, was invited on the same kind of program to go to Nicaragua. I can never say that name really well, who I, who I respect and like, a fine journalist, and when she went, the same editor wrote this glowing account about how she was one of only thirty-nine journalists in the country to go on this junket with the United Nations, but she would not allow me to go because I'm black and she didn't want me to have that kind of recognition. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--now this is a, what was going on in South Africa that you were invited? Speaker 1: Not South Africa, it was, we were going to, what's the island where we, the slaves left from? Speaker 2: Goree. Speaker 1: Goree. Speaker 2: Goree Island, off the coast of Senegal. Speaker 1: Yes, that's where we were going, Senegal, Senegal, that's where we were going. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: It was nothing going on-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it was just a junket that we were going to go on in and they, the United Nations were taking journalists over there and thirty-nine out of the country, and I was one of 'em. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, I guess to show that historic place, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, to, and I was so excited because I wanted to see it and I thought of all the things I could write about, you know, how it made me feel going to these people who were my ancestors had spent their last days at this, this, on this island, on this very ground, and, but she wouldn't, she wouldn't let that happen. And, you know, and she was one of the reasons, she was the reason why I stopped writing the column. Story_ID: 148124 Speaker 1: Right, '80s [1980s] was-- Speaker 2: It was a trying time. Speaker 1: Not only the riots and urban rebellions in Miami [Florida] were always covered by 'Nightline.' I remember, 'Nightline' started in what, '79 [1979], when they-- Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: --or, the hostages in Iran [Iran Hostage Crisis, 1979]-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --were being held and, but when it became like a, you know, really became popular in the '80s [1980s] and one of the issues, there's always some, there was, every, it seemed like every four years there's some kind of riot in Miami [Florida]? Speaker 2: Yeah, but what happened is with the '80s [1980s] for us, it, it seemed like it was, it was going to be so much better for black people and, and it looked like the people who held the power were so afraid that we'd get too much, it would get too much better for us and so they started harnessing stuff in like the same, the same month that I, that my friends put it on the bulletin board that I had been named one of the five top women columnists in the country, that same month, I was, it wasn't allowed to be on the front page of the local section any more. So they're supposed to be putting it in the Living today, in the feature section and the woman in the feature section is scared to do it because she's afraid of the editor and so my, I would write my column and it would mysteriously get lost in the system. And so I went to one of the guys who's an editor and I said, "I'm not doing this anymore. I don't need this hassle, you know, if they don't want me to do the column," and I know where it's coming from, he knew too, but he left the papers soon after then, and was nothing, and one of the young men who, I think he moved to Seattle [Washington] and was working in Seattle but I had told him one time about the voodoo, the highest, you know, it's very prevalent among Haitian people, and some people believe in it and, and that these, that curses could be put on them. And so he said, "I want to do a story for Tropic and I want you to work with me." And she didn't want him to use me on that story and he said, I, he said, "When you were talking about that Bea, I thought you were just saying things to be mean." He said, "But it's true, she, she really doesn't like you, she really doesn't want you here." He soon left the paper too. So, but you know, I stood it all and I went through it all. It was humiliating to me. Everybody wanted to know what happened to the column and how you going to say that you didn't, don't have the column anymore because this editor doesn't like you and doesn't like your work, you know, and everybody, I'm getting letters, I got so many letters. I was going through some of 'em when I was going through my papers, of people writing to me and they wrote, what happened to your column? Even young reporters who have come to the paper-- Speaker 1: This is all because of the recognition the column was getting? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 148125 Speaker 1: You're nominated for a Pulitzer Prize in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Yes, in '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: So your collective columns. What were, I guess, can you maybe give us kind of like a survey of what you were writing about in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Oh, I wrote about a lot of stuff, Larry [Crowe], and mainly I tried to be the voice in the community for the people who didn't have a voice and for instance, about that time we were having a lot of police brutality, not only on blacks but on young white boys with long hair and I wrote about that and I wrote about how wrong it was and one father wrote to me and told me about his son who had long hair and had been stopped in Coral Gables [Florida] because he had long hair and he was running for the school bus and they thought he was running away from a robbery or something. And he was so upset. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this just because I, you know, I used to work with a group that was kind of like a police watchdog with them. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: One of the, the almost descripted, you know, situation would be older people showing up at a police meeting and their major concern was young people. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: They're afraid of young people. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: Just afraid of 'em 'cause-- Speaker 2: Just afraid. Speaker 1: --you know they would say things like, they're in, they're walking down the street, or there's some young people standing in front of my house. They call the police. Speaker 2: Yeah, they would do that. Speaker 1: And because they're young. Now, they can, they, so what are they doing? Well, they're not doing any? I said, what are you, well what's the problem? Well, they, they just want to move young people along, get 'em out of our way-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --or their very presence-- Speaker 2: Yeah, frightened. Speaker 1: --is seems to be frightening and-- Speaker 2: You know, when my son was going--oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --and wait a minute, this other thing. I, I am going to catch up but-- Speaker 2: That's okay, I can remember. Speaker 1: --but you've got like, Cuban, boat people coming to Miami [Florida], Haitian refugees coming to Miami-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --you know, tourists, influx of tourists, young people on Spring break-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --you've got this retirement community and, and, you know, kind of a Southern-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, conservative community. I mean, this is, this is a dynamic for a lot of conflict. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was but when the, my son was going to law school and I had, had eye surgery in this eye and I couldn't drive for a long while and I had just bought a new car and when I found out he was driving, riding a bike in Coral Gables [Florida], 'cause he went to the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], at two o'clock in the morning, I said, "Oh no, you're going to have to use my car because I don't want anybody shootin' you saying that you were riding a bike in Coral Gables, and you's trying to rob somebody." And he just laughed 'cause he just thought, "Eh, that's not going to happen." I said, "Take my car and use it until I, you know, you don't have to go to the library at twelve o'clock and until you get you, a car," and that's what I did. Story_ID: 148126 Speaker 1: But prior to that, we talked about the Haitians and the Cuban people coming over. The Haitian people had it so tough. They would be smuggled over here and one story I did was when this, this, the man who smuggled him over made, when the [U.S.] Coast Guard was coming, he made a mother and her five children jump overboard and, of course, they drowned. So, I was sent out to interview the parents and everybody, you know, the family, and I'll never forget this editor who was scared of the editor who didn't like me. She said to me, and she wouldn't have sent me except it was Saturday and I was working and, "You know, you gotta write a good story because Sarah Rimer is going to cover the funeral," and Sarah Rimer was the young reporter who was having an affair with Gene Miller, our star reporter, and he practically rewrote her stories, you know. I shouldn't have called him the names, but I don't know where she is now but he's dead. But anyway, so I, I was so insulted when she said that. So I went out and I interviewed the paper and this is the first time I realized the difference in the cultures because you're black and I'm black, we don't have the same culture and I didn't realize that until then. So when I, I had a thing about black people. When I became a reporter, the only black women you saw on the covers, on the paper, would be the big fat women with head rags on, not really pretty, you know, and they were all called by their first name while the white women were called by their last name. So, when I would go on an assignment, I had to interview a black woman, I would say, "Okay, I'm coming with a photographer", I'd call or go by the house if they didn't have a phone, "and I want you to look nice" and I would tell them what to do and they would do it 'cause I didn't want that image always following us. So, this day I went to interview these Haitian women and the woman was sittin' on the front porch and she was just hollering and her hair was all, every which way and she had her bare, her feet were bare and her clothes were sort of hanging off and I said, "Well, you know, a reporter, our photographer is going to come to take your picture after a while. Do you think you want to go in and comb your hair and change your clothes?" And she says, "No, I want them to see my pain." I understood, I got it, and that was the picture they ran on the front page of the paper. But, while I was out, I found out, I learned that the children didn't have any clothes to be buried in. So before I went in to write my story, I went to the discount houses and I bought the prettiest little dresses and the hair ribbons and the underwear and the socks and then I had to go to Sears because the undertaker told me they needed gloves. And back then, gloves were not popular but I knew girls, Sears sold Girl Scout stuff and Girl Scouts wore white gloves 'cause I was a Girl Scout. So I went there and I got the little gloves for the little girls and the little boys, too, but I didn't buy their clothes, somebody else donated their clothing. So when I came in that day and I had written my story, that, that was a Friday, I wrote my story on a Friday, the funeral was on a Saturday, and Sarah was writing about the funeral and I heard Gene ask her, he was sitting there helping her, line for line, and I heard him ask her, "So what were they wearing?" And she said, "I don't know, I didn't see them." And so I said, "I know what they were wearing." I said, "The little girls had on pretty little frilly blue dresses and blue and white hair ribbons and white socks with lace on 'em and little white gloves that I, that came from Sears," I didn't say I bought 'em. And then he wanted to know, he looked, he says, "How do you know that?" And then I said, "'Cause I bought it," and he looked at me like, "You did that." And so when one of the, do you know who [HM] Francis Ward is? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Francis was the first black columnist at The [Miami] Herald and Francis heard what I had done and he came over to my desk the next day, he said, "I'm going to give you fifty dollars 'cause I know you needed that money that you spent on those children." Speaker 2: Yeah, a journalist, Francis Ward-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --whose wife [HM Val Gray Ward] founded the Kuumba Theatre in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Francis gave me fifty dollars on the bill that I bought, the things that I bought for those children. So, but, I learned so much from that. I never, whenever I try to find out a person's background and their culture before I would do that again but if they had known I was trying to set up the pictures, they probably would have fired me (laughter) but I didn't want our women looking like that 'cause, you know, we have beautiful women and because you're heavy, you don't have to look like a Aunt Jemima, you know what I'm saying. You, I, our women are proud and beautiful women no matter what size. I was thin then but now I'm a fat woman, you know, and I like to look nice and I know all, down through the ages, all of our women always like to look beautiful. So I didn't like it the way they were doing us on the paper, in the newspaper. They would find the ugliest picture they could find to put in there and this is black women and it wasn't, that's what, that wasn't who we were. Story_ID: 148127 Speaker 1: Now you're not the first journalist to come to journalism kind of in a sideways were you? You didn't, you didn't come up through the-- Speaker 2: No I didn't. Speaker 1: --master's in journalism from the so on, so on and so on, but you, you know, you can write and you can relate and that's how you ended up in the position-- Speaker 2: That's how you do it. Speaker 1: --and, but do you, what's your journalistic philosophy? Do you have a philosophy of journalism? Speaker 2: I, I don't know if I have a philosophy, so to speak, but I always believe that, as a journalist, it's my job to tell the story the way it is and not to doctor it up or anything but to just tell the story. Let the people talk through me and that's what I've tried to do all these years. I tried to let people tell their story through me and I still do that, I still let them do that. Story_ID: 148128 Speaker 1: Is there any particular column from that '81 [1981] period when you were nominated the, you think it was, or do you think now, I asked another writer who was nominated one year and they weren't nominated some of the other years. They think that some of their other columns were better than the ones that they were nominated for. Speaker 2: I don't know which ones he used. I really don't know but at that time, I was doing, that was on the, I told you about the police stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I was, I did quite a few stories on police, you know, on police brutality. Speaker 1: Do you think they made a difference in terms of how the police-- Speaker 2: I think it did. I think it made a difference because things started changing and also the way they handle rape victims, you know. I think, I think all that happened. Then they started setting up classes for police officers so they could know how to handle rape victims. We, I was on the ad hoc committee committee to start the rape, the first rape center with Roxcy Bolton. So that, you know, that, they needed to know and my friend, Dr. Evelina Bestman, who is also a person you should, you should put on your HistoryMakers' list, she was our first black psychologist and Evelina started a class because they used to laugh at Haitian people when they were coming to court and say somebody was puttin' the hex on 'em and they didn't know that this was a belief and it was a religion and that this really happened and, you know, if you believe-- Speaker 1: That's something that they took seriously? Speaker 2: They took it seriously. So Evelina started a designed course for lawmakers and, and judges so they could understand that this is a part of their culture. Speaker 1: This is Evelina-- Speaker 2: Evelina Bestman, Evelina Williams Bestman, B-E-S-T-M-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did they resolve those kinds of cases? I mean, if you actually, a person, did they make it a crime actually to put a curse on a person? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I'm not so sure how they resolved them but somehow they were resolved when the, when the judges and the police officers understood that this was a belief and this was not just something funny to laugh at and make jokes out of, they started looking at it a different way and I think they took it seriously, serious if somebody said, you know, this person has put a hex on me. And you know, I had a friend, a young Haitian friend, she was a, had a master's in sociology, she died when she was thirty-four, I liked her so much, her husband was a minister, and she told me that her mother-in-law had a hex on her and she wanted her dead and I said, "But you're a Christian, don't believe in that." And I kept telling her, but it was so ingrained in her, her culture, you know, that she didn't believe me and the first time she tried to lay on the couch and starve herself to death, I was able to talk her out of it and I talked to her and I said, "Please, don't believe this because you don't have to die because your mother-in-law wants you to die. You don't have to die." And we, she thanked me and we were so happy, she was so happy I'd come by and then, about three or four weeks later, she's dead. She has laid on the couch and starved herself to death because her mother-in-law said she was going to die. She didn't like her. She believed it. Speaker 1: It's amazing, you know. Speaker 2: That is amazing. Speaker 1: I mean, it's been documented before, that people, if they believe something, they, it will-- Speaker 2: It would help 'em. I went to her funeral, I was so sad, I cried so hard because she had four children and she was a very smart young woman, very smart. Her husband was a minister. Speaker 1: Now those days, they had like these, almost like concentration camps for the Haitian boat people-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that were coming over and I know we were trying to raise money, Chicago [Illinois] was trying to. Speaker 2: Oh, we, we had so many marches here. I remember one time there must have been about 50,000 or 100,000 people marching down Flagler Street, for as far, I got, I was like in the middle of the group. My son and I marched together and, which I wasn't supposed to do but I did it, and, by the time we got to the courthouse, I was standing up there and I looked as far as the eye could see. You see people coming around Biscayne Boulevard to Flagler Street. I mean, it was just a sea of black, white, all color faces and when I read the story the next day, I think they said there were about two to five thousand people. It was so closer to 250,000 or 100,000 but they tried to play it down because they didn't want people to really get involved in the movement. Story_ID: 148129 Speaker 1: So, now, as we approach the 1990s, what are some of the highlights of the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: That was the Botox era (laughter). There was a front-page story of a young white woman who had Botox in her lips. I think it was the first time it had been done in Miami [Florida] and they made the story out of it and I wrote a column. When I read it, I thought it was so funny and I said, you know, when I was growing up, I had these big lips and I was teased about it and I said, now, I'm fashionable and I said but now I have, I have an ample supply of hips and one day that's going to be popular. Do you know it is? I had no idea it was going to happen. It happened. I prophesized it and it happened (laughter). Story_ID: 148130 Speaker 1: You were telling me before we started about your experience in interviews and you said you had a particularly bad experience in 1990 or '91 [1991] with James Cleveland. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Now, now at this time, were you writing a, a gospel series, right. Speaker 2: I'm writing, I'm writing a big feature story on gospel music which I suggested because, on black gospel music, 'cause you know, white Southern gospel is different from black gospel, big difference. I love both of 'em but there's a big difference in the way the lyrics are written and the way the songs is, you know, is done, the arrangement and everything. And so I told them that, that the gospel business is big business. It's a multi-million dollar business and we need to do something about it and that Shirley Caesar comes here all the time. Every Mother's Day she used to give a concert here. I was an emcee at one of her programs and, and I said, "James Cleveland is coming" and so they said, "Okay, well, okay, do it and we'll put it on the schedule." And so I had done all these interviews on these people. Shirley Caesar came that year. I interviewed her and then James Cleveland came later and he was the one that gave me the hard time. He was the one who didn't want, when he saw me walking to his, I had gotten info--the okay from his publicist that it was all right to interview him and, before the show, and when I walked in that day, that evening, and he saw me and he already, he don't want to be bothered. And so I introduced myself. He says, "Well I can't talk to you, I don't have time to talk to you." And I said, "But your publicist said, you know, I could have this time with you." And he said, "But I don't want to talk to you. I can't talk to you now." And all of his little friends were coming in, you know, and they were, "ha, ha, ha", and then laughing and huggin' and talkin' and I sat there and watched that for about ten minutes and I said, "Dr. Cleveland, Rev. Cleveland, we could have been through with my interview by now, it wouldn't take that long," and he was so angry with me. He told me if I didn't get out, he would have me thrown out. And then, of course, tears welled up in my eyes and I told him that I was a lady and you don't have to throw me out, I'll leave. But I had to sit there and do that story. I was so hurt because he had hurt my feelings. And then, and that, it wasn't the first time that it had happened to me with a black entertainer. And so I'm beginning to put this thing together and they probably think that because the paper sent their black reporter out, that we were like the, the lowest ones on the totem pole and he didn't know that I had been nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, you know, and so he didn't want to be bothered with me, you know. If the paper couldn't send a nice white person out to interview him, he didn't want no interviewer, interview. Speaker 1: Now there's an Aretha Franklin story along the same lines-- Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: --then I'll ask you a good story, all right-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but these are another kind of a bad story with Aretha Franklin around the same subject? Speaker 2: Yeah, but, and I believe it, as I said, it's because black people was so unknown in this arena of journalism at that time. There was so few of us, even in the early '90s [1990s], in the '80s [1980s], there were not that many black people. So when I would go out on assignment, before I could interview my person that I had come to interview, they would almost always say, "So, how did you get into this business?" So then I would end up telling them my story, which was a great icebreaker. So I never had any problem with people of other colors, you know, in doing interviews, but it was my own people, and, but it was not the common people, it was the celebrities who were so high up on their horses that they didn't want me to interview them. And that's, that's my, it happened, you know, a few times, so that's what I, and then when I talked to other people, they said they had the same feeling, you know, the same experiences of interviewing people of color who were celebrities. Story_ID: 148131 Speaker 1: All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: So the paper sends me out to, we hear that Aretha [Franklin] is in town and, and I know she's going to be in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] and, at some youth center. So I ask the paper [The Miami Herald] if they, if I could go and they said sure, go and make, send a photographer with me. In the meantime, the Channel Four sent C.T. Taylor, who was their first black anchor on, on, and we knew each other and we was, so we were waiting there and after a while here comes the limo with Aretha Franklin, and so, she wouldn't get out. So, we were waiting on the side and we were waiting and waiting and she wouldn't get out. Finally, C.T. had to go back to the TV station and so I hung around and Vanetta Tempkin [ph.], I think Vanetta died, but she was driving the limo. She and her twin sister had started this limo service and when we were, when they were like two years old and I was like thirteen, I used to help my friend babysit them. They, they were so cute and we just loved them. So they knew me from when they were babies. So she said, "Bea, if you want to try to interview her in the car, ride on the jump seat, or there's this room on the jump seat." I said, "Okay." So I got in before, well she did get out to go and talk to the children briefly at the center and she got back in, I was already in the limo. So on the way to take her to the hotel, every question I asked, and I remember this one particular, she would say, "Yes", "No", "Yes", "No" and then I said something about Natalie Cole was just beginning to get big at the time. And I said, "What do you think about the young singers who they try to be like you?" and I said, "They, you've taught them so much and, what do you think about people like Natalie Cole?" "They can't touch mother," she said (laughter). I was so glad to get out of that car and then she wants to get a, we go near the Burger King, we're on Miami Beach [Florida], and Natalie's high school is right across the street and there's a Burger King. She wants a Whopper. So we stop and I said I'll never get this interview 'cause these children are going to know this woman and I, they are not going to let me interview her. So we're saying, a couple of weeks before, I had been, I had, I headed a workshop at, for junior high school journalists at Florida International University [Miami, Florida] and some of the children remembered me. I didn't remember them, there were so many. We're standing in line and I'm trying to get another question to Aretha and she's cutting the fool and she's acting up and I see these little girls, to my left, just looking at me, and I'm thinking they're looking at, I thought they were looking at Aretha. I said, oh my goodness, here they come. And they rushed over and they came to me, and they said, "Are you Bea Hines from The Miami Herald?" And Aretha turned around and looked and I said, "Yes, I am" and in my heart I'm saying, eat your heart out Aretha, you're in Bea Hines' territory now. They were so excited they said, we were in your workshop and, blah, blah, blah. And then another little boy came and he was black and he saw her and he recognized the face and he said, "Oh," and he saw the photographer, he says, "I know who that is, that's that Bertha," um, I said, "Aretha," and he said, "Yeah, yeah, Aretha (laughter)." They didn't know her. The children knew me, though. That was so funny. So I got back to the office and I told that story but, of course, I didn't put it in the paper. I didn't want to do that to her, but I wonder if they remember. You know, I sent the story that I wrote on James Cleveland, this was a big, big story, with color pictures and all, and I sent it to him. I never heard from him, you know. I figured he was just too embarrassed. He was so rude and I was so nice and he was just embarrassed. So it was on him. Story_ID: 148132 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite interview? Do you have a good story about somebody you really, they really made a good impression on you? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Did better than you thought? Speaker 2: I've had a lot of good, good interviews. One of my favorite interviews was when the Vietnam War, Vietnam War ended and they, we did a special. So they had a cover story, a front cover story and a back cover story and they sent me to do the back cover. And what I was to do was to interview a man who lost his only son in the war, his only child. And so I am so sorry about this assignment because I don't know how to comfort this man. He lost his only child to the Vietnam War. So all the way to his house, down South, I'm saying a little prayer in my heart and asking God to help me find something comforting to say to him. So I get there and I knock on the door and he said, "Who's there?" And I said, "Bea Hines," and he comes to the door and he's smiling. And he says, "You have got to be married." I said, "Yes, I am." He said, "Yeahm because nobody would name their child 'Behinds'" (laughter). And we just laughed and that broke the ice and he was one of my favorite interviews. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He told me about his son and what it meant to him and how he loved him but he was, he did a job for his country and how proud of him he was. So he was one of my very favorite interviews. And then, I was able to interview a woman who was very dear to me, who was a, she started the first classes for kindergarten teachers at my high school. And so when those girls who went to her class, many of them started their own kindergartens after they graduated high school because they, she, they were so well-taught. Her name was Adeline [ph.], Ms. Adeline and I was able to tell my editor about her. They had not heard that, none of the schools in Dade County [Miami-Dade County, Florida] had a class where the girls learned and they learned on children. They had a little kindergarten school there on the campus that the teachers brought their children and some working mothers brought their children. If you went to school and you had a younger brother, sister, you could bring your younger brother and sister there and she taught them well. She was a Home Ec [Economics], Home Ec teacher and her name was Elaine Adeline. Her son is, was a judge. He retired. He was in my class. I was so happy to tell her story. She was one of my favorites. She's [HM] Dorothy Fields' auntie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a fine woman. So, there were so many people that I enjoyed. I can't think of all of 'em. Story_ID: 148133 Speaker 1: --Right now. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: So your assignments have really changed from one, you know, you're writing but you're doing different things. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I was, while I was, I don't know of another columnist who did a column on the local page of the paper, on the main section of the paper, also I did two columns for neighbors, Friends and Neighbors and Neighbors and Religion, which is what I still do, then I wrote feature stories. I was giving them so much copy, I don't know, sometimes they couldn't even run the stuff because I, I was giving them so much copy. I, I don't know another columnist who, who had that load. Speaker 2: Now did you ever have, did you ever have a desire to become part of management? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I never did. I always wanted to write and I was happy. I was happy writing. I was happy when I, I was happiest when I went to schools and I was able to talk to girls, young girls. I went, I went often to, not often, but several times to, the school for, where unwed mothers would go, pregnant girls would go to finish up their education. And I loved talking to them, letting them know that this is just a setback, you know. You go on from here, you do what you want, you realize your dream. This, this doesn't have to mean the end of your dream because you're pregnant or because you have a child. You can realize your dreams. So I enjoyed doing that. Story_ID: 148134 Speaker 1: I enjoyed talking to adult groups who didn't understand what our culture is all about. And so working as a black reporter at the paper [The Miami Herald], I was able to show our culture and, and dispel a lot of myths that they had about black people. I'll never forget when I had been writing for about a year, George Beebe, who was the senior managing editor came, stopped me in the City Room one day, and he said, "Bea, we've hired all these young black reporters out of college and you're the reason we did it." I said, "Oh really." He said, "Yeah, it was because of your attitude and the way you carried yourself, we realize that we needed to hire some black people." And so that year they hired nine black people and I said to him, I wish he had written me a letter. I asked him to put it in my file. I don't think he ever did but I wish he had written me a letter saying that-- Speaker 2: How did-- Speaker 1: --'cause it sounds funny for me to tell people that and he's dead now but he said that to me. Speaker 2: How did things progress at The Miami Herald in terms of black? You were the, there was a gentleman there, was the first, the one you went to school with? Speaker 1: Thirlee, Thirlee Smith. Speaker 2: Thirlee Smith. Speaker 1: Yeah, well after Thirlee left and after I became a reporter, and then they hired nine other black reporters, I think around '72 [1972] when the convention was here that year the-- Speaker 2: It was the Republican? Speaker 1: Not the Democratic, the, the Republican Convention-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was here that summer and they had nine, Gayle Pollard, who went to, went to work for the Los Angeles Times was one of the reporters that they hired that year and we, we all were sent out to cover the convention and, you know, do stories about the people who were there and all and, it was just a mess, you know. It was a lot of, at that time, there were a lot of programs because of the riots and a lot of black people were using that money, and they were not doing the right thing with the money, you know. They would come to all these conventions and they became like a, a place where you meet guys or you meet women and it was just a, it was a bad scene, you know. And I saw all of that and I was very disappointed. A lot of the money was wasted, you know, but then there were other people who were so sincere about what they were doing and how to upgrade the quality of life for black people in their communities and they just worked diligently-- Story_ID: 148135 Speaker 1: Many of them didn't get the due, that they should have, because the respect, one man, though I have to say, T. Willard Fair of the Urban League of Greater Miami [Florida], and I hope you all got him on The HistoryMakers list. Speaker 2: I don't know that we-- Speaker 1: Maybe you've already, maybe you've already interviewed him. Speaker 2: Is he still, he's still around? Speaker 1: He's still the CEO [chief executive officer] and President of the Greater Miami, the Urban League of Greater Miami. Speaker 2: T. Willy [Willard] Fair. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: That's F-A-- Speaker 1: F-A-I-R. Speaker 2: --I-R, okay. Speaker 1: And T. has done so much in this community to up, and you know, you gotta either love him or hate him 'cause he hasn't done everything that I liked. One time I did a column on him, they ran it across the front page of the paper where he said, they were going to, they were going to start a club, an organization for black people, black men, to get into politics but no women would be allowed. And we were going to have our blazers and we're going to be strutting and I quoted him exactly and he called the paper and told 'em that that was a figment of my imagination. I mean, that was, when he saw it in print, it was so, and for the longest, T. didn't want to speak to me and I would walk up to him in public 'cause he had said all these things about me and I would hug him and kiss him on the cheek and finally he just, we became the best of friends. But, he did, he has done a tremendous job in terms of supplying housing, low income housing, especially in the Liberty City [Miami, Florida] area. Some of those apartments, they were like buildings that should have been thrown, gutted and, 'cause the bedrooms were like this, you know, little tiny, you could hardly get a bed in it and he gutted them, you know, and he gave people jobs and found places for them and, and made them have, give 'em, gave them a place where they can have some dignity and, and that's, especially for un--you know mother's, single mothers that I went to open up a building over on 62nd Street about two years ago and they were so pleased and one of the women he had put over in the building as a captain. So, you know, you can't do just anything there because you will be put out. And they were happy. So he has upgraded and that, that gesture just upgraded their dignity and the status of living and gave them more dignity. And I applaud him for that. He's been with the Urban League for fifty years. Story_ID: 148136 Speaker 1: Has the, has the black community, gained more political power since, since the early '70s [1970s] when you-- Speaker 2: Have we gained more power? Speaker 1: Yeah, political power. Considering-- Speaker 2: Politically, yeah, we got, the Dade County [Miami-Dade County, Florida], the Dade County Commission has two black women and I think one black man from down South but Barbara [J.] Jordan and Audrey Edmonson, who had done wonderful things in the community, and then on the city side, we got [Keon] Hardemon, who is a young man who just was elected in the last city election. Then we've had, who else did we have, we've had a lot of people, M. Athalie Range, who was like the mother to us all. Her children and I went to school together and she was like the first appointee by Governor [Reubin O'Donavan] Askew, some department in Florida. I can't remember now what the name of it, the department was, but she was appointed to that by Governor Askew but she was also a member of the city commission. And then we had Father [Theodore] Gibson who she went to the prom with. He was a city commissioner before, you know, for the longest-- Story_ID: 148137 Speaker 1: Now, did you join the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in the early days? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, I was an early member. Speaker 1: Were you a founding member? Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I was, they was already founded-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and had been running but not as much, it didn't get as big, it got big while I was a member but not because of me but it, it just got more members and it became more significant. But I remember the early days of the NABJ when we had, we would have meetings, local meetings for the local chapter and all they wanted to do was party and I was so offended by that because here we needed to be getting more blacks into journalism and creating ways and how we're going to go about doing this and it was all like a big party. So I stopped going to those meetings and then I got involved with the NABJ, the National Association, and I remember the time when, remember when [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] was running? Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1984, the first time, in '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and the guy who squealed on him when he, he said something. What did he say? And this black guy-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he said that, he called New York City [New York]-- Speaker 2: "Hymietown." That's right, and this black guy reported it. What's his name? Speaker 1: Milton, Milton-- Speaker 2: Young, he was dark-skinned, kind of short stature. Speaker 1: [HM] Milton Coleman. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: No, I don't know if he was the one that did, he's tall-- Speaker 2: No, he wasn't the one. His name was something else. Speaker 1: Milton was tall, Milton was tall. Speaker 2: He was something else. It was a little black guy who was kind of short [sic, Milton Coleman reported the Hymietown incident]-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: --but I'll never forget that day when he walked into that meeting and the people, many of 'em got up and left because they thought he shouldn't have done that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, my thing is, if you were going to do that, you should have told Jackson upfront that you know I'm going to have to quote you, otherwise, why would you do that? He didn't help his career. I don't think it helped his career at all. Speaker 1: No. Well in terms, has NABJ been helpful to you in your career? Speaker 2: I don't see where it has been helpful to me, you know. I had to fight my own battles down here. I don't think they knew about the battles I was fighting. When I was going through that ordeal with this editor who has now gone on, they never knew about it. They never knew about it. People knew what was happening to me but I don't think it was reported to the NABJ. Speaker 1: What do you consider, I guess, the best, the most positive feature of the National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: I'm not sure because I'm not involved with it any more but I think, at that time, the most positive feature would be the fact that you, when you get together and you see that there's so many other black journalists and sometimes in this business you kind of think you're out here alone, then you go to this gathering and you see all these black journalists from everybody, from everywhere else, Peggy Peterman was the woman I was thinking about, from St. Petersburg [Florida]. She passed a few years ago but Peggy was such a, she was a dear friend of mine. We kind of started out the same time but Peggy was highly educated and I think she was a lawyer and she, she became a reporter. She was doing something else at the paper and they put her on as a writer but she, she, I don't know that the black, the Association has done, and I don't, I want to be fair because I'm not involved like I used to be so I, I'm not sure what, what it's doing now, you know, in terms of making things better or taking on cases of discrimination and that kind of thing. I'm not sure but I know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I was going through my situation, it was like there was nobody to go to. Story_ID: 148138 Speaker 1: I know it was kind of a nadir at during that period of time because of the, I'd forgotten all about the Janet Cooke case occurred the same year you were nominated for a Pulitzer Prize [1981]. Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that. Speaker 1: The very same year. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And Janet Cooke had falsified the story for New York Times [sic, the Washington Post]-- Speaker 2: Sure did, she was a pretty girl. I remember her. Speaker 1: --and The Washington Post, rather The Washington Post. Speaker 2: I knew her. Whatever happened to Janet? Speaker 1: I think she works for a department store now, I heard. Speaker 2: No fooling. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Smart girl but in the wrong way. Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't, it was--we have a long story of that, you know, in the archive [The HistoryMakers Digital Archive] too, on what happened-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --her editor [HM Milton Coleman], you know, gave us all-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the full account. Speaker 2: Well he was, the black guy was the one who, who helped her with that, falsifying that story, isn't that so? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: She had a black editor, didn't she? Speaker 1: Yeah, he didn't help her falsify it, he just, his position was that the editor did not-- Speaker 2: They didn't check out. That's, what, something was going on. Speaker 1: Well he said that the editor's job was to stand by their reporters. If the reporters are trained and professional-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --they know what they're doing, you stand by 'em unless you find out otherwise and he finally found out, you know. His story was that he, he told her, he said, "Well let's go talk to the, the kid, you're talking"-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --"let's go over to his house." And she said, "Okay, we'll do it Monday" and then she called and said, "He moved, I don't know where he is," and then he said, "Well I'm going to go ride around and look, do you want to go with me?" She said, "Yeah," and then she didn't show up for work. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. Speaker 1: And then he said-- Speaker 2: Something's wrong with this story. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a--and I'm thinking, if you know there's a little child on, on drugs like that, what, what, are you just gonna write a story and get famous and not do anything to help? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that pushed it to the brink-- Speaker 2: You see, that, that's what got me. Speaker 1: --because people wanted to help. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Where can I find this kid so I can help. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause first thing I would have done as a reporter, I would have done the story, but the next thing I, I would want to know, what can I do? You, would you, I gotta help you, you gotta get out of this. We got to do something about this. And I would have been going to all the sources that I know to help this child. Story_ID: 148139 Speaker 1: So is there, is there ever a point when you, a journalist should say, oh, I'm just a journalist and I can't, you know, it's just my job to write about it? Speaker 2: I never, I never did that. Now I maybe should have but I didn't because it's, being a journalist, as I said to you before, means to me, I'm the voice for the people who don't have a voice. So I'm never just, I'm never, it's never just to write the story as far as I'm concerned, it's all about the people. You, you, if your story doesn't help somebody, or doesn't cause some changes, if the columns that I've written doesn't cause some changes, then I feel like I'm just beatin' the air. It's got to bring about some changes, even if it's just one person, it's got to bring about a change, somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay. I know you mentioned [HM] Francis Ward earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who are some of the other-- Speaker 2: Joe Oglesby-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: --who's my dear friend, I'm a godmother of his daughter, his oldest daughter, and Joe, Joe came around, he joined the paper in '72 [1972]. He's retired now. He retired about two or three years ago but he rose up through the ranks and became the editorial editor. Speaker 1: Okay, and, of course, [HM] Leonard Pitts is a-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --he's there now, right? He's a-- Speaker 2: Leonard Pitts, I love Leonard but he doesn't work from here. You know, he, he's got a, his by, I mean an e-mail that you could reach him, leonardlpitts@miamiherald.com but he doesn't live here anymore. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, this is another symptom of a new age, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Where you can be associated with a paper and not even be in town? Speaker 2: Well it was so funny to me when we used to, they used to put my story on the wire. So people were writing me from all over the country about something that I wrote about. I'm thinking, how did they know about this? Where'd they get the, the Miami Herald go, but, what I didn't know at the time, they would put the story on the wire so other papers would pick it up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's, that was before computers, stuff. Now, if I turn on my computer, I probably got a lot of hits on my column that won't run until Sunday but they, they have, probably already put it online, you know, the abuse story, the story about, you know, abuse. So they probably have already put that online. Story_ID: 148140 Speaker 1: Do, do you speak about that issue in public? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. I spoke about it in Sunday's paper [the Miami Hearld] because I was thinking about [Ray] Rice and mainly I was speaking about, thinking about Janay [Palmer Rice], his wife, who married him after he beat the stew out of her. If my husband [James Hines] had beat me up before we married, I wouldn't have married him but, but we, who love these men, who fight us, always think that when they cry, they're not going to do this again 'cause he's so sorry. My husband used to cry hard 'cause he was really sorry but then he would do it again and I learned that once they hit you one time, it's going to be, it'll happen again and again and again until you leave or die and that's what I said in the column. You know, if you think, Janay, that he's through hitting you, you got another thing coming because now he doesn't have a job, he doesn't have his endorsements, frustration's going to set in, unless he gets some help, some serious help, he's going to fight her again because he's frustrated and hurt and what gets me is that how she's blaming everybody else, the media. You know, this is our private stuff that we're ashamed of and you just keep throwing it in our faces. Well it happened and you're a public figure, her husband, so yeah, people are going to talk about, they're still talking about it on TV. Speaker 1: Yeah, they haven't stopped-- Speaker 2: It was on this morning. Speaker 1: --for about three or four days, now. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, this morning they were talking about, what's the Commissioner of the NF[L, National Football League]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so--yeah. Speaker 1: Roger Goodell. Story_ID: 148141 Speaker 1: I do talk about that a lot because I talk to groups about that. At first, Larry [Crowe], I was so embarrassed to say that. In fact, I was so ashamed when my husband [James Hines] broke my jaw, I was so ashamed. I didn't want my mother [Ida Lawton Johnson] to know and my neighbor across the street, whose son and I were friends, we had gone to school together, when she ran over to, to my apartment and she grabbed the towel with some ice and she says, "You're going to the hospital." And I begged her not to take me. She said, "Oh, yes, 'cause I would want somebody to do this for my daughter, if I had a daughter. And then I'm going to call your mom," and I was crying. I didn't want my mother to know. I did not want her to know. And so when they got me to the hospital, they had, the doctors had to pry my hands away from my, either the towel was, 'cause I was so embarrassed. I didn't, I didn't want them to see. And one of the doctors said, "Young lady, who did this to you?" And I had to say, "My husband." Can you imagine how that made me feel? Oh, my goodness, I'll never forget that feeling. I was so hurt and then what really hurt me, my baby, my oldest son, was five months old and when my mother brought, I was so swollen, when momma brought him to see me, he went back to her, he didn't want to come to me. He didn't know me. And I just cried 'cause he didn't know me. So, yeah, I talked about it but it used to hurt so bad that I would cry when I talked about it but, you know, as the years go, you, you don't cry anymore and then I had to, in order to stop crying, I had to forgive him even though he's dead. I had to forgive him and to try and understand why he did what he did and I'm so glad I was able to do that because that was sad for him. He was so confused. How you gonna, so I tried to raise my sons, you don't hit anybody. You know, if you, I used to tell the son who died, he used to call me every Sunday, "Momma, you telling me that I can't hit her and she's telling me I'm not a man 'cause I don't hit her" (laughter). I'd say, "Come over here, just get in the car and drive over here." I said, "I didn't raise you to hit your wife. You can't hit her, I don't care what." Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a funny side of it too. The wife saying, you're not a man 'cause you don't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, she was raised differently. She was in that, raised under that, whatever way wives got beat for a daily dose of their beating, you know. So she thought that was the way you're supposed to do. You're not a man 'cause you don't hit me. He said, "Momma, I don't understand this, you telling me I, a man don't hit a woman and she's telling me I'm not a man 'cause I don't hit her (laughter)." Oh, boy, that was something. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's something that takes, takes some, some serious counseling or serious work to change that kind of behavior. Speaker 1: It does, it does, and I was so glad, you see, in our house, we didn't curse and we didn't, you know, we didn't do that and I made a habit, I mean, it was, it was a thing that we hugged and, my son, the last time I saw him he was, well he brought his little grandson early that morning 'cause he had spent the night and I was going to take him to school and every time I see him, we hugged and I would kiss him and I'd tell him, "Okay, baby, have a good day." I never did, one morning, it was a Monday and he was saying, I said, "You want to see the floor, that guy finished the floor" 'cause I was having the kitchen done. He said, "Momma, I'm in a hurry, I'll see it later" and I, and I said, "Okay baby, go on, have a good day." And I could tell, I watched him walk to the truck and I said, my, my child is not feeling well. I knew it but he would not miss a day's work. Story_ID: 148142 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, just to go, you were working in 2000, right? Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], yeah, I worked-- Speaker 1: During the election? Speaker 2: --I retired in 2001. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were here during the election of 2000? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: What's your impression of, were, were black voters being disenfranchised here in Miami [Florida] or in Florida? Speaker 2: Maybe in some parts of Florida but I think the blacks here were so vocal, you know, that, that it didn't hit us like it hit in some of the rural parts of Florida and other places, but, there's, you know, you got to stay on top of it, Larry [Crowe], you just have to always be on top of what's happening because they would rearrange the districts or whatever they call it, how they do that-- Speaker 1: Gerrymandering. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then, you, or you go to vote and you don't have the right kind of identification but you didn't know that before you went to vote, you know. And so if you're not on top of it, every minute of the way, it's like when, when integration came and the schools were desegregated and all of the black high schools were turned into junior high schools at that time. Well, then later on, they tried to phase out Booker T. [Washington High School, Miami, Florida] completely. Well, we fought like I don't know what to get that school rebuilt and it's, and the last year it was, we called it our Golden Year because the, the academics was way, it was an "A" school and the teams just came back with all the trophies and everything, so we have a, we have a souvenir book, it's called 'Booker T. Washington's Golden Year' and now we get wind that they wanna do another school in Overtown [Miami, Florida], they don't have that many children. Why they're going to build another school? That means that if they build another school, it's going to have another name, it won't be Booker T. Washington, so we have to be vigilant on every hand. When the mayor first mentioned that, the alumni association got busy because we want everybody to know. If there's a meeting in that chamber, we got to be there because if not, one of these days we won't have a Booker T. Washington. All our history will be going down the drain. Story_ID: 148143 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your deep hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: The main thing is that I would like to see our young black men get out of jail and stay out. I would like to see the drug dealers taking their wares somewhere else and not in the black community because it has really ruined us and I would like to see them do something about the gun laws. We have got so many children being killed. We just had a little girl being shot the other day. She's sittin' in a car, I guess, I think it was her father, two, fifteen months old, in a drive-by shooting. So I'd like to see things like that changed. I'd like to see young black people in my neighborhood and in the black community have hope. It seems like there's so little hope now. You know, Miami Gardens [Florida] used to be a nice place to live. This is where I live. Now, there's so much, I'm sitting here, before I got the couch back, I just had boxes around 'cause I was all packed up, this was last year. I was watching television, I had the television and a couple of chairs and the rest was boxes, it was the fourth of--just before the Fourth of July, and I hear, pop, pop, pop, and I'm thinking, oh, boy, they've started with the firecrackers. I don't know the sound of a gun from a firecracker and then I hear a little shaking at my gate and I thought somebody was coming in but then nobody ever knocked on the door. So I looked out and I see all the yellow tape, from my gate, across the street and then on the other side. What had happened? I went out, I said, "Officer, what's going on?" I'm sittin' in my house, I don't know what's happening. He said, "There was a, there was a shooting, somebody shot the house next door." Somebody got hit and when I opened the door, I saw the, the paramedics turn the corner. Somebody was hit, but not killed. I said, oh my God. Suppose they had gotten the wrong house and I'm sitting with my back to the window, it could have been me, it could have been me. Story_ID: 148144 Speaker 1: I just want to ask you about how you engaged one of the big national issues of the last three years, the Trayvon Martin case [2012], here in Florida. Speaker 2: What I think about it? Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you wrote a column in the paper. Speaker 2: Right, of course, I, I think that Trayvon was, was, lost his life for no reason at all. He's a teenage boy, with a bottle of ice tea and some skittles in his pocket and my thing was, you know, if I saw somebody following me in a car, I would try to ambush him too and try to get the goods on them if they were going to hurt me, if I thought they were going to hurt me, but, the, he should never have been the man [George Zimmerman] who, who did this awful deed, should never have been set free. And I said that and I will believe that till I die, you know, but a lot of people would take that same, Stand your Ground thing, and use that as, as a, as an excuse to shoot somebody or to hurt somebody, and that's what I was afraid of was going to happen, and it's happening. People are using that as an excuse. You know, that, that kind of, people were calling me all kind of names because, because I wrote that column and one man just literally said some bad words to me and I wrote him back and I said, you know, you have a right to your own opinion but I would never have said bad words to you because I'm a Christian. And he had said something about being a Christian and I said, I'm a Christian and my Christianity doesn't tell me to say bad words and insult you like that and so, you know, I just won't, God bless you. He was so embarrassed, he wrote me back and apologized, you know, and some people would do that and some people, one man just kept a running thing going. I think I got about five or six e-mails from him, and the last one he wrote, well the last one I answered, he was throwing all young black people and saying that we don't do anything, they don't do anything but murder people and shoot people and rob and kill and shoot, and then I thought about Columbine [High School massacre], and the man who shot up those poor twenty-two [sic, twenty-six] people in Northeast up there, where? Speaker 1: Yeah, but in Massachusetts [sic, Newtown, Connecticut]. Speaker 2: Those children, and I said, they were white, and I'm sure they came from good families 'cause he was saying that they don't come from good families and that we raise our children wrong and all kind, and I said, so what would you say about that? You know, you can't do that. And then he wrote me back another nasty e-mail which I started to read and I said, I'm not going to give him, I just deleted it and I never answered him again because it could have been going on till now. You know, he would have still been writing. But some people will never see the wrong in what happened there. Some people will never see the wrong. All they saw was a young black boy with a hood on so he had to be up to no good. Story_ID: 148145 Speaker 1: Now today, I mean, you retired in 2001-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --but you, but-- Speaker 2: But I still, I write a column on Thursdays that's supposed to deal with religion and stuff and things is happening in our churches and synagogues and the mosques, and sometimes I'll put my own spin on something. I'll get an idea, a feeling, about something or, and then I'll just write, like most of the column will be my own thoughts, about whatever, issues pertaining to religion or stuff like that. And then I'll, sometimes I'll have a conversation with somebody about a topic and that will, a column will come out of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah, I pretty much do what I want but when I wrote this, the column that I write on Sundays is the Friends and Neighbors column and that's about people and what they're doing and, you know, stuff like that and then if something interesting comes up, somebody had a sixtieth, ninth, anniversary or whatever, you know, I kind of get a little story out of that and write about that, but then I can, I have the freedom to do my own thing, to write my own feelings and I, I was, I'm grateful for that because I had something to say on domestic violence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this gave me the avenue to do it. Story_ID: 148146 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently now if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: I would probably go on and finish school, finish college, and, and that's about the only thing I would, I would do. I would finish college and, and do music and art but I would still write. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's the only thing I would change and I'm going to try to change some of that shortly by taking a refresher course in art. Story_ID: 148147 Speaker 1: Now, now, you look back again at your contributions to your profession, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. Well they say I'm a legend, I don't know, but I think that's because I've been there so, I was there so long, but I think my legacy would be the way I try to bring our story, the black story, to the people, to dispel some of the myths that they had about us when I started writing. I think that's my legacy. I think people got to see black people as human beings. You know, I said one time that we love, we cry, we, we're romantic, you know, but I think a lot of people saw us in the slave thing. You know, we just mated it to have more slaves but we love, we actually fall in love and, and I had to say that to some of the editors 'cause they didn't seem to know that. So, I think that's my legacy. I think I'd change people's views on the way they saw black people and black women and single black mothers that we were not all on welfare and if we were, many of those women on welfare was, they were using that money to the best of their ability, the best that they knew how, to make a home for their children. And I did a story on welfare mother just because I wanted them to know that not all welfare mothers were driving Cadillacs and had orange wigs on, you know, and I went to her and she was living in the Liberty Square housing project [Miami, Florida] and I used to walk on and knock on doors to see what stories I could find to tell our story, to the community, and I found this young woman who had five children and she had bought them a television and she was one of the ones that I told them, make sure she was clean and the children were clean 'cause they were going to come and photograph her. And then I went shopping with her, grocery shopping, to see how much money she spent on food and everything. And she spent nearly the whole check on food for her children. And somebody said when they saw the television, well what is she doing with a TV? I said, she's got five children, she can't have a TV? This was some of my co-workers who were saying that. Because she was on welfare, she shouldn't have a television for her five children. Isn't that sad? Speaker 1: It is sad. Speaker 2: Anyway, I think I helped change some views. I believe I did. Story_ID: 148148 Speaker 1: Alright now, tell us something about your, your children. You have two sons, right, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two sons, I had two, I got one now. My baby, my big boy [James Frederick Hines, Jr.] has gone to be with the Lord last year, about this time, and my youngest son is Shawn [Hines] who is, he graduated law school and decided he didn't want to be a lawyer and got a master's in jazz and taught for a while. And now he's training dogs which he loves and he seems to be happy and I'm happy for him. Shawn has one daughter who is on Broadway in 'Motown the Musical.' Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Afra-- Speaker 2: That's Afra, Afra Hines-- Speaker 1: Okay, Afra Hines. Speaker 2: And Rick has three daughters, two are teachers and the middle girl graduated from Fashion Institute of Technology in New York [New York]. She's a designer. I have two little great grandsons and I have a grandson. Shawn has a son, he wasn't married to her, his mother, they live in Missouri, and he's thirteen, he's fourteen now, and I go to see them, they come to see me in the summer and last year was the first time I went to Missouri to see them at Thanksgiving. So that was nice. I've had, my sons and I always had a close relationship because it was just the three of us and they loved to hear my stories about growing up, you know, my growing up years and the things, the pranks and stuff that we were pulling. So Sunday nights after church, we would have dessert after church, after we come home from church, and we'd sit around the table and they would laugh. You would think we had a house full of people. So we had, we had a good time growing up together. I always tell people I grew up with my sons and we would, sometimes Ricky [James Frederick Hines, Jr.] would say, "Momma, you punished me and I didn't do it, you won't even listen" and I realize I was wrong and I said, "Baby, I'm so sorry." I said, "But you know what, they didn't write a book for this. Nobody's written a book to show me what to do and I don't know what to do so we're in this together. So I'm sorry, I'm not to be exempt, I'm sorry," and so we grew up that way. I'd always tell them, if I knew I did, made a mistake, I would let them know. "I'm so sorry, I didn't mean it." You know, I didn't know any better. I said, "We are growing up together, we're in this thing together." Story_ID: 148149 Speaker 1: Is there anything we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Is there anything we haven't raised? Speaker 2: I don't know, I can't think of anything right now. I'll probably think of a million things once you're gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That'd be too late. Speaker 1: All right, well at any rate, the last question is similar to legacy but it's a little different. I mean, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered, first of all as a child of God, a person who truly believed in treating other people the way I want to be treated and a person who had, who tried to change lives for the better and that's enough. Story_ID: 148150 Speaker 1: This is a friend of mine's, granddaughter, who, who asked me to make her a dress. That's Evelyn Wilkins' [ph.] granddaughter and she described it for me and so I sort of drew a picture and that was it. I made it so she loved the dress. She looked so cute in it. Speaker 2: And this was, this was in Italy. I went with a group called The Unity Choir to sing and we went twice to sing over there and we had to wear African stuff. Speaker 1: About what year is it? Speaker 2: That was in '90 [1990]. We went twice. We went in '90 [1990] and then we went again in '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was right after my mom's [Ida Lawton Johnson] funeral and these are the people, that's my brother [Adam Johnson, Jr.] in the center and the two women with us, well the two women that my mother took care of when, when they were little and we used to, we sort of grew up together. Speaker 1: That's my brother, Adam, and it was at our mother's funeral. That was at the repass, after the funeral in 2002. Speaker 2: That is a picture of my thirty-fifth high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida] reunion and the woman in the white and her husband in the middle, she was my best friend. Her name, she died when we were fifty-four. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Thelma Robinson [ph.], Thelma Rae Robinson. Speaker 1: And that's when I was fourteen and it was Easter Sunday and that's my brother. We had dressed up for Easter. I hate that picture. Speaker 2: That's a good one. (Unclear). Speaker 1: That's, my mother is on the right and her best friend, Victoria Dugan [ph.], that was one of her best friends and we were at a luncheon. Speaker 2: And that's my son and my daughter-in-law and Nykeva [ph.], who just walked in, that's Nykeva on the left, behind her mother, and her two younger sisters. And I made their dresses and their hair bows. Speaker 1: And this was an organization who gave me an award for an outstanding journalist and that's my son, my mother's on the left with the green, in the green turban and my grandmother's [Suzy Lawton] on the right and that's my son. Speaker 2: And that's my two sweetie pies, Shawn [Hines] was eight months and, and Ricky [James Frederick Hines, Jr.] was four. Speaker 1: That's one of my early pictures when I was at one of the schools and I was speaking and the man behind me is the principal. That's Northwestern High School [Miami, Florida], and they had invited me as a speaker. That was back in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: What an afro. Speaker 1: Yeah, I had an afro too. See my afro? Speaker 2: His is gorgeous. Speaker 1: He had gorgeous hair. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a handsome guy. Abney, Everett Abney [ph.], that's his name and that's me with my grandma, Grandma Suzy. Speaker 2: I don't know if you could even catch that, if that will come out. I was, I think I was eight and my brother was five on that. I, I wish I had my, my wedding pictures over to my son's house. I don't have them. Speaker 1: What is that? Let me see that. Speaker 2: It says, Biscayne [Bay] area. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, okay. I was speaking at a, at a, Biscayne Marriott. That's, that was a, that was a Good Friday Service and I was one of the speakers there. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: That, I am so proud of. I, I was the commencement speaker at Miami Dade Community College [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 2: And that's Richard [ph.], that's Marvin Dunn's brother who is a, who is an administrator at Miami Dade, standing with me. My editor, I had a wonderful editor at that time, Suzanne Levinson, and she made me write my speech so she could run it in the paper, otherwise, I would have been up there trying to figure out what was I gonna say. She said, no, you're gonna write it and we're gonna run it. Speaker 1: I was singing at some concert. Speaker 2: And this picture here, that you have in your hand, is of my oldest friend in Miami. Not that one, that-- Speaker 1: Well, what is this? Speaker 2: That's, I was singing. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I was singing at a concert in Overtown [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's my friend, Mae [ph.], and she and I have been friends since we were eleven years old. Speaker 1: Mae what? Speaker 2: Mae Whitman. Speaker 1: And that's at the, the City of Miami Police Department. They had honored me and given me an award and I was accepting the award for Black History. You see I'm all in my African attire. Speaker 2: And that, that one was taken, the Urban League had an affair and I went to the, to that affair in that outfit and then I was, I wore it at an event where Estelle Getty introduced me and she introduced me as Mr. Bea Hines, Mr. Ben Hines. Speaker 1: Ben Hines. Speaker 2: And when I got up there, I said well, that's better than being called, Ms. Behinds, and it took the audience about two seconds to catch it and they just cracked up. Speaker 1: Now this was when we would go, I would go with members of the City of Miami Police Department to Nassau [Bahamas] and we would take books and, and bikes to them, to the children over there and this was the group that went that year I was with them. Speaker 2: That's another picture from that same trip to Nassau. And then we would do motivational speaking and everything. Speaker 1: This is the committee here that we, we worked with, we worked with Charles Drew Elementary School and they had a sister school in South Africa and I went with them. This was the committee that went to South Africa to deliver goods to the children in South Africa. That was in 1999. Speaker 2: Okay to unwrap this? Speaker 1: Yeah, you can unwrap it. Speaker 2: We won't be able to see it very well with the cellophane. Speaker 1: And that was something. I was one of the calendar girls for Black History Month and, the, I think it was put out by Florida Power and Light Company. My grandson, my granddaughter, one of, she was honored this year. She came down from New York to accept that. Speaker 2: Where did that come from? Speaker 1: (Unclear) Shoot awards (unclear). Speaker 2: I don't even know where the other awards are. I just, they're in boxes because they, they're all boxed up. Speaker 1: So, some of these, now, oh, now this one we can shoot this one. This is very good. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the grandson, granddaughter [Afra Hines] who is in Broadway. She has my middle name, Loretta. We have the same middle name. Speaker 1: Now is that, this is another one here? Speaker 2: That's Laqonia [ph.], she's the middle girl, and there's Nykeva behind, Nykeva was-- Speaker 1: And then we have you and your mother. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: -- and your father here and then let's do those. Speaker 2: Can you do my other granddaughter, Nykeva, who just came in? That's the big picture. That's her. That's her graduation picture from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, let's get this one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She already did it? Speaker 2: No, we didn't do that one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's me, that's my mom. We took that picture, oh, maybe about ten years before she died. You can tell by the big glasses I'm wearing. Speaker 1: And that's dad. It's the only picture I have of my dad, Adam Johnson, Senior. Speaker 2: And this is Nykeva. We were so proud of her graduating and she, she was very active in school. She graduated from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama]. We don't have a picture of Quan, I mean of Jamie. Story_ID: 148151 Speaker 1: It's the only thing I have of hers is when she was a little girl, when she was a baby. Yes, I'd like to--Jamie and Asher, we got Quan. We got a picture of Quan. That's momma [Ida Lawton Johnson] when she was twenty-seven. Speaker 2: So what else should we shoot that's on the wall? We shot that one already. Speaker 1: Can you shoot the one with me holding my mother, cradling my mother there. That's the last picture we took together. Speaker 2: So just that one on the wall? Speaker 1: That one. And then you could take the-- Speaker 2: And your mother on the other-- Speaker 1: And my mother. And you could take the legend if you want to. The picture of me has a legend, that cracks me up. Speaker 2: Oh, that one. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That one? Speaker 2: Is there another one of him on there? This is my baby granddaughter. Speaker 1: Okay, so these are the-- Speaker 2: And she was, she graduated from Florida Atlantic [University, Boca Raton, Florida] in Boca Raton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So tell us again about the picture you see here. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one, that's the baby girl. Speaker 2: And what's her name? Speaker 1: Jamie, Jamie Hines Williams. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She's going to bring another picture. That's when I went to, that's my grandson but I don't know if that's so clear. He's, that's Asher, and I visited them at Thanksgiving time, last year, in 2013. Speaker 2: We're going to shoot this too, right? Speaker 1: Okay. And this was last year when I was invited, along with Nancy San Martin to the Miami Dade College [Miami, Florida] for their women's history month celebration and I thought it was a nice poster, they gave it to me, so-- Speaker 2: And the big picture behind me- Speaker 1: Okay, let me get a close up. Speaker 2: Let me see, baby. Speaker 1: I don't know where the other one is at. Speaker 2: You don't see another on the, okay, well that's okay, they got this one, that's good. Okay. Speaker 1: So now the ones on the walls. Speaker 2: That one, me cradling my mom, and if you don't mind getting the legend thing, there. Speaker 1: Adjust the lighting here. Speaker 2: That's the last article I wrote when she was alive and I wrote about being a caregiver. I wrote a poem, it's called, 'It's Baby's Time Now' and I'm, I was baby, now she's baby, you know. Speaker 1: My father said that to me when he was sick, he said, I'm the baby now. Speaker 2: Yeah, and when she died, I put it on her program, I put it on her program, it's baby's time-- Speaker 1: This was when she was all dressed up to go to see Louis Jordan and his Tympany Five and that was, she was twenty-seven years old. Speaker 2: And that's your mother, what's her name? Speaker 1: That's my mother, Ida Belle. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And there she was just about a year before she died. That was the year, that was in 2001 when I, just before I, I mean, it was in 2000 because I retired in January, 2001. That was in 2000. Speaker 2: And that was this photo? Speaker 1: Uh-hum. And the other one over there is the legend award. Speaker 2: Legend. Make sure we got it. We need to get a visual of it so they know what we're talking about. Okay, tell us a little bit about the legend. Speaker 1: Every year, The Miami Herald would give an award to, to, I guess, people who had been there and have done outstanding work and you're voted on and my, somebody nominated me and I was one of the honorees that year. And then in 1985, they had another kind of award where they did the, the, an award for the outstanding people among, in the staffers, for their community service and I got that award also. Speaker 2: And that's my youngest son [Shawn Hines] on the wall right there when he was in the service [U.S. Military]. I don't know if you got that? Can you get that? Speaker 1: Let me tilt down. Speaker 2: And then if you can get this last picture of my oldest son [James Frederick Hines, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Oh this one right here? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay. Did this one, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a lot, hang on. Speaker 1: He's right underneath my mom and I. Speaker 2: Hard to focus. There we go. Tell us about this photo right here. Speaker 1: That was, my son passed in 2013, September, and that was a last outing that his grand, that's his first grandson, and he wanted to go as a chaperone, a chaperone with them. Speaker 2: That's Fredrick? Speaker 1: That's James Fredrick Hines, Senior. Speaker 2: Junior. Speaker 1: Junior rather, and he was determined to go on that and it was, and the teacher took that picture, the three of them and when he died, she sent it to me and I was so thankful for that..