 Story_ID: 56956 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today with The History Makers. Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Full middle name as well? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Lord have mercy, this is--I'm gone have to kill y'all after this, okay? Have to burn the tape, but it's Karen, K-A-R-E-N, La'Donya, L-A, whatever that little thing is, capital D-O-N-Y-A, Hunter, H-U-N-T-E-R. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Four, 24, '66 [4/24/66], Orange like the fruit, New Jersey. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Empress, yeah, Ruler of the World, of the free world. Yeah, that's a tough, tough question, what do I do? Entrepreneur, journalist, writer, publisher, teacher, yeah all of that, thought provoker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: MSNBC contributor. Speaker 1: Now you teach at Hunter College [New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have--it's not a coincidence. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know. What day, what is today's date? August 2nd? Is it August 2nd, August 3rd? August 3rd, 1920--I don't know, 2012, August 3rd, 2012. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in the illustrious offices of Simon and Schuster, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York, 17th floor. Speaker 1: And this could be the board room, right? Speaker 2: This is the board room, yeah. Story_ID: 56957 Speaker 1: All right, okay now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: You got to ask the right questions. Speaker 1: That's my second question. Speaker 2: All right, yeah, all of them. Yeah, I like to eat, obviously. Food is delicious. If I had to pick a favorite, it would probab--probably be salmon, which I know is very boring but I love salmon. Yeah, yeah salmon's pretty good. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I like green, but money green, yeah, only on, you know. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Pur--purple's nice too. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I love the summer time. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Florida and Bermuda. Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Yes, yes I do actually. You know there's no reason to fight over the crumbs, hold on. What is it that I say? I say I'm a pie maker, you know. I'm not gonna worry about the crumbs or the last slice, I'm gone make me a new pie, you know. So--worry about what's not--I create what is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me. You could, you can quote that. Story_ID: 56958 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So we're going to go over your family history now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're gonna to start with your--we're gonna go over your mother's [Margie Sweeper] side of the family and then your father's [Donald Hunter] side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then we'll bring them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her full name is Margie, M-A-R-G-I-E, Olivia, O-L-I-V-I-A, Sweeper, S-W-E-E-P-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Four, two, 1943 [4/2/43]. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm sorry, where was she born? Speaker 2: Augusta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, Augusta, GA [Georgia], okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Mostly domestic. My grandmother, her mother, her name was Julia Sweeper, Blunt before she became Sweeper. She did mostly domestic work and worked as like a nurse's aide in, in Augusta [Georgia] but you know the south was very segregated. Her father, John Henry Sweeper, my mother's father, was in the military, he was also a carpenter, built his own home in Summerville, South Carolina. We believe he was--he was definitely Geechee, but also of Indian decent, very fair skinned, red, ruddy man. Very strong. His mother died in childbirth having him, so I don't know much about his side of the family, had two older sisters who basically raised him. And- Story_ID: 56959 Speaker 1: What now, just, just to go back to, to this--the term Geechee. Speaker 2: Geechee, yeah that's from the Gullah area of South Carolina, just outside of Charleston. Speaker 1: I just wanted to kind of explain that cause it's kind of a cultural-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. I mean if you, if you rent the movie Daughters of the Dusk, you know it kind of goes, you know there's a slave colony. You know South Carolina is one of the largest slave states in the, in the Union. It was a port of entrance for many of, of slaves. So a lot of the culture was retained in South Carolina on the plantations there because you had such a large number of slave to, to master ratio I guess. So in the, in the Gullah Geechee area, they, they have a dialect that's very--what we now know as very African, customs are very African. And it, it just, you know you can't understand what they're saying. That's all I remember as a kid, like what he say? But you know, I guess maybe I should do a little bit more research on that. But you know I just always remember, you know, them saying my [maternal] grandfather [John Henry Sweeper] was Geechee, you know. So, but I spent a coup--not a whole summer down there, but I would go down periodically when I went to visit my grandmother [Julia Blunt Sweeper]; they divorced early. So they had my Uncle Peter, we, we called him Peter, he was John Henry Sweeper, Jr., and my mother [Margie Sweeper] was the second born. And then there was George, and then my, my mother's last sibling Beatrice, or they called her Beattrice [ph.] because down south they talk a little different. She had a different father. So there were four, four of them. So my mother was in Augusta [Georgia] and my grandfather was in Summerville [South Carolina]. And when I would go down the summers to visit my grandmother, sometimes I would go visit my grandfather and he was a, quite a character. Hard, scrabble, liked to drink and cuss and you know, just, just was a, you know, that man, but everybody loved him, you know. Fished, you know, he built a lot of the homes down there and did a lot of, you know, odd jobs like that. But just one of those guys that everybody knew him, you know. And very handsome too, so--but he remarried, we think. I don't think he ever got divorced from my grandmother, actually. I think he was a bigamist but you know, I wasn't there so I can't prove it. But--so he had a wife named Naomi who was also of Indian descent, Native American, a very nice lady. Speaker 1: Do you know what Native American group they were? Speaker 2: Not sure, no, never--you know it's, it's, it's sad sometimes when you, you know when you think and they're, they're not here now to ask, you know. And my mother was raised in an era where kids never asked questions, you know, that was a big thing. You know, children were to be seen and not heard and particularly down south. So you know, I'd ask her questions and I don't know, you know like we couldn't ask questions. You'd get popped in the mouth if you ask, you know, the wrong question. You stay out of grown folks' business, that type of thing. So you know the kinds of questions I would ask today I don't have the opportunity to 'cause they're no longer here. My grandfather passed away from pneumonia at the age of eighty six. But he had cancer, but he would have probably, you know, still been here if that drafty house that he bought didn't, didn't, you know--had better, a better heating system. He lived by himself till, till the end. He was determined to not, you know, be put in a nursing home, that type of man, you know. Just never, you know, wanted anybody to help him. So he lived in that drafty house and caught pneumonia and passed away. I want to say eight years ago, not really sure exactly. I can check the dates though and get, get them to you. Story_ID: 56960 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now are there any stories from the Gullah Geechee side of the family, or the Augusta, GA [Georgia] side? Speaker 2: None, none that I will tell publicly. Some things you have to kind of preserve, come on now, you know. You don't want your family looking so bad. Speaker 1: But this is history. Speaker 2: I know it's history, but you know part of, part of history--what I love about history is that, is that it's not an exact science, right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: That it is some, some of, some of the things, some of the things we whimsically would like to see happen in our lives. I'm not saying that I'm gonna make anything up. I'm just saying that you know, no I'm not sharing those stories. Speaker 1: Well we trying to get the stories too. Part of this, I mean this oral history is collecting the stories about what happened. Speaker 2: I have a great letter. Speaker 1: Not [unclear] exactly what happened. Speaker 2: I have a great letter that I will not share here today, but I will give to you from my grandmother [Julia Blunt] to my grandfather [John Sweeper] basically cussing him out. My grandmother was--I love that lady. But you know basically, you know tellin' him, you know I'm doin' all of this by myself and you know, you haven't contributed to any of these kids, you know, anything. And you know so it was, it was really fascinating to, to hear her express herself in a time when women, you know, most women stayed in a, in a relationship back then. I mean this--we're talking, what they get together in the 1920s, 1930s, you know. Speaker 1: Did, did they live together in Augusta [Georgia] or in South Carolina? Speaker 2: They lived together in Augusta and he went--when they separated, he went back home to South Carolina. So my mother [Margie Sweeper] would spend her summers in South Carolina, but not with him because he had a new wife. So she would spend my--her brother [John Henry Sweeper, Jr.] would spend it with him, which he hated, and my mother would be with his sisters Pearl and Wilhelmina, you know those were his two sisters, mostly with Pearl. And she loved both of, both of our aunts, but they would be separate and my uncle hated staying with my grandfather cause he was, you know, he was a tough guy. So you know it wasn't a lot of fun. They weren't playing Chutes and Ladders and Monopoly and stuff, so-- Speaker 1: So he, he did like contracting work. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he smoked, he drank, you know he was, you know he was just a, you know, kind of a really you know, diff--difficult personality, you know. But at the same, you know, for a, for adults I guess that's great, you know, he's that guy that you wanna play cards with and hang out with. But for kids they're like come on. Want to, want to have fun, right? Story_ID: 56961 Speaker 1: All right, James Brown. Speaker 2: James Brown, yeah. Speaker 1: The Godfather, you know. Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting. I did a book with Al Sharpton and he, you know a lot of it is, is paying homage to James Brown. Not in that particular book, but we, we were starting to work on another book and you know he was telling me about--James Brown was his, in many ways his father. You know, Reverend Al didn't, didn't grow up with a, with a dad in his home and as a matter of fact, his father did something really horrific that he shared in his autobiography. And you guys can--when you do History Makers with him, you can talk to him about it. But you know he, he talks about James Brown teaching him how to be a man and taking him different places. And, and the time if you imagine in a time during Jim Crow, you know he was a dark skinned black man, you know from Augusta, Georgia who basically told everyone to kiss his butt. I'm black and I'm proud. And he went out and made his own money and, and he defied, you know Jackie Wilson and all these, you know Smokey [Robinson], you know all these light skinned black men. Here comes this dark skinned--not so attractive black man, but just setting the, the table in a way that you couldn't even imagine. But the impact that he had, not just on culture. Cause I remember Say it Loud, I'm black and I'm and Proud as a little kid and being impacted by that. But, but to have him impact a whole generation of young people like Michael Jackson. So upon his death, Michael Jackson secretly came in and Reverend Al, you know, facilitated him in to, to view the body. And Michael spent time with the body and he did James Brown hair, which is--yeah, that's weird, right? Did James Brown's hair because he was so--they had such a connection that people don't even know about that Michael wanted to do something for him, you know, in, in his death. And, and he, he did his hair in the morgue, in the, in the funeral parlor. And I thought that was very interesting. But yeah, James Brown is probably the most famous Augustan if, you know, from our side of things. Speaker 1: Now did your grandmother [Julia Blunt Sweeper] know him? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did she know about him? Speaker 2: Of course she knew about him, everybody knew. Speaker 1: Growing up, you know, in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 56962 Speaker 1: My, my family was not you know, and it, and it's weird, you know kind of sitting here today. But even, you know and I'll tell you about my dad [Donald Hunter] later, but you know my mom [Margie Sweeper] was kind of like an under the radar, you know nobody wanted to stick their head up too far, you know. Augusta [Georgia] while it was not Alabama, you know it wasn't Mississippi, you know it had it's, it's very strong you know, laws you know. De facto laws. And black folks needed to know their place, you know. I will share the story when my parents met, my father's from Newark, New Jersey. And Newark is quite different from Augusta. But he couldn't go to school here. He, he worked his way through school and I'll, I'll get into that as well. So he, he went to Allen University, trying to think it was Allen College [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Maybe we should save--when we get to him. Speaker 1: We should save it. But the, the story's going to--like the personalities are so-- Speaker 2: I, I know we're gone come again. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right so, so you know my mom is, is, is to this day still you know the type of person who, you know she's, she's not you know, quiet by any stretch of the imagination. She's a spitfire. But there's still internally this, this, this kind of--I won't say fear, but you don't wanna rock the boat, you know. You're not going to make waves, you're not, you're not gonna, you know, necessarily be out there marching. You're not, you know what I'm saying? You, you don't want to be that person that's going to get lynched or, or you know, thrown in jail or anything like that. So, so you know even my grandmother [Julia Blunt Sweeper]--she's well loved. Speaker 2: Did they have some stories? I mean did, did, did your mother tell, tell you some stories about growing up? Speaker 1: My mother talked about, you know, she and her brother going downtown to sit at the lunch counter. But you know, and then my grandmother was like y'all better get your butts in here, you know, you know that type of thing. So they weren't really allowed to participate the way maybe they even wanted to, or maybe they wanted to participate because everybody was doing it. But, but there was a understanding that you're not going but so far because your, your preservation of life has to, you know, predominate over this notion of freedom and equality. So I, I get that sense, you know that there was just, just living, you know every, every generation just lived to get through, to get by. You know my, my grandmother had a sister and she had like, you know, nine kids, Aunt Pinky. And they're fun people and you know, laugh, they love to laugh. But, but it's just like just get by, get through, get by, get through. There's not this--you know so there's no like incredible stories of you know, perseverance or success or anything. Speaker 2: But, but what I hear you saying there's a lot of tension where those-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah like-- Speaker 2: You know where freedom meets oppression. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and I, and I think that that's natural. There's a natural frustration when you, when you have all this pent up emotion and energy and you can't express it, you know, so you drink, or you, you go crazy, you know. Which there, there is some mental illness, you know my, like my, my grandmother's father, you know. Rumor has it he had to go to Millersville or some, you know, one of those places you know to, to get right, you know. But I, I can't imagine you know, living in that time, maybe being a, being a black man and not being able to provide for your family the way you want to, or not being able to do the things that you really want to. And you know, actually I carry that with me all the time. I carry those thoughts with me through the things that I do because one of the, one of the things I want my life to be is representative of, of, of the possibilities. Of the unbridled possibilities of whatever I think I wanna, do I'm gonna do because my, my, my ancestors couldn't. Because they, you know they had thoughts and dreams and hopes and wishes that they couldn't fulfill. Story_ID: 56963 Speaker 1: Now, now did your mother [Margie Sweeper] have an aspiration? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: As she was coming that she wanted to-- Speaker 2: You see what I'm saying? So she might have, but, but to give thought to it, to, to imagine it, to have it burning inside of you and not be able to fulfill it. What kind of pain is that? So then you don't really hope for much more than maybe I'm gone get married, have a job, have a kid. To be honest with you, you know that was kind of what they thought, you know for me. Just get, you know just get a job, get a Civil Service job, you know just like get a safe job, get a pension. You know retire and then, you know but to me I'm like what kind of life is that? Who wants to, who wants to do that? You know. So I had to keep my own aspirations secret really for a long time cause I didn't want to have the opposition. Like well why are you doing that? What is that? You know, nobody here does that. You know so, so those, those notions of, of like fancy of like I wanna, I wanna be a doctor. I don't think they ever were, were germinated in my mother. My father [Donald Hunter], quite a different character. But my mother, I think she just--if she had 'em, she killed them, killed those dreams. If she had 'em, she doused water on them before the, the sparks turned into embers and fire into flame or whatever. Story_ID: 56964 Speaker 1: Now, now was she [Margie Sweeper, mother] able to finish high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, she finished high school, went to Paine, Paine College [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia]. I don't know what she was gonna do there. And then met my dad. And, and couldn't wait to get the heck up out of Augusta [Georgia]. Offered her passage out of, out of this, this mundane existence, right, excitement. Speaker 1: Now do you know what high school she went to? Speaker 2: Yeah, Lucy Laney [Lucy Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia], actually spoke last year at their 50th high school reunion. It was the honor of my life to go to my mother's high school reunion and be their guest speaker, you know. But what was more honorable was to see how close those people are fifty years later. It's like, it's like the, the hands of time rolled back and they were in high school again and they all like the, the camaraderie, the love, the--I mean they're just--today I think a lot of relationships are so superficial. But when I look at my mother and her classmates, they still--they travel together. They have like trips throughout the year. They keep it--I mean they are so tight, it's as if they're fifteen, sixteen years old again and watching them talk--it was just a pleasure. And I was a little jealous. I was like man, you know. So, so while you're raised in this crazy you know, time period you know, where you have to go to Lucy Laney because you can't go to the white school, right. So Lucy Laney, this great historian, educator, created this school for kids who look like her to get an education, right. While you had to do that, the benefit was you guys came together in a way that today--even today is enviable, you know to, to have those kinds of deep serious bonds. So, so you know I don't know, which one would you rather have? I'm, I'm--all right you ask me questions. But yeah, Lucy Laney High School, and then she went to Paine for a year and change, so- Speaker 1: Paine is spelled P-A-I-- Speaker 2: --I-N-E? Speaker 1: --I-N-E? Okay. Speaker 2: Well don't quote me, 'cause I don't want to be wrong. Speaker 1: Yeah, I always get it mixed up with--you know, I think about the Payne who founded--the other Payne, Wilberforce Payne, Theological Seminary [Payne Seminary, Wilberforce, Ohio], P-A-Y- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think this is P-A-I-N-E. Speaker 1: P-A-I-N-E. Okay. Yeah, I thought so. Yeah, so you're the second person on this trip that mentioned Lucy Laney and Paine College and all that. Speaker 2: Lucy Laney, a powerful lady. Speaker 1: Didn't she have something to do with the Presbyterian Church or something? Speaker 2: She and Nannie Helen Burroughs kind of have similar paths, but you know I always--one of, one of the things when you ask me what is it that I do. I think teacher should be number one, you know because it's the one thing that I am most proud of, you know. It's the one thing that I think is, is the most important job you can do in this life. So anybody that has the, the, the wherewithal, particularly during that time to say I'm gonna start a school, I'm gonna educate my kids, I'm gone make sure that I'm gonna, you know create an environment for, for success, you know. You just got to applaud that, so yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 56965 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side now. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Donald, D-O-N-A-L-D Hunter, no middle name. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve, 16, 1960 [12/16/1960], Newark, New Jersey, 1940. He couldn't be born in 1960, that would be impossible. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was getting ready to say-- Speaker 2: That would make him like really, really weird. Speaker 1: This was in the Guinness Book of-- Speaker 2: Yeah man, he'd be like nasty, 1940. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and where was he born? Speaker 2: Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Newark, okay, Newark, New Jersey, okay. Well what do you know about your father's ancestors? Speaker 2: A lot, a lot, a lot, a lot. We could trace back to Handy Hunter, who was a minister on a plantation in a little space called Arthur's Quarters, South Carolina. Just outside-- Speaker 1: Arthur's? Speaker 2: It was a slave community just outside of Columbia [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Is it-- Speaker 2: Arthur, like the name. Speaker 1: Arthur, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Arthur's Town or Arthur's Quarters. And he was a, you know a jackleg slave preacher. Speaker 1: You said Arthur's Quarters, what state was that? Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: South Carolina, okay. Speaker 2: Just outside of Columbia. Story_ID: 56966 Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. And actually I could give you the whole--my father [Donald Hunter] spent a lot of time recording the history and writing it down and he was--he was an interesting man. One of eight, he had--he was named after Donald O'Connor, his mother--he's got a brother Melvin, he's got a brother George after, you know so, so she loved old movies, right, and none of them have middle names. But--so it's four boys and four girls. My grandmother had her first child at twelve, and came up from South Carolina with my grandfather, his name was Colia, C-O-L-I-A Hunter, and my grandmother's name was Vernell, V-E-R-N-E-L-L. And came up from South Carolina. My grandfather also had family in Florida, cause my father talks about driving down all seven at that time, kids, in my grandfather's giant car and they would have you know, four on the seat in the back and my father and his brother would have to sit on the floor, you know, with the hump in the middle, all the way to Florida before there was a turnpike, you know. It's like that ride was hell and he was like miserable and you know my grandparents be in the front with the baby and, and got feet in your face and you know--but he's got all of those stories and you know, growing up in basically two rooms in Newark [New Jersey]. You know, you have to share a bathroom with like four other families. You know, four, four boys sleeping in a bed, you know, head-to-toe, you know. You know god forbid one of them, you know has a, you know pees in the bed or something. It's just like--so he had a very impoverished upbringing, right. No, no bathtubs, you know, washing up in the sink, that, that kind of thing. Nobody--I don't think my grandmother finished high school. I do know that you know he talked about his, his father reading like every newspaper, but I'm not sure if he finished high school. But I know that he put a high premium on, on you know at least reading the news every day. He would have the papers stacked and he'd come home from work. So my--I'm not sure what my grandfather did in addition to, but he also opened up a little corner store. But they didn't make much money. And my father talks of like selling watermelon out of a truck when he was like six or seven. Working in a chicken store, he and his brothers when he was like eight or nine. I guess they didn't have any child labor laws back then. Collecting bottles, his mother would wake them up at five a.m. and they would have to go out and collect bottles, you know. So to the day he died, he would be up every morning at like five a.m. just because that's kind of like you know, part of his DNA. Out of the chicken store which he worked in through high school, it was a Jewish chicken store. He learned values, business in a way that had a profound impact on the man he was to become. And he also saved enough money to become the first person in his family to go to college. So he, he wanted to go to Seton Hall, but Seton Hall University [South Orange, New Jersey] at the time did not allow blacks, so he went to Allen [now Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] where he had a cousin who was the head of the Music Department, John Hunter. Story_ID: 56967 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Allen-- Speaker 2: Allen College or Allen, Allen--and it's in Columbia [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, is it Richard Allen? Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, think it is Richard Allen inspired or named school. Speaker 1: AME [African Methodist Episcopal] school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, in Columbia, okay. Okay, so he had a, a cousin [John Hunter] in the Music Department there? Speaker 2: Yeah, John, John ran the choir--kind of famous down there. And not just down there cause that choir traveled. You know during that time at historical black colleges, they weren't so historical but they, you know back then, you know the, their, their bands and their, their choirs were, were world renowned. You know I mean we, we're talking about, you know--Jessie Norman went to school with my mother. Since I'm now remembering. Yes, Jessie Norman was one of her classmates. Think she was a year or two ahead of her, or behind her. Jessie Norman's sister might have been in my mother's class. But yeah, so you, you're, you're talking about even during that time, you know, people breaking out of molds and, and, and doing things at, at a level that today I think we should be ashamed of the mediocrity that we produce when you think about how excellent, you know, these folks were. And my cousin John had like a dynamic choir, but my father [Donald Hunter] was able to go to school there because of him. Story_ID: 56968 Speaker 1: Okay, we got your father [Donald Hunter] at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Allen, yes, yes he worked his way up to like working in the Business Department there and ended up majoring in business. So he had a--he got his degree in Business Administration and Accounting. And while he was down there, he, he worked at this boys' home and that's where he met my Uncle Peter [John Henry Sweeper, Jr.] and my father loved to play cards; that was one of his things. Bid whist, blackjack, tonk, pinochle, you name the card game, he could play it. And my Uncle Peter was quite a card shark himself, so he brought him home. My grandmother Julia [Julia Blunt Sweeper] was the grand dame of cards. That woman--brilliant, and Scrabble. She taught--my father taught me how to play Scrabble, but my grandmother taught me how to play like ten different kinds of card games and to this day I'm not to be toyed with, no. But--so he brought him home and that's where he met my mother [Margie Sweeper]. And he's like who's that, who's that young lady? And my mother at the time was dating this guy named Tank, but she dumped him for my father and they had a whirlwind romance and they got married really quickly and had to leave, cause I think they were gonna lynch my father if he stayed there another week or day. He got into--well while he was there he got arrested a couple of times when these civil unrests, you know, sit-ins. Speaker 1: He's in Augusta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, no in South Carolina. Speaker 1: In South Carolina, okay. Speaker 2: South Carolina. He was, you know from Newark [New Jersey] he's like what? I got to what? Get off the sidewalk. I got to put my hat, I got to what? No, I can't eat here. Speaker 1: So this was in about 1960 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, bout 1962. Speaker 1: '62 [1962], yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: '62 [1962], '60 [1960]. They got married in '64 [1964], so this was like--he was down there. I think he graduated in '62 [1962], down there a year. Kept getting in trouble, you know, cause he couldn't wrap his head around this boy thing. And not that Newark [New Jersey] didn't have its problems, but it was just a lot different, you know. You didn't have the signs, you knew you couldn't go, go to you know, certain stores in Newark. You couldn't go to Woolworth's in Newark. You couldn't go to certain stores, but you know, they didn't tell you with the sign. And they didn't call you out, you know, out your name. You may not be hired at Prudential [Prudential Financial] early--actually Prudential's one of the first to integrate in the 1940's, but that's another story. But you know so he, he wasn't getting along too well down south and they said to him boy, I think you might want to consider leaving. And he said okay, you ain't got to tell me, you know, I'm out. Married my mom and whipped her up to Newark real quick. So--and that was 1964. Story_ID: 56969 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was born in wedlock. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which was a big deal for my father [Donald Hunter], by the way. He had his whole thing with out-of-wedlock births, drove him crazy. So anyway-- Speaker 1: Now was your father's side of the family--did they take after Hardy Handy in terms of the religious-- Speaker 2: I mean yeah they were--my grandmother [Vernell Hunter] was Pentecostal, you know. My father tells some crazy stories of going to church and you know, you always could time when my grandmother was gonna get the Holy Ghost, you know in the pews. They had this little like, you know these, these storefront churches and, and you know all of the, the pews would be flying cause she was a big, robust woman. And you know that was like exciting for him just waiting for her to get the Holy Ghost. He's quite a character. But yeah, no I mean, I, I think I, I've--I think very few black families, you know, of that time weren't religious. You know like everybody went to church is where you, you gathered your information. It's where you could connect and be yourself. Church was where you could be a man or a woman, you could get dressed up. You know during your days as a, as a porter or a maid or whatever, where you have to be subjugated to, to the white will, church is one place you could put on your finest gear and your hats and your gloves and really be a human being. So for a lot of us, you know that is where we, we got to be human, you know. So, so even if you didn't really, really believe that there is a God and really, really, you know understand that Jesus is your savior, or even understand these scriptures, you understood that part. So, so church is where you could express yourself. Where you had to kind of be a silence--what is it the spook that sat by the door type, you know. This place you could get the Holy Ghost and run laps or whatever, you know. Speaker 1: People would do that in church, right, run around the church. Speaker 2: I mean so that, that was my father's experience. My, my mother's [Margie Sweeper] was much more subdued. My father, Pentecostal, holy, sanctified, you know. Not quite Father Divine even though the, you know, Daddy Grace you know that, that was part of that experience too in Newark [New Jersey]. But you know, entertaining. The music and you know, the tambourines and so you know my father would talk about he, he and his brother having to triple clap and the double clap and you know, very fun, and they could sing and you know. So I got a little bit of that, but I'm not doing that today unless you pay me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. We'll just do the interview. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, let's talk. Speaker 1: Now if you know a song you can sing, we won't-- Speaker 2: No, I'm not singing. You have to catch me on the next go-round. Story_ID: 56970 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so your parents married in '64 [1964], you were born in-- Speaker 2: September '64 [1964], I was born in April of '66 [1966]. I think I, I tell the story of coming out grabbing, trying to grab everything to make sure that nothing would come behind me. My mother [Margie Sweeper] had five miscarriages after me, which is painful but at the same time, you know, interesting that I even got here. And I have a brother who was born in '88 [1988] and they call him the Miracle Child cause she had an ectopic pregnancy. I was three years old and she passed out in the house and I ran next door and got the neighbors and like my mommy's--you know, and they you know, called the ambulance and I, I guess I saved her life. She should owe me something, huh? But--and so she, she had, you know a bunch of miscarriages, carried one to six months. I mean it was kind of horrific. As a kid I didn't process that, but you know I always kept, you know, wanting a brother or sister. But I got kind of used to the idea of being by myself at a point, you know. And, and then here comes my brother eleven years later. You know and I was like it's too late now. I'm over this whole sibling thing, you know. But there he is. Story_ID: 56971 Speaker 1: Okay, so now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their attitudes, their habits, their hobbies, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Who do you think I take after? Speaker 1: That's a good question. Speaker 2: Most people say I look like my father [Donald Hunter] and I act like my father. And I would tend to agree with them with certain modifications. You know my mother [Margie Sweeper] smoothed me out a little bit. My father was a very dark skinned, intense man. I have his eyes definitely. And I probably have his demeanor with I, I say to--what I used to joke about 'cause I embarrassed them a lot on purpose. And I say I'm the public representation of the way you act in the home. 'Cause they were both very dignified people, right very--my father, not only did he graduate from college, but, but he spent his, his entire adulthood like absorbing knowledge. Like Rut--Rudyard Kipling, Napoleon Hill. I mean he had books and would read them over and over again. How to--his diction was perfect. Like I, I'm embarrassing him right now, God rest his soul. And I, I do things on purpose because--and I'll tell you about this later. But my father--impeccable. Probably until his fifties you couldn't get him outside of a suit and tie. He called that his bulletproof vest, you know when he was out in public because he was a very dark skinned, you know kind of tall, thin black man, intimidating persona. He felt like he always had to have on a suit and tie because if he ever got pulled over, he at least would distinguish himself as somebody worth of, you know, respect, and he carried himself that way. He did not play. He opened a corner store. He, he actually--his father [Colia Hunter]--the store that my grandfather had was you know, really where they lived out of, basically, you know where the family was able to eat eight, eight mouths. But my father took that store when he came back from college and took it over and created a mini empire. For eighteen years on the corner of Ridgewood and Madison [Newark, New Jersey], he employed several dozen kids from the neighborhood. Every kid had to have on a white lab coat, and these are teenagers, white lab coats. He would bring them home every night and watch them in bleach. Everything had to be crystal, pristine. I would go down to the store and he's constantly wiping down the, there's not a ounce of dust anywhere, nothing, you know out of place. To this day, my--if you look in my refrigerator, everything's lined up because that's the way I was raised. If you open my refrigerator--people come in, come to my house and be like my God, you know who does this? Every soda, juice, water, lined up in perfect order. Story_ID: 56972 Speaker 1: My father was OCD [Obsessive Compulsive Disorder] and I am OCD as well. Very anal, very, very anal. But he was raised if you imagine, in a house that he would describe in horror, all right, as filthy, right. Cause my, my grandmother [Vernell Hunter] you know being so young having all these kids one after, one year after the next, after the next--I think she finished having kids at age 23, eight kids by 23, that's like a lot of kids, right really quickly. And that's a lot of babies, a lot of--she didn't--no one taught her how to take care of home, really. How to be a parent. She just knows I have to survive with these kids, right. So you know my father would talk about the rats and the roaches growing up and be horrified. So as an adult, if my mother [Margie Sweeper] left paper somewhere for more than a day, he didn't care what it was, he wasn't looking at it, it just had to go. There's things in the corners, you can't leave shoes here, you, you know, very you know, like that, and I got that. I understood it, you know cause of his background, that represents dirty, roaches, rat--things that he's not ever gonna revisit in his adult life and he didn't. He would get up every morning at 5:00, he mopped the floor. Cleaned the--you know, that was his thing, all right. He had a--he was funny. He had a, a love of, of aquariums. He had a 300 gallon fish tank that we had to remove an entire wall it into the house, into the basement, that's still there to this day because nobody's removing a wall to get it out. But you know he would--he was so anal that he would vacuum his fish tank like every day. So we went away to Georgia for one summer, came back and he was always wondering why aren't my fish having babies? You know like for ten years he would just have to keep replenishing the fish tank cause his fish would never procreate. And he came back and saw babies in the tank and realized that he was cleaning the tank so much that he was probably vacuuming up eggs and just would not let anything you know, right. So it was like okay, let me let them do their thing. Maybe it has to be dirty for a minute, a day, you know so that they can get busy and do what they have to do. But that's how much attention he paid to things like that, you know, and I got it. I completely understood him and, and you know on many levels if, if you're terrorized by roaches and things like that, why in the heck would you ever want to have that environment in your life? So that was one of his pet peeves. So who am I more like? Probably more like my father. Story_ID: 56973 Speaker 1: There's another side to that. Some people get used to them. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They get used to having rats and roaches. Speaker 2: Well, I mean he has siblings that would, that would--we would classify as being used to it. He wasn't that one, but I, you know I look at him, he wasn't the oldest, he was the middle child, right, literally. So he got to see a lot and got to say to himself I don't see these models represented in my house per se, although his father [Colia Hunter] had a work ethic that he, he followed. Like he really admired that, that he would--and that he stayed there when a lot of men may have run away from the responsibility of all of these, these kids, right. And the illiterate wife, maybe it just--you know what I'm saying? But he was there. So that was another thing that my father [Donald Hunter] was really big on men being there no matter what the circumstance, you got to be there for those kids. You got to take care of those kids. So you know, that notion of getting up at 5:00 in the morning, he would go down, open his store. He had to get there that early because in Newark [New Jersey] if you left your papers out, they would be gone, you know. So he'd get up 5:00, go down, meet the paper guy, open the store and then go to his job, which was a parole officer, he was a parole officer for sixteen years in Newark, right, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, now well yeah, so this--so he--he came back, took over the store, but then had another-- Speaker 2: Got a Civil Service job cause you got to have a secure job with a pension. Worked for the state as a parole officer. Speaker 1: So who, who, you know ran the store when he was-- Speaker 2: His, he had three brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of them got killed really young, Melvin was his favorite brother. He got jumped by six men and stabbed to death in Newark in a pool hall. Really tragic. But his brother George, and then like I said there were kids from the neighborhood who he had raised up basically to work different shifts. He had a sister, one of his sisters would work there. But here's what he'd do. See as a parole officer, what's your job--it's not a nine to five type of job. So he would check in and then shortly after checking in, 9:00, go back to the store. And probably work there, you know, intermittently throughout the day. You know he had a state car, go visit his parolees, come back to the store. And then come back to close it at eleven. Come home, reconcile the books for the day. He had a little office in our house. And you know probably hit the, hit the sack at midnight. And he did that every single day. Saturday, Sunday, holidays, much to my mom's [Margie Sweeper] chagrin. That would be the biggest fight in the house. You not going down to that store, it's Christmas, it's Christmas. We had a blizzard one year. My father--this is history. He's not here anymore to defend himself, but he called the Fire Department cause he couldn't get out of the driveway to open the store. So he figured the Fire Department would make tracks big enough for him to be able to follow, crazy right? This is my father though. Called the Fire Department, and this is before they had Caller ID otherwise he probably would have been in jail. And said he was someplace else, and they came down our street. My mother was like I cannot believe you did that, that's really--like she's the one that's scared. They gone come get you. And my father's like shut up, this--you know, I got to get down to the store. So they--the fire trucks sure enough made--and he was able to get out the driveway and go down West Market Street to, to open that store. That's my father, okay. Story_ID: 56974 Speaker 1: So, so this is all in, this is Newark [New Jersey], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in Newark, yeah with the store. Speaker 1: And, and what was the name of the store? Speaker 2: It was Hunter, Hunter Corner, Corner Store, it was called the Corner Store. Initially he would pretend that like Mr. Lipman owned the store, but you know the genie was out of the bottle relatively quickly, you know. Speaker 1: Okay now, Mr. Lipman is the Jewish guy? Speaker 2: Yeah, he just made up a Jewish name cause he figured that black people would respect that more. He was a character. Shaquille O'Neal would come in the store. Shaquille O'Neal is you know, from Newark or had part of his childhood--he grew up in Newark. He was like he came home, he's like the largest individual I've ever seen in my life came into the store today. A huge individual, that's how he talked, huge. Good great day. He was only like twelve or eleven and you know, Shaquille O'Neal. I can't imagine what that looked like. Speaker 1: Largest individual I've ever-- Speaker 2: Seen in my life came into the store. A lot of people would--people from that area, Ridgewood and Madison, that area of Newark, knew that store, knew my father. It had an impact, you know. Story_ID: 56975 Speaker 1: Now did--now you were born right--just two years before the riots in Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do, do you remember the riots or did you remember stories about them? Speaker 2: No, but I'm actually doing a history book right now, as you mention it, for Bethany Baptist Church and that's the church that I was baptized in, my mom [Margie Sweeper] is a prominent member there. Amiri Baraka's family, Leroy Jones' family is prominent, prominent church-goers at Bethany. I think Leroy's mom was the--was the Head Nurse at the black, black owned hospital in Newark. But I have many riot stories because the riots actually kicked off at a housing project named after one of the pastors from Bethany. So I know much of what happened, but no I don't, don't know what happened and my dad [Donald Hunter], you know, talks about the Jewish flight and I mean he was, he was an historian, very well versed in you know, spoke Yiddish. You know just kind of like really immersed himself in, in the things around him that, that could help him get ahead. You know what I mean? And also understood how to navigate, you know. So he was from there, he grew up on Prince Street, you know he was from there, went to Charleston Street School [Newark, New Jersey], went to South Side High School which became Shabbaz from Newark. Lived in Newark most of his life, but, but somehow understood that there was a world outside of Newark and things outside of what he saw around him that he wanted to do. Story_ID: 56976 Speaker 1: And he was very driven in a way that I don't see too many people. I, I take that. Watching him get up every morning, watching him come home every night, watching the diligence, watching just the methodical way in which he did things at the same time he played hard. You couldn't find a more, you know, competitive person. He taught me how to play Scrabble when I was eight and beat me mercilessly. And I'm like I'm a little kid, like why, why don't you let me win? I'm not gone let you win, you beat me. You, you want to win, beat me. And so that made me study the dictionary. To this day, like there's very--I haven't met anyone yet in, in real life, you know online they cheat. But in real life I haven't met anybody who could beat me at Scrabble. I think I might need to enter a tournament just to see what's out there. But you know in my regular social life, nobody can beat me in Scrabble because at eight, now I'm that person. Like oh, okay, so then I used to beat him so bad, you know in his later years. And he would, he would be mad. He'd cheat. He was a, he was a notorious cheater. He would feel in the bag for the smooth letter, you know, cause that's where the blanks are. I'm like just pull your letters, stop feeling in the bag. He would hide letters under his board. He was ridiculous, he hated to lose. So I'm like him, but I will, I refuse to cheat cause I find it distasteful, you know, but probably cheated me when I was eight too. Probably was cheating then too. But, yeah--what's your next question? Speaker 2: Okay, now we- Story_ID: 56977 Speaker 1: Look, I've got you--I went on a sidetrack. Speaker 2: This is a, this is a--no it's not a sidetrack. This is what we, we really want. When we ask, ask these questions as a, as a regular thing. I always ask if you have an earliest childhood memory. Speaker 1: Too many. Speaker 2: An earliest, an earliest. Speaker 1: Earliest, yes I remember learning how to tie my shoes at two. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I remember learning, Ms. Murray who was my babysitter, lived across the hall from us. We were in East Orange [New Jersey], we lived on North Arlington Avenue across the street from the library. And in this building, Ms. Murray lived across the hall from us and she used to babysit me and I remember I had red hush puppies. And I, I know I was two because I was two when we lived there. I remember there was a commercial, a Spaghetti commercial and it was "Uh, oh, Spaghettis." And I used to walk around the house doing that, uh, oh, Spaghetti song. There was also a Wrigley Spearmint Gum song. I might have been eighteen months, cause I remember singing it. I remember that, that commercial, you know. My parents [Donald Hunter and Margie Sweeper] were--would play cards, they played cards a lot, right, that's part of my earliest memories. They'd have a bucket of fried chicken on a Friday night and I'd be in my crib with--and they were smokers too. I probably have lung disease as a result. But it's like--there's stories around that, you know, me being in the crib just watching them play cards and then just falling asleep. I was a good baby; I didn't bother them, you know I just would watch. So--but I do distinctly remember learning how to tie my shoes and how, how I felt at that moment, you know. It was like the loop, loop, boom and I got it and I was like yeah, what. But yeah those are--that's my earliest memory. Story_ID: 56978 Speaker 1: Now what were some of the--in your household growing up then it was your mother [Margie Sweeper], your father [Donald Hunter], you. Speaker 2: Me. Speaker 1: For many-- Speaker 2: For a long time. Speaker 1: For a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did any uncles or aunts and grandparents live with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody rolled through. Now we--my Uncle Peter [John Henry Sweeper, Jr.] lived with us for a couple of years. He was in Vietnam, came back and then he became like a, a chef and manager at restaurants--odd jobs everywhere. Came--was a notorious gambler. And he lived with us for a couple of years till my mother [Margie Sweeper] put him out. And then my Uncle George[Sweeper] lived with us for a few years until my mother put him out. She, she puts people out. At some point she gets like you got to go. My grandmother would stay with us a lot when I was little. But you know, that was it. You know, just, just pretty much us and you know, in this nice house, in East Orange [New Jersey], in a suburban neighborhood with a--everyone, you know, with their little tree lined, grass cut, you know my father was another who--in addition to everything else, his lawn. Like setting a standard in the neighborhood was important. Like he would go to the neighbors if their lawn wasn't quite right and say can I cut your grass for you? Which was basically him saying cut your grass, 'cause you, you know, you look around, everybody else's lawn looks nice, why is your lawn looking like this? Like--but he was so polite and public and--but when he'd get in the house--he would--but you know he was gracious and charming and you know, that person. Story_ID: 56979 Speaker 1: Now did he have a--did they ever talk about a mentor that he had, someone that-- Speaker 2: The, the, the Jewish owner of that chicken store. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know. Who really, you know he, he [Donald Hunter, father] was fascinated. He said people would come in the chicken store and cuss them out and spit in their face and they would, you know, wipe the spit off and take the money, right. And in his mind he was like you know, shoot I'd be ready, you know--but he, he sat there and he watched that. He said and then they would take that money and he watched them put the two kids through college, nice home, car. And he learned in that moment that your emotions and, and how you feel about something can't take precedent over your objective, which is to make that money. And I think that's why he was so good at it. He amassed enough money in a--in that store, and he worked extremely hard. But you know I didn't have a school loan, thank God, you know. And he was able to retire, which was a big mistake. Because you give somebody with that kind of mind nothing to do, and then they find like crazy things to do, which he did. Blew through all kind of cockamamie things. Half a million dollars in like two, three years. It's--I'm talking cash, just doing crazy stuff. But you know, the, the reason why he left the store [Hunter Corner Store]. He had been robbed a few times. But the last time a guy came in with a double barrel shotgun and stuck it in his face, shaky hands, and he was like I can't keep doing this, you know. Like he saw his life literally in that moment that you know, this young kid has nothing, absolutely nothing to lose. He's got this double barrel shotgun in my face. I'm giving him everything but, you know, it's getting really bad. I'm leaving, you know. And he'd come home with stories before, getting robbed. Somebody came in and made everyone get on the floor and undress, you know it was like you know, there's all--it was funny stories. That was the one story that wasn't funny. At that point it was like yeah, I gotta go. So, you know, so, so that kind of like you know shaped his, his--the rest--the latter part of his life, you know. Having all of this money and then you know like he'd get new cars every two years. Like tailored suits and you know, Johnson Murphy--you know like he was dapper, you know, he was sharp, sharp man, you know. Back in the day with the hats and all, you know but not, not pimp style, like really sharp. But you know retirement wasn't good for somebody like that at all. He was somebody that needed to continue to do something, you know. Story_ID: 56980 Speaker 1: Okay. What--when did he [Donald Hunter, father] retire? Was it--when was it? Speaker 2: At forty eight. He had a premonition that he would die at fifty, that was his thing. Which is why I think he probably did all the things that he did, you know, and was so manic in accomplishing these things because his, his father died at forty nine or fifty. His father's father died at like forty eight. No man in his family, no man in his family had lived past fifty. Speaker 1: So this was like the late '80s [1980's]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he said I'm gone, I'm not gonna live past fifty. So we're like okay. You know it's like who, who thinks like--so, so he retired at like forty eight and spent two years like just going buck wild crazy, spending money, gambling at Trump. Like Donald Trump probably owes me some money, I think so, I think he does, owes my family something. But what was funny was fifty came and then fifty five and then sixty and I'm like you're still here. You know it's like don't you regret it, you know? Don't you regret all of that? He's like I don't understand it. I don't understand it. And he made it to seventy, which was a record, you know. So-- Speaker 1: Well did, did he retire from the-- Speaker 2: He left the Parole Board, parole office, he left that shortly before he left the store, so maybe two--he was there sixteen years. He had the store for eighteen years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right, so-- Speaker 1: But he didn't retire from the state. Speaker 2: No, he, he did. Speaker 1: He did? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So he was there long enough to get a retirement. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he had a pension and everything. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was his point-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he had to go back to work after all that. It was like--another funny story, he used to dye his hair. He was gray very early and so when he finally earned the gray hair, you know in his fifties, you know he had to dye it 'cause he's like now I got to be out here working; people can't know how old I am, you know. It's like, you know nobody wants to hire a old man, you know that whole thing. So he had to go back to work, so he ended up working for welfare, he was a case examiner and DYFS [Division of Youth and Family Services], worked for DYFS, you know but even there--people have stories about him in those. Story_ID: 56981 Speaker 1: But okay now we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of New Orleans? What? Sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 1: Some of the sights and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Growing up, all right. Grandma [Julia Blunt Sweeper] in Georgia baking in the morning, bacon. The smell of bacon waking you up in the morning, one of the best smells ever, ever. Sounds, I don't know, I don't know. I lived in a quiet neighborhood, but some of the sounds, kids playing outside my window and I'm on punishment. Didn't happen often, but you know, you're in the window like come on. I can't think of any others. You know what, I actually--you ask that question. It's interesting, I'm a writer, you know, I do consider myself a writer but I'm not one that's heavy on imagination. I don't rely a lot on fancy and you know, whimsical thoughts. I've kind of spent my life in a very literal place, you know, in a very now place. Not in a very kind of introspective, you know kind of like--so you, you're asking me things now that I would never explore in real life, so that's interesting cause I don't spend a lot of time on those things, smelling the flowers. Story_ID: 56982 Speaker 1: Well what did your neighborhood look like? Speaker 2: Tree lined, beautiful. We lived in something they call the Presidential Section of, of East Orange [New Jersey]. I grew up in East Orange, New Jersey, so you have Arlington Avenue on one side, Roosevelt Avenue on, on the other side and in between Roosevelt and Arlington were these streets. So there was Madison, Monroe, Grant, Sherman and I lived on Lafayette, right. So, so we were in the Presidential Section and it was quite beautiful most of--every block, you know you had your, your well-manicured lawns. There wasn't any crime. I can't remember any--the drama, no, you know, everybody had a daddy. You know that wasn't unusual. So when I hear you know the statistics and when I get into journalism later and all black people are you know, seventy percent are born out of wedlock, I'm like that wasn't my experience. And everybody was black, everybody was working, you know. There was like--I remember there was a couple around the corner, the Neals, and they had two of the most gorgeous sons. Anyway Mr. Neal would be dressed to go to New York [New York City, New York] to catch the train, there was a train around the corner to New York and Alice, Miss, Mrs. Sheldon lived across the street. She would go to New York, walk down the street in her high heels. Like everybody--and I'm not saying everybody was perfect or whatever, but we had some fly neighbors, you know. We had people doing things in our neighborhood and we had a police, a police detective living down the street and you know it was just a--you know that kind of neighborhood. I lived next door to the Castros. And they had, I want to say nine kids, which my mother [Margie Sweeper] jokes about cause we bought our house, when we came to look it wasn't, wasn't--they weren't all out. And so she never made the connection that all of these kids belonged to that house cause you know, we would play kick ball in our street. But I just remember it being so empty that we would flip, jump double dutch, play kick ball, hot peas and butter, hide and go seek, Mother may I, all that happened either in front of my house or you know, a couple houses down. But we had so many kids on our street, we commandeered that, that street and nobody yelled at us. There were no cars beeping. It just seemed like there was--we didn't have to block off anything. Cars would come, we'd let them by, but it was not--it was--we just always had full run of our streets. And that--when that light came on, we had to go in the house, you know, and that was, that was it, you know. I got in trouble one time for leaving the house, I think I was five. My neighbors came by and they said they were going somewhere, to the park and the yelled up at my window, come on down. And I left the house and came back and got the whooping of my life. And I remember that, I never left the house again. My parents were so scared, they didn't know where I was. And so I was like confused. I'm like I'm just with, you know Diana and Mary, we went down the street and they were like you, you know. But I, I got that, you know that, that even in that time, you know there was a sense of responsibility and, and neighbors looked out for each other, you know. It was just very community oriented, like I had a absolutely great neighborhood. Story_ID: 56983 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now where did you start school? Where, what was your first school? Speaker 2: My first school was Columbia, Columbia Grade School [now Columbia High School, East Orange, New Jersey] I guess. It was at the time grades K [kindergarten] through, through eight. Huge school, it was overcrowded. I remember having to do second grade in the auditorium. And they had six classrooms, probably thirty five kids in each class, it was like crowded. I remember, the, the, the--you know all--it's just open thing. We had partitions in between each class. That's how overcrowded it was. And I think then they reduced it to fifth grade. But I, I was there until the fifth grade, and then I went to Catholic school, Our Lady of All Souls [Our Lady of All Souls, East Orange, New Jersey], which was two blocks down the street from Columbia. And that was interesting because we got out a little early and we had to walk past Columbia. So by the time we got down the street, they were kind of getting out. And they used to tease the kids, but they never teased me because I was 5'10" two plus hundred pounds in the sixth grade, yeah, nobody bothered me. I didn't get teased at all. So if anything I was, I was a--not a bully-bully, but yeah I wasn't--I had a mouth on top of it. It's sort of like you know, you see these little dogs and they don't know how big they are and these big dogs, they don't know how to, you know they don't know how big they are either. I was in this big body, but didn't process that that's why no one bothered me. So in addition to developing physically, I also had this, this mouth. So kids were like if we could ever gang you up--gang up on you and kill you, we might want to, but we're afraid. And I didn't get the fact that they were afraid of me physically. I just thought you know, I was so quick-witted. But that was interesting, so other kids would get beat up; I never did. Speaker 1: Now were there, were there gang issues and stuff in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: None, none whatsoever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was one kid when I was at Columbia who took karate. And he terrorized. And then it was one family you know that had like eighteen kids in the school, you know cousins and this, so nobody messed with them cause then all the--you know, so you just knew we can't mess with them. That was the only gang we had you know. But no, there were no gangs. I, I'm telling you it was a--I look back on it now and I almost, you know I'm not embarrassed, but I'm, I feel really you know, blessed to have a, a childhood where I have so many fond, great, wonderful memories and not too many like, you know, crazy. Story_ID: 56984 Speaker 1: How was Our Lady [Our Lady of All Souls, East Orange, New Jersey] different from Columbia [Columbia Grade School, now Columbia High School, East Orange, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Small and I went from like thirty kids in a class to two or three, I mean not two--we had maybe ten kids in a class, ten, eleven, twelve kids in a class. What was also interesting in Columbia there was this kid named Martin Lucas who I had a awesome crush on. And so crazy, I, I was in love with him. In the fifth grade I wrote him a letter, you know, asking him to be my boyfriend or something. It was--maybe that was the fourth grade. But he ended up in every single class of mine, right. So from first grade to the fifth grade at Columbia, we were in the exact same class competing for one and two, for the one and two spot academically, which you know, it was brutal. And I always like why is he in my class again? But I didn't realize then that they would place kids based on their academic performance. So I wasn't that smart. So I'm like he's in my class again, he's in my class again. So I go to, to All Souls and I'm like finally I'm, you know cause he didn't, didn't want to be my boyfriend so now I don't like him. And I'm at All Souls and here he comes. But I left him, though. He was in, in the sixth grade, but then I skipped the seventh grade and then I was like peace out. So that's what happened. Story_ID: 56985 Speaker 1: And you didn't ask me this, but I'm gone tell you how I skipped the seventh grade cause it's a fascinating story, at least it's fascinating to me. I'm home thinking about this and I--maybe Martin Lucas played into it cause I'm like really kind of tired of seeing him at this point. And I devised this plan and, and we had a nun running the school named Sister Margaret who was, she was about 230 pounds, scary, scary broad, right, really scary. She actually beat up a kid with, I probably shouldn't say this, but she did, she beat up a kid in one of my class--like everyone's petrified. She beat up the biggest kid in our school cause he did something, I don't even know what he did. But she like slapped him the face and punched him in the stomach. And we were like petrified of her. But I decided I was going to go in and set up a meeting with Sister Margaret and I was going to lay out my case for why I should skip the seventh grade. And I had this whole thing, and I put it on paper and I set up an appointment and after school one, one--it was like a Friday afternoon. I came into her office and I said here's what, what I'm thinking. And I said to her--and in my mind I knew I had to make her an offer she couldn't refuse. So I said to her here's the deal. Put me in the eighth grade for one marking period. If I make the honor roll, I get to stay. If I don't make the honor roll, you put me back in the seventh grade, there's no harm, I've only learned some eighth grade stuff for the last semester and, and we can just go on, you know, like that. But if I make the honor roll, I get to stay. That's got to be, you know--and so I come in on Monday and she calls me, Gary Graves, and Jackie Kimball. I remember this distinctly because I'm looking at them and I'm saying why are they being called out of class? I was in that meeting by myself, right. And we walk across the hall, cause this is the other difference with, with a Catholic school. You know we had, you know these different classrooms. And, and they were all small. So seventh grade was on the right hand side of this hallway. The eighth grade class was over here. So we walked across the hall and we're introduced to the eighth grade. So we all skipped that day. And I was like why are they--so I realized that Sister Margaret probably was like first of all this girl has some chutzpah coming in here, you know, mapping out this game plan. But I can't skip her because there are two other kids in the, in the class with similar GPAs [grade point averages], with similar, you know, scores. So I can't just skip her by herself. So I guess to make it palatable, and, and seem fair, she brought these other two over. But I learned later in life is that your destiny is what you make it and if it's your vision and your plan for your life, that's the only way it can be successful. Gary ended up and we, we still speak. He lived down the street from me, knocked my tooth out too when I was in eighth grade, but that's another story. Gary ended up going and dropping out of college. And Jackie Kimball never finished college either. So these two kids skipped, but it didn't have a, a positive impact on, on their academic life because it wasn't something that was in them to do. Speaker 2: They didn't ask to do it. Speaker 1: They didn't ask to do it. So my thing was she shouldn't have done that. But I guess she couldn't justify it maybe you know, without doing it. I'm glad she did it, I don't really, you know, I can't begrudge them. But I just feel like, you know, maybe their paths would have been more successful had they not been skipped with me. And they don't probably even know why they got skipped. Story_ID: 56986 Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup of, of both schools I guess? Speaker 2: African American, all 100, not 100 percent. We had a white kid in Columbia [Columbia Grade School, now Columbia High School, East Orange, New Jersey] named Charlie, red head, and his sister, you know she was in another class. So, so we might have had maybe a handful of white kids at Columbia. And there was one girl in my eighth grade class who looked white, but she wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She ended up getting pregnant. Speaker 1: What about teachers at both? Speaker 2: All the teachers were white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of them. Speaker 1: In both schools? Speaker 2: Yes, isn't that something? Yes. I didn't have--not true, not true. We had--my fifth grade teacher Ms. Johnson, actually Columbia had a lot of black teachers. Ms. Johnson whose husband is the head of UMDNJ [University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey] in Newark [New Jersey]. She was the baddest teacher. If you could imagine Diahann Carroll, Diahann Carroll back you know when Diahann Carroll was in her, in her heyday, this lady was like Diahann Carroll. She would come to school like dressed, you know, cause her husband was a doctor. I didn't know that. She was rich, basically and probably didn't have to teach but she was the baddest. But she wasn't just the baddest looks and clothing, but she was one tough teacher. She was the only teacher, cause I obviously was a little bit rambunctious, you know, you, you can probably imagine. I brought, I brought cigarettes to school. My mother [Margie Sweeper] had the nerve to leave cigarettes in my backpack when, when I was in the second grade, right. We went to Ringling Brothers and Barnum and Bailey Circus and you know, I had my little school bag and she put her cigarettes in there. So I get to school and I open it and I was like ooh, cigarettes. So I'm giving them out on the playground at lunch time. And kids is like lighting up and I'm sitting in the cut like what, and then one kid ratted me out. Like where'd you get the cigarettes? And they were like Karen. I was like how did they--come on, man. So I got in trouble in school, but my mother couldn't beat me or anything because it was her fault. Shouldn't leave cigarettes in a bag of a kid like that, can't do that. So I didn't get in trouble at home, but--so you know needless to say I, I talked a lot in class and I was, you know, always bothering kids and you know, acting out. And this was one teacher who checked me. She checked me hard. But she checked me in a way that I think is brilliant now that I think back on it. She made me a school crossing guard. And every morning she would ask--she would tell me before I came to class to get her a newspaper at the corner store. So I'd buy her a newspaper every single morning before I came to class. She gave me responsibility and made me feel important, you know. And, and it had an impact, a profound impact on my performance in, in her class. And she figured out that you know, the kind of attention I needed was something that would build my character, and she was right. Speaker 1: Now what was the teacher's name again? Speaker 2: Mrs. Maxine Johnson. Maxine Johnson. She made me memorize every capital, not just me. I mean in that class I learned the capitals of every state, but we had a contest, right. So it wasn't just learning the capitals, but you know there was a grand prize. She understood reward. At the end of the school year she came to my house, which I almost passed out, Ms. Johnson came to my house, and gave me a, a gift, a glass that said Best Student or something on it for bringing her her paper every, every day. She understood that you had to make incentives for kids like me. You had to give incentives for, for kids to perform. And I think Roots came out that year. We did a whole series and study on that and had to do a--we did a paper that year. And that year my brother was conceived cause my mom [Margie Sweeper] was pregnant, I remember that too. But it was really, you know this woman opened my academic mind, you know, to the possibilities of like really wanting to learn as much as I could. And I wanted to be like her, you know. I didn't quite hit the mark on the style level, but I don't know. Ironically I, when I started teaching at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], her nephew Rashad was in one of my classes, which was kind of weird. It was like you're, your auntie used to teach me in the fifth grade, just weird. Speaker 1: That's a good story. So this was 1977, the year Roots came out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 56987 Speaker 1: Yeah, so but you're at Our Lady [Our of All Souls Grammar School, East Orange, New Jersey] through the 8th grade, and so you're there one year, right? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years? Speaker 2: Six, well sixth grade and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Sixth and eighth, okay. Speaker 2: And the eighth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: So then where, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Marylawn of the Oranges [South Orange, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Mary-- Speaker 2: Marylawn of the Oranges, don't ask, don't ask. I don't know, I don't know what saint that is. I am sure it has something to do with Jesus's mama. But it was a all-girls Catholic school, which is a first all-girls cause you know, every school up until then was coed obviously. And now I'm in, in this school with you know, all these you know, girls, nuns and it was interesting. Speaker 1: So were most of the students black there? Speaker 2: No, it was--when--my--when I first got there it was like 50/50 actually. My class was 50/50. Ironically again, I'm at MSNBC in the makeup room and one of the makeup hair stylists there, she used to go to Marylawn [Maryland of the Oranges, South Orange, New Jersey]. Her sister, her cousin Becky was in my class and we were like, you know reminiscing about Marylawn. But yeah it was, it was actually--it was heavily Irish and it was predominantly white. Our class actually tipped the scales into the 50/50 mark and then after my class it became predominantly black. But my class was sort of like the tipping point when it was 50/50. Story_ID: 56988 Speaker 1: Okay. So well what were your experiences there? Speaker 2: Wild. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Needless to say, just to--my senior year I was kicked out of homeroom, so I had to spend homeroom in the principal's office. I got kicked out of class a lot and I was in trouble a lot, couldn't keep my mouth closed. I couldn't keep it closed, but they couldn't keep me down. Yeah I, I wore those nuns out. Yeah, pretty much they all have stories about me and I see them, cause they live in the neighborhood now, right? So I see them from time to time. But-- Speaker 1: What did you do to get kicked out of homeroom? Speaker 2: Just--well my, my homeroom teacher--every morning the intercom would come on and the principal would come and do morning prayers and announcements and stuff. And I had to do my homework that I should have done the night before, but I never did homework. So I would do the homework for the next class and she had a rule that you couldn't do homework during homeroom time. I'm like well what's the point of having homeroom? So I, you know I make my own rules, I'm just gonna, I'm gonna do my homework. So she was like put the pen down. And I'm like lady you must be crazy, I'm not trying to, you know, get a bad grade. So, so I wouldn't put my pen down and I kept doing my homework and wouldn't listen to her, so she said get out. And I was like all right, fine. I'll do my homework in the principal's office. She got tired of looking at me, so finally another nun, political science nun, which actually worked in my favor, she taught political science. She took me in her homeroom, but she also recommended me to go to something called Presidential Classroom, which only two students in our school got selected for. So how am I getting selected for these things even though I'm really not the model student, you know, behavior-wise? They sent me to DC [Washington, D.C.] with Kimberly Banks to represent Marylawn [Marylawn of the Oranges, South Orange, New Jersey] at Presidential Classroom for an entire week, where students from all over the country came to you know, learn about Congress and go, you know--do the whole tour. And it was fantastic, it was a fantastic experience. Ended up meeting, you know, this girl from Allentown [Pennsylvania], another girl from Texas, Beaumont, Texas. I ended up being in her wedding, she was in my wedding. It was a, an incredible experience to, to learn, to, to, to be selected as one of the, you know, leaders I guess that was the criteria, so-- Speaker 1: This is now 1980? Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982], probably '81 [1981], '82 [1982] I was in Presidential Classroom, '82 [1982]. It was my--I think it was my senior year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982] going into '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: It's called Presidential Classroom. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 56989 Speaker 1: Okay. Let, let me ask you this and I didn't ask this all along and I should have probably along the way raised this before, but it's not too late, so-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What is your information intake? What's coming--you talked about your father [Donald Hunter] being a reader of the news and discussing of current events and that sort of thing. But what, what kind of information was coming in your house and what, what were the streams, the radio, television, newspaper? Speaker 2: Well my father forced me to watch Walter Cronkite, 6:00 every night, well cause that--you know he had control over the, over the television, you know and it was--you know. I had a TV in my bedroom, but it was like Walter Cronkite's on. Good evening, this is Walter Cronkite. So, so I had that. But I was an avid reader. I, I think you know again Mrs. [Maxine] Johnson had a tremendous impact. So I, I would actually get money and go on the weekends and buy books. I'm saying it was ironic being here at Simon and Schuster because the little kangaroo on the spine of the book is what inspired me to want to work with them, you know. Because that--those were the books, you know those Judy Bloom, Judy Krantz, you know, Stephen King, Richard Barclay, you know I was, I was fascinated by all of these, you know, stories growing up. And I read, I probably devoured so many books, I would be hold up in my room, you know, for countless hours, reading. So I did that. Uncle Tom's Cabin, read--you know so I'm reading these books not for school, just because you know. And maybe that, that had some impact. I read a lot. Story_ID: 56990 Speaker 1: Maybe so. And now you were, you said when you learned how to tie your shoe, you all lived across from a library. Speaker 2: Right, and then we moved to a place called--it was a beautiful building at the time on 96 North Walnut Street. I remember the address. It was like a glass entrance and the hall--you know the, the, the foyer of the building was like twenty five foot high. I mean it was like really a beautiful building. We lived on the second floor and I remember because my dad [Donald Hunter] always had a fish tank and he was raising Jack Dempseys at the time and I was four, three or four, three. And I had this little iron that they got me for, for Christmas. And I was trying to hit the fish, and it was like a thirty five or forty gallon fish tank. And I hit it and busted the fish tank open and all of the water came and there was water in the lobby because we lived right over, you know and it was dripping down, you know and I ran for my life. Speaker 1: Did anybody know what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, hey the figured--the iron was there. I'm not, I'm hiding in the closet. Okay, this little kid just broke the fish tank. That was, that's me. I didn't get in trouble then either. I was, I was petrified though, but they didn't, you know--glad about that. But I do remember doing that. And then we moved to a house, like the Jeffersons you know. Now we up in the big league--so we moved to, to this Presidential neighborhood when I was four, the--in September, I remember that because there was like all these kids next door and I was like wow. Story_ID: 56991 Speaker 1: Yeah I was intrigued by the library, access to the library. So did you go to the library a lot to check books out? Speaker 2: No, well yeah, I mean I, I went to the library but I didn't check books out, I wanted to keep my books. That whole--it was funny, I was cleaning out my mother's [Margie Sweeper] garage and I had like a bunch of library books that I probably should--they should probably arrest me for that. I still got library--don't say--is it a--that's a federal offense? I'll send them back. Anyway this is like 30 years now or whatever; they're not missing them. But--what's the statute of limitations? All right I don't have any library books. But you know, I--at that point I liked to buy them. So I was buying them and pocket books were really cheap, right. So I would--mass paperbacks. So I would, I, I just had a li--a little library in my, in my room, it was crazy. But yeah, I had a lot of books. Speaker 1: Now you came along in a time when there, there were, were a lot of black bookstores for a minute. Did, did you have any-- Speaker 2: No, I had no desire to read any books by black people. Isn't that something? And now I have no desire to read any--no I'm joking, I'm joking. I, I read now because you know obviously because I'm in this industry and I, you know, I actually--that's not true. Gloria Naylor, Alice Walker, like highly literary stuff. Like I didn't--I didn't get into Donald Goines, all that. I didn't read Iceberg Slim until one of my editors forced me to read it when I started writing books and he was like you have to broaden your, you know, expand your mind, read Pimp. I'm like I don't wanna read a book about pimps. And he was like no, this is a classic book, you have to read it. So the first street novel I ever read, was forced to by an editor at the Daily News, so there you go. Story_ID: 56992 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I just wonder about the four--did--how many--did your father [Donald Hunter] get the black newspapers? Speaker 2: No, no, everything with him was mainstream. He, he had this vision for you know, acceptance. Very black, he was very, very, very, very, black, but from, from a dominant standpoint, he wanted to conquer all of these ideologies that were, were mainstream and show that he could do this as well if not better. That was his thing. So somehow doing, you know, that black thing, you know how people get immersed and do the whole dashiki--no. Business suits, wing tips, perfect diction, you know, that. Story_ID: 56993 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what about music? Did you play a lot of music at home? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Just go--my parents were party animals. So like I said my, my, my dad [Donald Hunter] is a--hard as he worked, he played equally as hard. When he got to play, he played. And our house was always full of people, you know on the weekends, parties. I just remember you know, climbing down the steps cause we had this beautiful house. And I laid down on my belly and listen in at the--you know we had a basement. The basement came with a full wooden bar, like old style wood panels. He put in a brass bar, you know. Speaker 1: Rail. Speaker 2: Rail and I mean it was--our, our house was that place that people came to to party, you know. And the liquor, because it was like wooden, you know, cabinets, not cabinets, like shelving all the way around the bar lined up with every kind of liquor you can imagine, it was amazing. I never had a desire to drink, but if I wanted to really get buzzed and drunk, like there was no supervision. I could have been down there like guzz--but it wasn't my thing. But they had every--my father had like a ten gallon vodka thing with a pump. But they weren't big drinkers, they just wanted to make sure that everyone of their friends had whatever they wanted to drink. That was my dad's thing, just like the refrigerator had to be stocked, his bar was stocked. I mean he had, excuse me, he had liquor from places that people would be like, you know--so that was, that was the kind of thing that you know, went on in my house. So why'd you ask--did you ask me that question? Speaker 1: It's about music, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Music, so, so of course you know I'm now well versed in all, all things, you know from the, you know, the OJs to Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes, that was my mother's [Margie Sweeper] thing. Nina Simone of course. You had Gladys, my mom's from Georgia, you know that whole you know, Gladys Knight performed at their, their, their prom or whatever when she was in high school. And, and you know so, so music was very much a part of my--Stevie, Songs in the Key of Life, my goodness. You know it's like music was very much a part of it. And then I found my own, you know, Sugar Hill Gang came out, you know, Shalamar, I'm really dating myself. And then Luther was with Change, this group called Change in the Glow of Love. You remember that song? Come on. And they performed at Martin Stadium, which is in East Orange, and I got to see them. So Shalamar, Jeffery Daniels, I think that was his name, was married to Stefanie Mills, she was standing on the stage, it was like crazy. But Luther didn't show up, cause then he went solo. So everybody was disappointed. But yeah, music was important, very important. Because as much as books allowed me to kind of go someplace else, music filled in those blanks, you know, filled in those spaces and I was really, really into music. Doing the tapes, double--that tape, taping those shows on the weekends, you know. The commercials--you know and trying to tape around it and then have the mixed tapes and stuff, it was crazy. Yeah, I was into it. Story_ID: 56994 Speaker 1: All right, so we're talking about music and just, you know--now do you all go to church every week in your household? Speaker 2: Me? No, well I was forced to, so now I don't. But I'm, I'm going to say this, you know and I'm not being cheeky, but I, I, I had a very--I went through with my mom [Margie Sweeper], you know having to go to church every Sunday. And then when I became a teenager, I didn't. And then I kind of started studying at different churches, Times Square Church in New York, I would study actually at the Daily News with a couple of ladies, we would study the Bible at lunch time. And that was really weird. Now I don't want to freak anybody out, but I had an epiphany about God and Jesus and, and I decided to kind of go on this journey to really, really know, you know. A lot of us go to church as passive observers. You know, we go, we you know, get filled, pay our tithe or whatever. Some people get the Holy Ghost, some people don't, some people speak in tongues, some people don't. But the connection in relation with God is not a daily process, it's a Sunday process, you know and then they go back to their lives as if there's no connection. For me, I wanted to find the connection and make it a fluid kind of life, you know. Like if God made us in his image, or her image, then what's that reflection in me and how am I projecting that out in the things that I do and the things that I am? You know, so I started asking these kind of very esoteric questions in my twenties that, you know led me to different church experiences, that led me to the notion that going to church every Sunday does not make one holy. So to answer your question, I go to church, but what's the definition of church? I'm in church right now. And you can send your donations to--no, that was a joke. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so when you were a, a teenager, you kind of--you didn't go-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: I was wondering if your, if your father [Donald Hunter] being raised in a holy roller kind of-- Speaker 2: No, that was a joke, it was a joke to him. Like not, not that God is a joke, but that whole thing was so much entertainment as opposed to like you know, that kind of thing, that was more fodder and things to talk about. Speaker 1: It had more of a secular approach to it. Speaker 2: Yeah, but gospel music was a part--Dorothy--I was raised on Shirley Caesar and James Cleveland and you know, the O'Neal twins, now I'm gone take you there, okay. Jesus Dropped the Charges. You know that song? You probably don't, but he did drop the charges. That's right, you know. But-- Speaker 1: Now I heard the Football Game of Life by James Cleveland. Speaker 2: Listen, I, I'm, I, I--we have like James Cleveland's last album when he was sick. When he was talking about having a headache all over his body, you know cause he liked to talk during his--so, so that's what, that's what I was raised on. With, with Richard Pryor. All--you see what I'm saying? So like my parents, you know, that, That Nigga's Crazy, huge album. I listened to it at the stop of the stairs on my belly, cracking up, not understanding half the jokes, but you know like that's my, my, you know, my experience. You know, so it's a little, little dash of, of all of that. Story_ID: 56995 Speaker 1: Now did you have a hero growing up or a shero? Speaker 2: No, no, I really didn't. And I guess if I look back, it would be my dad [Donald Hunter], you know, in terms of like who I most wanted to emulate, and Miss, Mrs. [Maxine] Johnson. You know my, my fifth grade teacher. But there was like no figure like you know I didn't look at the, the actresses of our time, Lena Horne or anybody, or--she wasn't even on my time. But I'm more like a throwback, you know. I, I remember watching Louie Armstrong and being fascinated as a little kid, you know, maybe I was three years old, four or five when he died. But I, I remember him dying and being like hurt by it. Do you know what I'm--so I guess no, no I didn't have a hero but I respect and kind of honor everybody that came before me, right. Speaker 1: Now were you aware of some of the black writers in the, in those days. Speaker 2: James Baldwin, thing, yeah. I mean I, I read--like I said I read that, but I didn't like I wasn't like I'm going to read black writers. Go Tell it on the Mountain, that's interesting, or Black Boy, that's an interesting book, let me pick that up you know. So I would find these books in the store and say let, let me pick it up. But nobody directed me that way and I didn't really have this, this idea that I wanted to just read these kinds of books. Like I, like I said I would read Stephen King one day, The Incubus, I don't even know who read that, wrote that, but that was a nasty book. And I read that, I was like twelve and that was a nasty. I'm reading The Stand, you know at twelve, thirteen, twelve I'm, you know I'm reading Judy Bloom which is, you know a little risque. And I'm mixing in all these other things. So it's like it's, it's kind of like all over. It's not just one thing. Story_ID: 56996 Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any teacher in high school [Marylawn of the Oranges Catholic High School] that, or, or person around you, like a mentor or anything? You know other than your dad [Donald Hunter], you know. Speaker 2: No, but you know what? Every teacher, like even the ones that kicked me out of class, you know, had, had pushed me in a way. I had a teacher that had my name, my--her name was Sister Kathleen Hunter, Sister Kathleen Hunter. And she introduced me to English. She got me to love Shakespeare, which is tough reading for a high school kid. I loved Shakespeare because of her and how she presented it. Tale of Two Cities. She just got me into the classics in a way, but then she, she, she honed in. She made me try out for the basketball team. She was the basketball coach, cause of course I was five ten when I was twelve, so I was also five ten when I was thirteen or fourteen. And, and you know she was like you have to try out. I was like I don't know how to play basketball, I never played, you know. So the girl that lived around the corner from me was a basketball nut and so I went out with her a couple of times and tried to learn how to play. And she went out for the team and didn't make it and I made the team. But I, I'm tall at a Catholic school. You put me in the middle if I can shoot it, they didn't care, you know. And she was like short. So you know you need commodities, tall is a commodity, learned that too, that it mattered. So she had an impact on me. She ended up leaving the nunnery. There was another nun who taught us religion and she was off the wall and she would say things like yeah, Joseph screwed Mary. And I was like is that appropriate for a nun to say? I don't think that's appropriate. She ended up leaving the nunnery too. But I learned about hypocrisy early and, and kind of questioning being in this Catholic school where I see nuns smoking. I see, you know, you know things happening that are, are not necessarily appropriate, and just being human beings where you tend to put people on a pedestal because of their commitment to whatever it is that they're doing. As a nun now, I mean that's a heavy commitment. They live in a convent. They've given their lives over. But yet at the end of the day, they're just human beings. And I think I was able to strip away these, these, these veils that we put on people, or these, these, these shields that we put over people to say everybody is a person; everybody matters, but they're just a person. And so for me, that was great. So the relationships that I had with the nuns there was pretty interesting and powerful. I had a--my Latin teacher, Sister Joan. She was another one that could check me, you know. I'd be in class doing my shenanigans, she'd fold her arms and just stare at me for what seemed like an hour, it was probably only like a minute but I was like wow, that's so effective. And I would shut up immediately cause I was so embarrassed and I would get red. But she knew how to check me, but she also knew how to get the most out of me too. Cause I'm now reading the Iliad and the Odyssey and all of these, you know, in Latin, and into it. I'm into mythology, you know in a way that she brought it, she brought it for me. So that was empowerful [sic.], I mean impactful, and powerful. I just made up a new word. I think we should put that in there. They're making up words every day, why not? Story_ID: 56997 Speaker 1: Right. Okay, now, now when you went to [Washington] D.C. in '82 [1982], now you, you were a senior, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, then you went to--Ronald Reagan's the President and did, did you meet any of the politicians? Speaker 2: I'm sure I did, but I went to Paris and, and Spain the year before that, and it's all a blur to me, right, as a school, as a school trip. So we, we had the, the French teacher and the Spanish teacher and all I remember is on the train ride from Paris to Spain, the, the chaperone was an 80 year old French teacher who was sick on the train. So that means that we got to go buck wild and, and I--we almost got thrown off the train because of me. That's what I remember of my trip to Paris and France. I remember being chased in this bad neighborhood by some guys who, you know it must have been a boatload of women that came there from America and had sex with everybody in France, because their notion was that you're from America, you must want to have sex with us. And we're in high school, fifteen, sixteen year olds. So we were running form them. I remember not being able to fit in the miniskirt that I wanted to buy from France and buying my boyfriend some Lagerfeld, didn't know who Carl Lagerfeld was, but it smelled good and it was from France. So I didn't--I wasn't aware enough to appreciate Ronald Reagan and, and, and the enormous honor that was, you know, given to us to go to Congress to, to really understand, I wasn't conscious enough. I was more into the kids and having fun and, and bugging out and acting silly, than I was appreciating a moment. I wish I had. You know if I had to do it over again, I would be more present. We went to the Louvre. Yeah, I saw the Mona Lisa, but there's no connection because I wasn't conscious. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I'm embarrassed by that. Speaker 1: But, but it was a experience that you probably--I mean you're better for it. Speaker 2: Yeah, but it should, it should be more--with, with, with, with the kinds of things that I've done in my life recently, that should have, you know, been way more you know, pres--you know, colorful in my, in my memory you know. Watching the, the Spanish dancers with their, you know--all of that and drinking Sangria and you know, drinking wine in France. That should have been so much more rich in my memory but it's not because I wasn't present. Just bugging out, just wilding out and I wasn't even on anything. Speaker 1: Okay. You were, you were an adolescent, that was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the problem. Young people should not have experiences, that's, that's what it is. You should wait until you're old enough to appreciate them before you give a kid experiences like that. Or give them some sort of test, see if they can handle it. Story_ID: 56998 Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have counseling about college? Speaker 2: Yes, and I was told to go to nursing school because you know as a black kid--that was the other thing. There was inherent racism at my school that just kind of missed me. So I guess in some ways it was great that I wasn't conscious cause I might of really got my feelings hurt. But I came home and I was, I was like yeah, she said I should go to Stockton and study nursing. And my father [Donald Hunter] was like what? They was like what? So that was interesting that I should go to a trade school or something, you know and she was kind of recommending that--our guidance counselor to all the black kids, go to trade school and become a nurse or something. But you know, I didn't have any grand aspirations. Like I thought I wanted to become a lawyer, just cause I talk a lot and I could argue. I knew I was going to go to college, that wasn't even part of, you know, the discussion. I applied to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I applied to Brown [Brown university, Providence, Rhode Island] and that was it, right, and I didn't make it into either one of those. So I was left my senior year--I did pretty well on my SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test], but the problem was my school was very competitive. So like the valedictorian went to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], the, the girl that went with me to Presidential Classroom, she got into Princeton. You know Princeton's not going to take two people from a school that graduated fifty seven kids in their senior class, right? So you know, and I didn't realize that. I'm like I'm just as smart as she is, but yeah you're not going to take two kids from Marylawn of the Oranges [Marylawn of the Oranges Catholic High School, South Orange, New Jersey], Princeton, you know. And so I'm left without a--and I applied to St. John's, but it was no way, I got in there but it was no way I--my parents were going to let me go to St. John's [St. John's University, New York City, New York] because they didn't have a dorm. They're not going to send their baby to New York City [New York] with no dormitory, what is that, right? So, so I'm like sitting at home. My mother got this brochure, they had been sending, you know colleges had been sending me stuff, but I'm like throwing them in the garbage. And this school, Drew University [Madison, New Jersey], sent me--they been, you know, kind of harassing me. So my--this is now--we, I graduated in June, so this is like June 15th or so and my mother was like we're going to go up to Drew and check this out, you know. Now everybody else knows where they're going, and I'm like--I go up to Drew and they accept me immediately and- Speaker 1: Now where, where, where's Drew? Speaker 2: Madison, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Madison New Jersey, okay. I think that's where James Cheek went. Speaker 2: Lot of--what it's most know for-- Speaker 1: Maybe not. Speaker 2: Is, is their seminary. Lot of great, Samuel Proctor, lot of great-- Speaker 1: Samuel DeWit Proctor, yeah. So this is the school. Speaker 2: A lot of great, yeah a lot of-- Speaker 1: James Cheek who became the president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Ministers. Speaker 1: He, he went to Drew. Speaker 2: Yes, Drew-- Speaker 1: Cause of the seminary, that's right. Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time over there with some of these wild ass ministers. Speaker 1: Don't, don't tell us the ministers-- Speaker 2: Man, let me tell you. No, I had some fun. Again, a very strange young person. I didn't roll in the, in the obvious circles, but I spent a lot of time having these discussions over in the seminary section with the, with the soon-to-be illustrious pastors. But yeah Drew is that school. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The undergrad though is like 99 percent white, or is was when I went there. And at the time they had a EOF [Educational Opportunity Fund] Program, which I wasn't a part of, so their--the, the majority of black kids in my class were in EOF, but I didn't know them. So they got to know each other over the summer cause the program started in the summer time. And so I arrived in September and end up with the international students who also weren't part of EOF. So my best friend was from Bermuda, Jill, there was Teeno [ph.] from the Philippines, there was Moosa [ph.] who ended up being my boyfriend that year, Shayhoo [ph.] from Nigeria, Bryant Tobangtoka [ph.] from South Africa. That was my crew, you know. Earl Mohammad, a Muslim from, from [Washington] D.C. and Clay Appalla [ph.] from Baltimore [Maryland] who was also Nigerian. So I hung out with those kids and that was an experience, and I had a car. So you know good times were had. Story_ID: 56999 Speaker 1: Okay, so well Madison, New Jersey, is it close to-- Speaker 2: Chatham, Morristown, it's in Morris County. Very, you know, upper middle class, very, very white, very white. Matter of fact, I got a job as a Library Monitor at Chatham, think there may be--I think there's one per--one black person in all of Chatham. So I'm telling these kids to shut up and sit down, you know and they're like what? You should be cleaning my house, tell me what to do. Speaker 1: So you majored in education? Speaker 2: No, I majored in English. Speaker 1: English, okay. Speaker 2: Cause that was easy. I wanted to get out in four years, that was my only goal in college. Learn, learn as much life experience as possible and get out in four years cause my dad was paying full, the full ride. So I could not burden him with another year. Story_ID: 57000 Speaker 1: Okay, so you majored in English and your goal was, what was your goal, ultimate goal? Speaker 2: Be famous. That was it. Get a--have a easy major. Speaker 1: Did you want to write? Speaker 2: Cause I was really good at writing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Could read. Speaker 1: Did you want to be a writer? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was just good at it. So, so which means I could do papers and not go to class, which I didn't--get through without going to class if you can write well, you know, take tests. Come up, show up for the exam, get a B, good enough you know. A couple of teachers that made it a little sticky cause they had this attendance requirement. And I don't know why I didn't want to go. I just felt like I didn't have to. And I learned early that there's a social component to, to success that it doesn't really matter what you do in the classroom. If you connect--so I spent a lot of time in the teacher's lounges hanging with the teachers, but not going to their classes, just having philosophical conversations with them in my off time around the things that I wanted to talk about. It was very interesting. And to, to get like good grades in classes that I didn't show up to just because I had great relationships with the teachers and I would do the work, you know, was fascinating to me. So I learned some things about life in those moments, just testing things out. One teacher gave me a D though, cause I didn't come to class. So I had to think that over. Story_ID: 57001 Speaker 1: Was there any particu--particular class that you liked most? Speaker 2: No. I liked the philosophy class and I got a B in that, never showed up for. But you know to me unless you're going--and I don't know why I knew this, but unless like I wanted to be a doctor where I really had to know like molecular, you know biology or whatever. Like I--you have to know stuff if you want to be a doctor, or a chemist, or you have to know stuff. To me the college experience was about knowing yourself. So I spent that time with--it was great for me to be with these international students, learning about countries and places. I spent a summer in Bermuda, come to find out her father's just like my father [Donald Hunter]. He has a store, he has a chicken store, you know, in, in Bermuda and his--her dad's just as crazy as my dad. Her mother was a teacher and just a wonderful person. And it was like being home to the point where I'm on this, you know tropical island, and I'm going bowling and hanging out, we're making kool aid and we're, you know--and so I, I'm learning that it doesn't matter. I'm with this South African kid who at the time apartheid was still in effect, who's pimping the whole thing cause it never dawned on me how'd you get out? You're not Mark Mathabane, you know, you didn't--there are rich people in South Africa who are black. Because you couldn't have gotten out unless your parents had influence. I learned that after school. He played that sympathy card, my--he was a character, Bryan, to this day. But I learned something about that, right. I learned about, you know my, my boyfriend Moosa was a, a--I won't say a prince, but his--he was Arab. You know like his dad was a dignitary, you know. So, so I'm learning things in college that I think are absolutely important to navigating life, but it didn't happen in a classroom for me, you know. And I purposely, you know I start out majoring in theater because I thought that would be easy, and it was. My first class was a four credit class and we spent the first thirty minutes taking a nap. And I'm like this is too weird. I can't--I have to change my major. I'm like who--what is this? You know and they doing all these exercises and yoga and stuff. I'm like I need something more a--you know more concrete, you know. So I majored in English. But for me the college experience was really about, you know, getting my Gallagher game up. Story_ID: 57002 Speaker 1: Your what? Speaker 2: My Gallagher, Ms. Pac man--anyway playing pool and being in the U, you know in our University Center. And, and just--I started, I started a chicken business in college, right. In my dorm I--Bryan and I decided cause he was very--this guy was--he's now a banker in, in South Africa. But even in college, this dude was brilliant, right. So we decided we would go to Newark [New Jersey] cause you know my, my dad of course had a store so I knew where all the wholesale places were cause I used to go to them, to them with him. And we bought like, you know, chicken, we bought a deep fryer, little mini deep fryer, bag of fries, cucumbers at the market. And I started a fried chicken business in, in my dorm basement cause I was the RA [Resident Assistant] there. So I had full run, keys and everything you know. And I would fry chicken and we had a phone downstairs so people would make orders. I would deliver, Bryan would manage the money and I had Gail, this upperclassman, and we--she was a senior, I was a, a junior, yeah cause I was the RA. And she would, she would help cook, right. We got so popular, cause I ended up--cause Drew [Drew University, Madison, New Jersey] is near Fairley Dickerson [sic.] [Fairley Dickinson University, Teaneck, New Jersey], St. Elizabeth's [College of St. Elizabeth, Morristown, New Jersey], it's like this whole little college row. We would be making deliveries to the guards at the, at the different schools and the kids started--it got big. So there was a pizzeria in town called Rocko's. They caught wind of it and they called the Board of Health. I didn't know that we needed to have a license and all of this stuff, and it was clean, don't get me wrong. Cause you know how particular I am. And it was good, it was really good. But we were cutting into their business. So I came back from a delivery and Gail was like they shut us down. I was like what? But we, we had made some decent money and some delicious chicken. Speaker 1: How long did it last? Speaker 2: I think we did that for maybe two months before they shut us down, which actually is a long time. We had flyers and everything, it was getting, it was getting--about to, it was about to take off. But you know--so that's what I did in college. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Not quite Facebook, but- Story_ID: 57003 Speaker 1: Did they have a, a Black Studies Department there? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know no, that's a lie. No they did not. As a matter of fact, you know-- Speaker 1: Or, or a program or something? Speaker 2: They, no, but, but it was becoming more and more. Like we had Professor Limworth Gunther who is now a really good friend of mine. It's so weird how life is. But he was one of the first black studies professors we ever had. But he was an adjunct. And--but he was so dynamic. If anybody knows Limworth Gunther, dynamic. Speaker 1: Where, where is he from? Is he from the islands? Speaker 2: Yeah, he is from the islands. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He is from the islands. I, I--this gorgeous, you know, good looking man came in. You know it was like sweet talking everybody. These girls, man, everyone was taking--all the girls were taking his class cause he was like--look at him, you know. But he was powerful, powerful, powerful brother. And so that was interesting. You know, and we had a couple of English classes that you know, you study Toni Morrison and you study you know, different authors, Sue Ludd, read all of that. You know, Zora Neale Hurston, we had--you know but, but there was no concerted effort. It was so few of us. And, and but we did have some, you know, apartheid protests. I had single handedly, you know, I'm a mess. But I was kind of notorious on campus for not having it, not taking any crap from anybody. And I would spend a lot of time in the Dean's office, surprise. Because you know they may have a keg party in my dorm. This was after--while--after I was an RA I moved into the senior dorm and they would have keg parties. And it was only like two blacks in the thing. So I would be coming up to go to my room on the third floor, and the whole first floor, you know, drunken white kids. And I set it off, you know cause I'm like I need to get to my room and they want to, you know--it wasn't pretty. So we, you know we had some altercations on campus from time to time. But we regulated them and they, you know, stayed out of our way. And by our, I mean mine. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So was it--was there a black student organization? Speaker 2: Yes there was, there was a very--run by Ursula McGee. Ursula McGee was one of the presidents and, and it was pretty--you know I, I-- Speaker 1: What was the name of it? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: It was--Hyera [ph.]. It's coming back to me; look at this, look at this thing here. It's that gingko I took earlier. Yeah it's called Hyera. Don't ask-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I don't know. I will have to look it up. Hy, H-Y-E-R-A, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know it means something in Swahili, I'm not sure. But I'll tell you the truth, I wasn't an active member, I was not. I always kind of marched to my own beat and I hate all, always have, I've always hated organizations. I think there's something stymieing about being a part of an organization. I don't mind--okay I look at an organization and I see what they're doing, and I don't mind like helping or, or facilitating. But I just don't--it's too many meetings and things. I want to get stuff done. I hate meeting and talking about things. Like let's--all right, what's the plan? What's the--let's go, let's go. We're going--okay let's go get it, you know. I guess if I had planned better my chicken business would have probably have prospered more. But I want to do this, let's go do it. What do we need? Let's get the chicken, let's go, let's fry it up, let's go. Story_ID: 57004 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So when you were on the verge of graduation, what were your prospects? What do you think you were--you had a straight up English degree, but you, you weren't thinking about English education. Speaker 2: I was thinking about graduating. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let me tell--people who were hanging out with me at the time, are still baffled and dismayed and amazed that I was able to graduate with them. To this day, it was a magician's trick. Like minoring, what? No, I, I'm like my last semester, and this is God's honest truth, I had to average something like an A minus or something ridiculous, which I did, I got straight As my last semester just to graduate on time. Because I had not gone to school and done what I needed to do in school. But I did what I had to do when I had to do it, right. So it was like it wasn't that I couldn't do it, was that I didn't feel it was necessary until I had to do it. Now I have to get all As in my last four classes, all right, no problem, boom. So that was interesting. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you graduated. Speaker 2: Yelp. Speaker 1: Now here's where we came in now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You, you get a job-- Speaker 2: Got out of school. Speaker 1: You sold Funk and Wagnalls. Speaker 2: Funk and Wagnall dictionaries door-to-door. Got out of school, no, no thought whatsoever to what--and, and let me, let me back up a little bit because there was--there's an entertainment line here. Story_ID: 57005 Speaker 1: The summer before I went to college, my buddy Carlos Castro who lived next door to me and I, decided that we were going to go on Saturday Night Live because Eddie Murphy had left and there was no black presence on Saturday Night Live. So he and I were going to go there and do our little routine for--it was Lorne Michaels or somebody. I think Al Franken, no Al Franken was in charge of it then. And we were going to go. So I got, I had a license, I drove to New York City [New York] in my father's Pontiac LeMans, and parked somewhere and we went over to 30 Rock [30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York City, New York]. Now we had no clue where we were going, what we were going--how we were going to get--and we got there and there's a guard at the, at the elevator bank to lead up to the Saturday Night Live. And we're like shoot, there's a guard, what are we going to do? I'm like well you get--distract him, let me get up, you know we had this--we're trying to work something out. In comes a balloon delivery, I'm not joking, a balloon delivery and we literally walked behind the balloon delivery, past the guard into the elevator. We don't know what floor we're going to. So we just push every floor, look out, push a floor, look out. Sue Simmons gets on the elevator on one of the floors and she's like hello darlings. And we're like Sue Simmons, you know we were so excited. And then Arnold Diaz gets on one floor. I'm Arnold Diaz. We were like okay dude, that's cool. What floor is Saturday Night Live? So he tells us. We get up there, they're on hiatus. We're not thinking. Again, I need to plan better, right? We get up there, there's no Saturday Night Live. So we go back down to the Live at Five floor, steal soda out of the refrigerator cause we're like parched. And, and go, go on home. I lose the car, forgot what street I parked on. But I'm in the, in the mindset that I'm going to be famous, you understand, doing something. So I'm not planning out of college. I mean who plans--how do you plan to be famous? What do you do? So I'm out now, I got this degree. And my mother's [Margie Sweeper] like you got to get a job. Story_ID: 57006 Speaker 1: Selling Funk and Wagnall dictionaries. Speaker 2: Yeah, so my mother [Margie Sweeper] said to me you have to have a job. I'm, I'm at home now two weeks after graduation. I'm thinking I could, you know, chill in my pajamas and you know till something--I don't know what was going to--maybe I was going to start auditioning. I didn't have really a plan at this point. But my mother got up one morning 7:00, opened my blinds. Get out the bed, you know. You gone get you a job. So I looked in the paper, she threw a paper at me. And I started going on interviews and I got this job selling dictionaries in business districts door-to-door, Funk and Wagnall. So--so they were like these big encyclopedia style, you know dictionaries, like this thick. And in cases, and you had to go from business to business and say hey, so they paired me with this Polish guy who would say working hard or hardly working. And he'd come in with these, this script and I was like who the hell is buying dictionaries from you? And he was like the top sales person. I'm like dude, I would just close the door as soon as you started, you know, talking. So I, I went out on a couple of sales things with him, and I was like I can't do that. I'm not going to ask people if they're working hard or hardly working and to have all these little pitchy little things to say. Here's, here was my approach: I got these dictionaries, they're really good. If you need them, you should look at them. If you don't, I'm going to keep it moving. But I'm not going to waste your time, either you want it or you don't. If you have kids, maybe you want to--so I was so direct that I was one of the most successful sales persons that they had. One day I sold like sixteen of those suckers, which they went crazy and put it up on the board. Like they would have these, you know, daily competitions and all of this. And I won like two or three weeks in a row. But I just really wanted to talk to people the way I would, you know--normally I probably would be the worst person in the world, like I'm the worst person in the world to sell something to. If you call me up on the phone to sell something, I am not the one. So being that person, I'm like what would make me not hang up the phone or close the door? So I had to develop a pitch in a way that would make folks like oh, okay, you know. Give them the fear of loss. You don't want it, fine. You know, start picking up my stuff. And it, and it worked. But I hated it, I hate sales, I hate selling. There's something dishonest about it. Even though I did like the dictionaries. There's something unseemly, just--you know, trying to get somebody to buy something. Which is ironic cause I'm now selling books. But it's a little different for me, I had to feel like it's a higher purpose. But you know then you know it started wearing on me. Week two, week three; then it was raining like for like a couple of days straight and you couldn't really carry an umbrella and navigate the umbrella with these heavy dictionaries. And I, I got to work that morning and it was raining and I'm looking, I'm like I quit. So I quit that day. I came home and my mother's [Margie Sweeper] like you got to find you a job. You know it's like okay, you know. So--and my dad [Donald Hunter], just so you know, he was working constantly. So if you imagine he's up at five, goes to work, comes--you know may, may stop in to eat, maybe not. At the store, come back 11, 12:00, same thing every day. So he's not there really in the decision making or making me do things or to sit down and have these long philosophical conversations. I may catch him on a weekend, on a off weekend or something. We'll definitely play cards or Scrabble, but that was our interaction you know, that one-on-one. We'd play Monopoly, he cheated at that too, he'd hide money. Man he was--that's what makes me almost unbeatable at most things. Because if you can beat a cheater- Story_ID: 57007 Speaker 1: So I look in the paper. There's a job not too far from us in South Orange [New Jersey] at the News Record, which is a, a local paper and they have several different papers for each town. So there's the East Orange Record, which was my hometown paper, the Orange Transcript for Orange, the West Orange Chronicle, so all these papers. And the main hub was the News Record, which was in South Orange, across the street from Columbia [Columbia High School, East Orange, New Jersey], which is where Lauryn Hill went to school. Why, I don't know why I mentioned that. But--so I go to interview. The lady is like the wife of the owner or something and she's not really into the whole newspaper business, so to speak. And so she says to me all right, I--basically I'm hired. I have two positions open. One is as a reporter, and I figure I can write. I can do that. I can talk, I can ask people questions. And I have a sports editor's position. And I was like which one pays more? And she says the sports editor, it's like $35 more a week. I was like I'm your new sports editor, no clue what I'm doing. So I'm like okay, I'm the sports editor for this, for these seven different papers, cause it was like not just the News Record. Now I have all these papers I have to go out and cover sports for. And so I grab my Star Ledger, which was our number one paper in the, in the state. And I start looking at their sports section to try to get a sense. Cause I didn't just have to do the reporting, I had to do the pictures, I had to do the cut lines, I had to do the headlines, I had to edit. I mean everything, and we had to lay it out every week with the little glue and the little--this is old school. I was there with that pasting and the little xacto knife and all of that stuff. So I'm sports writing, I'm sports editing, I'm out there covering these little football games, locally, whatever. And I'm there for three months. I apply to the Star Ledger. Why not? I been ripping off their style for the last--and I get hired to cover high school sports there after three months of working at the News Record. I'm there for eight months. Decide at that time it was interesting cause it was a, a columnist named Philip Bondy. Philip Bondy wrote for the New York Daily News. And he did a series of pieces that just captivated me on the Boston Celtics, and he was doing a lot of waste pieces. And it was a guy with curly hair, you know with his little picture. And I would, I would read his, his columns just like voraciously. And, and I started reading the Daily News, and that now became my model for how I wanted to cover sports, right. So while I was at the Star Ledger, I was copying the style of writers in, in the Daily News. So I, so I went on vacation. They had just given me a raise and they made me in charge of, of all of the female sports for the state. So I was going to do the all state basketball team, which was huge in New Jersey. You know the all state softball team, I would be the one selecting that. And, and compiling that team. I went on vacation, I interviewed at the Washington Post, set up interviews there, New York Times and the Daily News. And I fell in love with the Daily News. I came back off of vacation, tried to log in, and I was locked out. And I was like what's going on? You know like Gary wants to talk to you. And so I went into the editor's office and he was like so while you were gone we, we evaluated your work and we found that it wasn't up to par. And you know we're going to have to let you go. I'm like what? You know like losing it at this point, confused isn't the word for it. I'm packing up my stuff and I'm like--so one of the editors ran out to my car as I was packing up and he said did you go on an interview to Daily News? I was like yeah. He was like yeah, they called Gary while you were gone and, and he was like real livid, you know that you would have the audacity to go get another job when we just gave you all of this stuff. And I was like--he was whispering. And I said oh okay, but in the back of my head all I heard was you're not up to par. So I went home and I cried for like two weeks I was in bed crying. And my mother was like you got to get out of this bed, girl, you got to--you know my mother doesn't talk like that; that's funny to me, though. But, but you know basically it was like stop crying. So every day for like maybe three weeks I called the Daily News, but not in an annoying way. Because once again, as a person who doesn't like to be annoyed, I know what that feels like and where the threshold is for annoyance. But I got in good with the, the assistant to the sports editor. Got to know her family. Really grew to love her, her name is Deloris, I think she's still there. And you know I--every day I would just call to chat. You know, with of course the ulterior motive to, to try to figure out like all right are they going to hire me or not, you know. And eventually I guess they got tired of me calling there every day, cause I would literally is Vic in? Let me talk, you know, and I would talk to--Vic Ziegel was the sports editor. They finally called me and, and hired me in September of either '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]. I don't remember. Story_ID: 57008 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay so, so you were hired initially as a sports writer. Speaker 2: Sports writer, yeah, high school sports. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So now, so you have to understand I'm a sports editor, have no clue what I'm doing. I'm covering high school sports at the Star Ledger, but it's really not writing, it's more formula, agate taking--you know like there's a real stiff formula. Now I'm at the Daily News covering high school sports. But in addition to doing that, I'm doing Yankee sidebars, which are features, Nets sidebars, and they allowed me to cover the Nets and do fill-in work for the Nets writer, which was fantastic. And so I'm thrust in, I've never covered a football game before. You know, I've gone to football games, but I really don't understand it. So now I'm out covering like football games and, and there's this guy name Burt Beagle who was a statisticianer, and I think he did this on a volunteer basis. He had like three teeth and two hairs. But he knew anything and everything you wanted to know. And I just made him my best friend. I hung out with him and he taught me how to do football games in the rain. How to put plastic over your thing and put it in this pocket and write your stats. How to--each I mean like I'm a football expert because of him. I learned the game like the back of my hand. Basketball, same thing. And it's not just about enjoying the game, but knowing the nuances, you know, the, the turning points in the game. I got to cover US Open tennis, which to this day is like the best event to cover. You get more stuff. It's like the Emmys, the, the, the stuff that they give you. And you don't really have to do anything cause everything is done. Like, I'm like what kind of job is this? You--every point, every stat, all you have to do is focus on watching it, enjoying those moments and writing about the moments cause every stat is written out. Like you don't have to do that. Speaker 1: They just give you the states. Speaker 2: Everything, everything. And you got box seats right there, right there. I miss that, I do. That's the one thing--I miss sitting courtside, I miss sitting courtside. I was there the night that Charles Smith failed to make that one layup with the Knicks. I was in the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York City, New York], I was there. Dude, layup, dunk that ball. Scottie Pip [Scottie Pippen]--I don't care if they're beating you in the head. You're six ten, dunk the ball. I was there groaning with--but as a reporter. I was in Chicago [Illinois] when they won. I was there because at that point now, and I'm, I'm fast forwarding a little bit. I evolved a little bit because I--I think I was telling you there was an earthquake, right, during the World Series. Speaker 1: 1988, this was the year you started. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I remember sitting there being amazed and I asked Chuck Slater was one of my editors. And I said to him why are they sending all of the news people to the, to San Francisco when we have all these sports writers out there? And he said you know, look at those offices--you know cause there's like a bank of offices in the back with all the big editors. None of those people came out of sports, you know. They don't consider sports writers real writers. That's--it's like fancy, it's, you know--so in my head I got sports writers aren't considered serious writers. That's entertainment. If we want to cover an earthquake or a disaster or anything serious, we're going to send a real reporter out. So I made a determination, even though I kind fell into this career, that I wanted to be considered a real reporter, someone serious, you know. So at that moment I kind of started working for--I started doing Sunday, Sunday news features, and then Sunday news stories. And I had a front page piece like my first month there in October of a, of a kid, a basketball player who was homeless. So I understood that there was a way to take this fancy thing, you know this entertainment world and make it newsy. Story_ID: 57009 Speaker 1: Now were you a fan growing up of Howard Cosell at all? Cause he was often criticized by sports people for, for making stories out of-- Speaker 2: I loved him. Speaker 1: Cause there's so many stories in sports. Speaker 2: Loved Howard Cosell and serendipitously, I interned at ABC News Radio, right, the summer of my--no it was my sophomore year in college. I worked overnights and also--I did different shifts during that summer. And I got to meet Howard Cosell cause he was doing a radio show out of there. But that was a wonderful experience as well, but I loved Cosell. But I was a kid watching Wild World of Sports, watching Ali, Fra--cause that stuff came on regular television. We didn't have pay-per-view. Man, I'm getting old. When did this happen? But I remember watching these things on television and I was definitely a fan. Dr. J, I had a little television in my room and he was on Channel Nine, right, so I--his--I loved basketball, but I didn't understand it the way I understood it when I was covering it, but I did definitely had an affinity towards watching sports, and I love sports. And I love, you know, of course the Olympics and Nadia Comaneci. You know you remember these things because they, they, they mark points in your life historically. But yeah, I was a fan of Howard Cosell and I, I, I found him fascinating, you know. So yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, thought I'd ask about that. That's what he would do on air, he would, he would know the back story of the people who were actually-- Speaker 2: But that was, that was what, what made--I mean you, you--I, I've learned, and I don't--maybe it's through osmosis, but I, I figured out that everybody has a story to tell, right. It's up to you, you know as a writer or as the person doing the interviewing, to find that pivotal moment that makes that person relevant to the masses. Because everybody thinks that their story is great and that--but it's up to you to find that off the beaten track, so even in sports. And that's why I was able to transcend sports. That kid is homeless, that's the story. Not that he's a great basketball player. That he has to go home every night to a shelter with his mom and two bro--you know, his brother and sister, that's the story. And it became a front page story because it was a human story. While he's in this horrific situation, he's also trying to make something of himself playing basketball. And he ended up getting a scholarship and getting out of that situation. But that's, that's the kind of writing I would do. And Chuck Slater used to say to me you do these fantastic pieces, but the, the little stuff, you don't do well. And I say why slow me down? If I run better than I crawl, don't, don't stop me from running, you know. But he--what I learned from that was that you need a great foundation. And he's absolutely right. Like just because I can write these wonderful pieces that end up on the front page, the little stuff, if you don't get that down, will eventually come back and bite you in the behind, and he was absolutely right. At the time I was 23, you couldn't tell me anything. You couldn't tell me anything. I'm at the Daily News, I'm on the front page. I'm--what? You know, but he was right. And I ended up having to learn how to do those little things later cause it did catch up with me. But um-from high school sports-- Story_ID: 57010 Speaker 1: Is there, is there a story about how one of those little things caught up with you? Speaker 2: I'm not sharing it. No, it's a secret. Speaker 1: It might, might be of use to somebody-- Speaker 2: No, just learn your foundational pieces. You know seriously, I, I think you, you battle at a young age between, you know ego and, and you know, finding your way, right. So, so while I could hear Gary Dorfman's voice telling I'm not up to par, I would have books in my desk you know, that I would rely on. I had about three editors in there. Before I sent my piece to my desk, I--that's one lesson I can give. You know, sometimes we go into these places of work, or these new experiences as islands, and we don't realize that people have come there before us, they know stuff. They know more than we do. And I, I had a sense of that when I came to the Daily News. I was twenty one, twenty two, just basically out of college and I looked for elders in the room that I could relate to, but importantly who would, who would help shepherd me through. So a couple of people, Joyce Shelby, Jarrett McAlister, there was Maria Fugate who was a copy editor, but each one of them you know, they had been there for a while and I figured they could help me, you know, navigate this. If not editorially, at least, you know I knew that my personality was all, already--maybe a problem down the line. But they, they helped me tremendously, tremendously. And I would send pieces to each of them before I submitted to my sports desk because I wanted to be sure that my stuff was tight. Because I realized that maybe I'd be scrutinized a little bit more heavily than someone else coming in. Maybe I would be looked at, you know, expected to not be as good. You know, so I wanted to be better always. And I knew the way to get there--I couldn't necessarily do it on my own steam; I needed help. So I had no problem asking for help. So and it wasn't like a pivotal moment where I messed up, but I, I've messed up. I've totally made mistakes that have caught up with me not doing the little things. But you know, as a general rule, you know I always try to have my own back, or at least have people have my back so that I wouldn't be out there by myself trying to fight this. Story_ID: 57011 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So all right so what are some of the other stories you covered at the Daily News? I know that you, you mentioned before we started a Arthur Ashe story. Speaker 2: Yeah, so shortly after I started doing pieces for City Side, I got invited to, to work the news side of, of things, and I-- Speaker 1: Tell, tell us how that happened. Speaker 2: Well Rich, Richey Rosen was the Sunday editor and he and I have had a great relationship and he said you know, why don't you, you know, come over here? Why don't you try over here? And I'm like no, you got all the black people working the night shift, I'm not working the night shift. And he was like you don't have to work the night shift, you know, if you come over. I was like I want to work ten to five, ten to six like all the other--you know. And so that was the deal. I came over, I worked ten, ten to six. I ended up having to work the night shift on weekends. So, so it was like you know you had these rotations. I couldn't work Monday through Friday. I had to work like Saturday, you know it was like weird shifts, and that was fine. So one night I'm there, Arthur Ashe passes away. And it was interesting for me coming out of sports because in sports you write your own pieces and you submit them and you know, and that's, that's the way that goes. On City Side they had reporters that would go out and report and then call it in and they would have rewrite people to compile all of this. So you see all of these people in the byline with so-and-so. I hated that. So Arthur Ashe dies, they send me out to Richmond [Virginia]. I actually got on Amtrak and I go immediately out to Richmond cause he was going to be like one of the first African Americans to lay in state. I think Douglas Wilder was the, was the Governor of Virginia at the time, so it was like a lot of history coming together. So I went back and I did all these stories on the, the courts that he couldn't play on right near his home because he was black. Found his nephew at Virginia Union, who was a tennis player, did a piece on him. And I had the wherewithal to bring my own computer. Because what they asked me to do was to call in these, these stories, call in all of this stuff. And I was like hell no, no one's getting credit for this. I brought my own computer, I wrote my own pieces and sent them and they were like shocked. And I had single bylines on the, on these Arthur Ashe pieces and I was--you know covered the, the laying in state, was there for that. And it was an incredible experience. So from there, I was kind of the resident news person covering sports type stories. Story_ID: 57012 Speaker 1: So I did the Mets Spring, Spring training scandal the next year, you know to see--which was not fun and pleasant. You know for a woman being sent into basically the lion's den after they had all of this negative backlash from the media. Now here I'm coming, hanging out in the clubs with them to see who their, who their doing, you know in their locker room and they're like- Speaker 2: Now what was the story there on that one? Speaker 1: You know they, they had some very wild dalliances, Mooky Wilson and a bunch of these guys went buck wild during Spring training with prostitutes. Like this whole kind of crazy, wild, you know, Port St. Lucy ridiculousness, and so I was there to see if things had changed a year later, and they didn't want me there. So you know, I'd go in the locker room, a guy would lift his butt cheek and fart at me and stuff like--I'm like really, really--that's the way--but Dwight Gooden, to his credit, was a gentleman and he was like come on, you know she's just doing her job. And I was like thank you, your mama raised you well. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dwight Gooden really seems like a tragic story. Speaker 1: That is a tragic story. He was such a gentleman, such a great human being. And, and again, you know, people are people. You know they, they make mistakes and they, they get caught up in things that they can't handle sometimes. But it doesn't mean that they're not good people. Doesn't make them bad people cause they may do things that we don't agree with. And who did he hurt but himself? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know and maybe his family. So I mean I, I don't get caught up in judgments like that. Speaker 2: Darryl Strawberry is another one that-- Speaker 1: Another one, but also another gentleman. I, I have--I spent a lot of time in the locker room and, and I'll say this for, for sure. The baseball locker room is way more intimidating for a woman than a basketball locker room. Basketball players, first of all it's not that many of them, so you're not dealing with that. But they just seem to be more modest and more cognizant of your presence and respectful than the baseball players that may throw a jock strap across the room if you're in there, and you know dangling and hanging and whatever. And it's like okay, you know, it's really like if you gone be in here, you gone get the full Monty. And needless to say I, I had a lot of full Monty sightings. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Some I could share, but I won't. Speaker 2: No, not today. Story_ID: 57013 Speaker 1: So anyway, so I went from there and then I covered the murder of Michael Jordan's father. And so I got to do sports at, at a level that I probably never would have done sports at in Sports Department, you know. And it was very rewarding. And, and covering crime, like I did the, the Sol Wachtler [Solomon "Sol" Wachtler] case. I had a case with a four year old kid name Keyshawn Blackledge who, whose mother was like an eighteen year old--she had him when she was fourteen, gave him up for adoption to her transgender auntie whose boyfriend, you know had a--snatched the kid. It was a crazy story. So she had a sex change, she had a boyfriend, they had a fight. The boyfriend snatched the little boy who she now adopted, killed, murdered him, stuffed him in a trash compactor in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]. So my assignment was to go to the birth mother and ask her, you know, how do you feel, you know, you know, about giving up your child for this to happen? And I'm in there with the screaming babies, cause now she's had four more kids since this one. And she's 18 and I'm in this project in Brooklyn on the sixth floor with no, no telephone, bars on the, on the door, on the wall--on the windows. And then there's a knock at the door. And she looks through the peephole, and they hadn't caught the murderer yet. And she, she knew who he was. And she comes freaking out, screaming and crying, it's him at the door. So I'm sitting there like okay, I don't have a nickel in this dime, I don't really want to die for this story, you know. So I'm processing in my head. I'm looking at the closets, like where could I hide? There's no cell phones at this point, there's nobody to call; I'm trapped in this Brooklyn, sixth floor walk-up cause the elevator is out. Speaker 2: This is 1980-- Speaker 1: I don't know what--it's '90 [1990], it's probably '92 [1992] or '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992], okay. Speaker 1: I could look it up, but I'm sitting here. And at that moment I realized man, this reporter thing could like be dangerous, you know. Because until this point, I'm not, you know, I'm just going into anybody's apartment, any, you know--fires, I've covered a plane crash, you know. But I'm doing it in a very detached way. You know like I'm not thinking about the impact this might have on my life until there's a possibility that there's a murderer on the other side of this door and there's no way for me to leave but through it. So it was, it was quite a pivotal moment. It turned out not to be the guy, thank God. But you start to think about, you know, wow this job could really, you know, kill you if you're not careful. Speaker 2: So she was afraid that she thought it was him even though she hadn't really looked (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But it wasn't. And I finally got the courage, I'm like look, he's not after me. So I'm just going to go out there. Hopefully he doesn't have a gun. I'm big enough, I might be able to take him, you know, you know like processing all of this stuff in my head. I will lust have, you know, elbow him, I don't know what I'm gone do, but I'm getting out of this apartment. So I did, I left and it wasn't him, thank God. But you know it made me take the job a little bit more seriously. Story_ID: 57014 Speaker 1: That, you know, every situation you go into, you, you don't know. I covered--Thomas Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson High School, Brooklyn, New York City, New York] had a school shooting with one student shot two of his classmates and Jesse Jackson, everybody was out for that. And so I'm there to, to get a story. And it, and it goes back to what you were saying earlier about, you know find the, finding that, that story. And I'm looking in the crowd and there's this kid, and he's like six seven, six eight, and he's got these dreadlocks standing, you know like all over his head. And he just looked different to me. And I just go up to him and I say to him, you know, introduce myself. And I said did you know them? And he's like yeah, they were my classmates. And so I'm talking to him, come to find out he had been shot. He showed me his bullet wound. He had a little baby. He was sixteen years old, he had a two year old, you know. And I'm learning his story, his mother's. You know of course he didn't have a dad, and it's like the, the whole tragic story. He's special ed, he's on the football team at Jefferson. And we ended up doing this full, two page spread on this kid cause he was writing a journal as part of his special ed class project about the violence in the school. So this turned into--news people started coming, like it turned into a thing around this kid that I just saw in the crowd, you know because I knew he had a story. I knew he had a story. I could just look at him. And I allowed him to tell it, and it was so poignant and I ended up following this kid. That's ironic. To this day, his name is Craig. I followed him to college, went--you know they have that freshman year parent day. I flew out to Iowa to be with him. And it--to this day, he credits me for be--he's a father of, of two, he's married. Works as a security guard. Also--just doing well. And coming out of East New York, Brooklyn, you know, shot and all this. He should be a statistic and he's not. And I'm not saying I have anything to do with that, but I, I, I appreciate that, you know I was able to see this kid, see him, really see him. And give him a, a voice, you know. Story_ID: 57015 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is it time to talk about Hap Hairston? Speaker 2: You want to talk about him? That's fine, come on. Speaker 1: Is it time-- Speaker 2: We could talk about-- Speaker 1: Is this where he comes, comes in? Speaker 2: Well Hap Hairston, you know after, after doing news, we had Mort Zuckerman buy the paper cause we had a, a, an owner that fell in the ocean and died. Speaker 1: What, what year was this? Speaker 2: Robert Maxwell. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Years, I don't even know what year it is now. Speaker 1: This is '90 [1990]-- Speaker 2: This is '90-something [1990]. Speaker 1: Early, early '90's [1990']s. Speaker 2: Robert Maxwell owned the paper. We just had, we went through a strike. I mean a lot of stuff happened, right. We went through a strike, the Tribune Company sold the paper to, to Maxwell. He dies, it was like this controversy around that. And then Mort Zuckerman comes in and buys the paper and basically fires like maybe two thirds of the staff. And there's this editor from News Day who, who was there before the carnage named Hap Hairston. He was a Pulitzer Prize winning editor. And you know, I, I have a particular kind of personality where you know, I kind of hit it off with certain personality types, and he definitely is the type of personality that I hit it off with. So we were friendly. So when the, when the wreckage started happening, he came over to me and said hey mama, they've thrown him into the Business Section. Like he was the editor of the Business Section, which was a complete waste of his talents, but who am I? And he said mama, you want to work with me? And I was like sure, anything not to get fired. It's like there was this fat envelope, thin envelope, you know, terror going on through--you know you had to go up to Human Resources. If you got a fat envelope, you stayed. So I knew I was safe because he said he was gonna save me, you know like I got you. And, and I was like maybe one of two blacks remaining after everyone got let go. And I started covering business. Which I knew nothing about, like the sports editing. But he said don't worry about it, you can write. So I learned too that, you know having the skill, being able to write, can get you a, a long way. Story_ID: 57016 Speaker 1: All right, so you're doing business stories now with Hap Hairston. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm doing businessy-type things. So I, I started this thing called Women in Business, which were basically features on women like Faith Popcorn, I think that was her name. But business figures or people like the woman that started the Daily Blossom, which is a black florist, big time black florist in New York City. Sandra Parks, I did a piece on her. You know so I would, I would find like very you know, hot business women and do stories on them. And then I would, you know like do--like I did a piece on Russell Simons when he first, you know, kind of came out with Phat Farm. I did a piece on FUBU [For You By You], you know so it was like hip hop culture, women. You know I did a whole series on rap, the business of rap that won an award. You know just kind of at the time, in the '90's [1990's], you know there were so many rap labels coming up and how much money they were making and you know, how many album sales, the hottest artists. You know we broke it down, it was a comprehensive pull out packet that Hap [Hap Hairston] and I did. We were--you know he was so out of the box, you know. Because quite frank--and it's the Daily News, we're not the Wall Street Journal. So if we're doing business, it should be business that people can wrap their minds around. You know doing stock tips and you know real estate and futures and shorts and all--that wasn't entertaining, you know. The Daily News was an entertaining paper, right. Story_ID: 57017 Speaker 1: I need to ask you about--I, I guess the--you know you, you got the New York Times, this is a world, international, international news leader and all that sort of thing. And that's here in town, then you got the Daily News. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you got New York Post I guess too. And so but the philosophy of the Daily News that separates it from the New York Times and the Post is? Speaker 2: New York's [New York City, New York] hometown paper. It's the, the paper that if you just came off the boat from someplace, that's the paper you're going to pick up because while it may not be lofty, you're going to learn, you're going to learn about the city, its neighborhoods. You're going to learn it in very plain English, written on third grade level because you want to be able to grab as many people as possible. But you're going to get the facts, it's going to be pretty credible. Whereas the Post [the New York Post], you know it's a tabloid. So when I got there, it was the number one tabloid in the world, in the country, not in the world cause England has, you know, huge tabloids. But the, you know the philosophy of the tabloid is sensational just because of the format. Tabloid is a format, it's not necessarily you know, the Enquirer. It's a tabloid because of how it folds as opposed to broadsheet, which is the USA Today and the New York Times. But the tabloid lends itself to more sensational coverage because you have images now that you can put, big images you know, which you're utilizing that space. But what--you know instead of comparing it to the Times [New York Times], what differentiated us from the Post is that the Daily News was more of that working class, you know. That working class immigrant as opposed to the Post which I think appeals to the working class racist. I'm gone say that because it's true. So I was proud to work at the Daily News because I felt that the editors before they started bringing this British invasion in, the editors there really understood what New York was. Story_ID: 57018 Speaker 1: And that--now they had to get sued to, to do it. It was the first paper on record to be actually convicted of racism in this country. Did you know that? Which is how I got there. I didn't tell you that story, right. So I get there the first week after this dude was telling me I'm not up to par and I'm already a little insecure now about my talents. And I get there the first week Bill Traverse, who was my direct supervisor in high school sports says to me well, you know you're only here because you're black. Who says that to a kid coming in? And I--so initially, and this is how I operate, I was taken aback but you can't show it. So I said okay, well I'm gone show you how a black person operates, you know, that was my mindset. Okay, I'm just here cause I'm black, well I'm gone let you know what that looks like. They had never had a black person in that particular department before, so that--the next week I got that front page piece, or two weeks after that. So that was my answer to that. And so he says to me I been here for twenty years, I never had a front page piece. I said maybe you need to work a little harder. Maybe, maybe there's something you're not doing right. Or maybe it's cause I'm black, you know. But--and there was another kid that wanted the job that I had and he was dating one of my coworkers who was in high school department. And somebody asked him to do something, he said get the nigger to do it. All this was going on with--without me knowing, you know, that there's these, these, these, these rumblings, these racist rumblings going on in this department. But I'm oblivious to it because I have a, an objective. It has nothing to do with their racism. I got my own plan. So it in many ways not knowing it probably helped fuel, you know, and then when he confronted me with that, that put me in a whole 'nother path. So then he was telling me about the, the lawsuit and how the slot was open for this many years because they had to fill it with a minority. And this and this and that, you know and it had to be, you know a black or Asian or something. So my being there was interesting because in many ways I, I kind of set the table. And then coming behind me a couple years later was Steven A. Smith. So he comes into that same cesspool of racism, same exact space, and he's experiencing the same thing. So we automatically bonded because I'm a little brash and out there. And at the time he was just out of his--I forgot what school he went to in North Carolina. But you know he's wearing these tight pants, and that wasn't in, in style then. But love you Steven. But he comes in and he's getting broadsided because he's, he's urban, you know he's very urban. But what he does know are the streets in a way that these people never will. So he's now talking to kids like Lamar Odom, you know and, and you know really developing relationships, which has been his hallmark. And he and I are talking, you know. And he's like well they told me I shouldn't hang out with you, that you're trouble, you know. This is what he tells me. I said well you can make this decision on your own, I'm still here doing things at a high level. They're in high school sports. So you make a decision about who you're going to listen to. Somebody who's been in high school sports for twenty five years, or someone who's moving and shaking over here. So he made his choice and it was the, I think the right choice. He didn't last there long, but as a result of kind of marching to his own beat, look where he is today. And I feel like--not that I empowered him cause Steven A was Steven A when I met him. But to have somebody there as a mentor at, at a place where you could really get damaged if you don't have someone showing you how to rock and sock and robot, you know, gives you more power to, to operate in your space, in your talent. So that was you know- Story_ID: 57019 Speaker 1: Do you know, did, did he develop that, that bo--that catchphrase, quite frankly, when he was there? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what I'm saying, you know what I'm saying? You know, but that', that's how he talks you know. And, and it's that, that Queen's--you know he's got a wonderful family, a wonderful family. A bunch of sisters raised by a lot of--got a lot of women in his life. But yeah, that's his thing, that's how he talks. I mean he is authentically what you see is--that's him. There's no-- Speaker 1: I figured it was, but, but-- Speaker 2: There's no, you know, made up-- Speaker 1: All the sports writers have like a-- Speaker 2: You know, like that's his thing, you know. Speaker 1: But quite frankly thing, you know. Speaker 2: Quite frankly, you know. I mean but we all have our little, you know verbal ticks, I know I have mine. I was thinking about my dad and how, how much you know, care he took with the spoken word, and how little I take with it, you know. And it, and it is a kind of--for me, you know, as much validation as my dad wanted to have in being accepted for being equal to, I kind of want to deal in the opposite. Meaning that I'm gonna talk like a black person. I'm going to act like a black--whatever that means. Cause we all have these stereotypes in our minds about what these people, these people, how they talk and behave. And then I'm gonna achieve. Not like a white person, but like me. So let's, let's, let's now like make this real blurry. She talks like this, she acts like this, but she's doing this. So what is that saying? That there really are no limitations, you got to stop judging people by how they talk and how you think they should behave and how everyone should, you know, come in and pontificate about things and talk in these dulcet tones and be really calm about it cause Steven [Steven A. Smith] caught hell. He caught hell because he's loud. He caught hell because he's passionate. I caught the same hell, so that's why there was a natural thing. But what, what he learned from me is that it's okay to be who you are, as long as you do it well. Because one thing they can't deny is if, if the ratings are there, if you're selling the papers, if your stuff is good, at the end of the day they can hate you as much as they want to for the things that you represent that they're not comfortable with. But they can't deny the results. So if you pay attention to those, you're gonna be okay. So that's--he's super anal too about his writing and you can't find a more neurotic person about making sure stuff is like right. But that is the, the mania that you must have to be successful and still be yourself. I think it would be far easier to put on that mask every day, right, and pretend to be something that you're not so that people are comfortable with you. And you might go maybe a little further in life, maybe, superficially. But at some point you go home and you don't feel good, right. I go, I tell people I sleep extremely well. Every night I hit the pillow, I'm out because I know when I wake up, I'm me and there's no compromising that. Now has it hurt me? I don't know. Maybe I missed out on some opportunities because I was authentically me all the time. But I'm happy, you know and I'm here doing things that I can't even imagine. I know my parents couldn't imagine me doing this stuff. I know my grandparents couldn't imagine it. And, and as I look at--we're talking about history, that's what drives me. I have a publishing house. Why? And it's got my name on it. Why? Because I wanted to have a legacy that says something 100 years after I'm dead and gone. There will be Karen Hunter Publishing books out in the universe that will say something. I have a book called Why Black Men Love White Women. I have a book called Stop Being Niggardly: And Nine Other Things Black People Need to Stop Doing in addition to the Janet Jackson book that I published and the Chris Jenner book that I published, and the E. Lynn Harris book that I published, all best sellers. I have books that have purpose. I'm doing Keith Ellison's book, the, the first Muslim Congressman elected in this country. That's important, you know, that I'm shaping people's view of things that they may not have ever thought to think before. And I'm doing it through this medium called publishing, that will be here, you know in some form, forever. And my name's on that. That's history, that's legacy, and that's I think what we're here to do. I mean if you don't produce children to carry that forth, then you must produce works that say something, meaningful for the generations that come after. Story_ID: 57020 Speaker 1: So I digress. I know you had something else--the Daily News related, Hap Hairston. I, I'm there, I'm there, I'm there with you. But yeah, Hap Hairston and I rocked and rolled in, in the Business Department for a while doing business stories. And then I had Michael Goodwin walk by my desk. I had a desk that was near the Editorial Board, but we were kind of in no man's land in the middle of, of the Daily News [New York Daily News] on one section. And he came by my desk one day and he said to me you know I've been watching you. I don't know why. He said would you be interested in sitting on the, on the Editorial Board? Now in my mind, I know that that's very prestigious. But also in my mind, cause it's off a little bit, all I'm thinking is that's the most boring ass writing I've ever seen in my entire life. I can't get through an editorial. I don't read the editorial page. I can't even get--I'm like--and I said to him, the writing is boring. I don't know if I can do it. And he said why don't you come over and try? Speaker 2: Now, now what year is this? Speaker 1: Sheesh, '90-something [1990]? Ninety six [1996]. Speaker 2: Now is this before '96 [1996]? Speaker 1: Wait, I did my first book in '96 [1996], so no it had to be '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Ninety five [1995], okay. Speaker 1: Ninety five [1995]. Speaker 2: Just trying to check. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's '95 [1995], cause I wrote my first book in '96 [1996], it came out in '96 [1996], so this had to be 1995, cause I did LL Cool J while I was I the--on the editorial page. So I came over first week, I'm sitting next to the guy that like does all the editing. So Michael Goodwin is the editorial page editor, but there's a guy named Bryan Cates, and I'm--for some reason I'm sitting next to him, like we're in a cubicle like bumping booties. And I would send my pieces over and he would be--you know and I'm hearing him groan and moan through edit, you know that really, that really makes you feel some ways, you know. So I'm sitting there like man, if you don't shut up--you know it's like I was get--getting increasingly annoyed. And, and he's just like tearing my stuff up. And I go into Goodwin like a week into it and I'm like I don't think I'm cut out to write editorials. You know it's, it's a particular--first of all, you're writing someone else's opinion, right. So you take a topic, we're going to write today about--so it's Mort Zuckerman's page, basically, right. Story_ID: 57021 Speaker 1: So say a cop shoots somebody. Mort Zuckerman's opinion is we shouldn't rush to judgment, and this happened. Amadou Diallo--night Amadou Diallo--thirty bullets, never seen this before. I'm losing it, losing it. How in the world do you fire off shots in a neighborhood? You can hit innocent--but more importantly, this man didn't do anything. And you're looking for a rape victim, what was he going to shoot you with his penis? Like I'm, I'm livid. Thirty bullets, you reload and I'm going 0-- Speaker 2: It was actually forty one, yeah. Speaker 1: But thirty--nineteen hit him. No, there was another one after that. But I think there--that was thirty shots cause I remember that, that was Diallo. After him was Dorsman [ph.], that was forty one. And then it was Sean Bell. There have been a series of these, unfortunately. But the first one was Amadou Diallo, and that came through and we sat in that meeting. And Michael Goodwin was like well this is the opinion, you know, it's--we can't rush to judgment. Giuliani was the mayor and remember he had that, that street team and all--the cops--we own the night and all of this stuff. And these vigi--they were not vigilantes cause they had guns and, and badges, but you know this, this notion that the cops acted appropriately was the tone of the editorial. And I'm sitting there shaking. And I go in and close the door and I say to Michael Goodwin how in the world can we--he said Karen, this--do you see who's on the man--this is Mort Zuckerman's page. It's not your opinion. It's not even my opinion. This is the opinion of the paper. So any time we did endorsements, it was the opinion of the paper, right? So he never asked us to write editorials, things we were diametrically opposed to, so like I couldn't write a pro-abortion piece or whatever, or something like death penalty, for it, yay. That probably wouldn't be my piece cause you still want people to have passion for something even if it's not their opinion. We had some incredible editorial writers on the page. But that day was a pivotal moment for me because I realized the business of things, and I also realized that you know, at the same time you could still have impact. So he allowed me to write a paragraph within that editorial that gave the other side, which was for many African Americans, police are not your friends. For many African Americans, it's not pleasant to see a cop in your neighborhood and they're, and they're not always there to help. And this is one of those cases. And, and while we don't know all the circumstances, we do know that unloading and reloading a gun on a, on a person in a neighborhood, in a vestibule, is probably not appropriate. But, you know--but most of the editorial was no rush to judgment, the cops--benefit of the doubt, you know, those kind of things. But I learned how to write editorials probably a month in I got the rhythm of it. Story_ID: 57022 Speaker 1: And I also moved my seat, that was the other thing, and ended up sitting next to Jonathan Capehart much to his chagrin. He went in and tried to--he protested very loudly. Cause I'm, I'm loud, you know. If you haven't figured that, I'm kind of loud and gregarious and you know, unfiltered in a way that can make some people uncomfortable. And Jonathan Capehart at the time he was, you know--even though he's only like a year younger than I am, very kind of like quiet and you know, reserved and always had his Gucci loafers and perfectly, you know--everything's perfect. And he's kind of like very in the box, right. Even, you know--and I'm not. And you know so we also had a altercation before cause he wrote a piece about the bath houses and I came back when I wasn't--when I was still in business and I stormed over like Ms. Sophia in The Color Purple when she confronts Ms. Celie in the, in the field about having, you know Harpo beat her. I'm like what are you doing? Writing, you know--cause in my mind, and it was so narrow minded of me, but I'm thinking we have so few black images that I don't want this to be an image--do you know what I'm saying. There's so few black people writing columns or working in, in our space, that every image we put out has to be in my opinion, positive. So now you're writing about bath houses. Like what's that about? And it didn't dawn on me that he like was gay, that like none of that, like I didn't process. It was so superficial, my reaction, and then now I'm sitting next to him. And I end up, you know, we become pretty good friends. I'm going out to Fire Island with him, you know, doing a quarter share at Fire Island with he and his boyfriend and all his friends, and it's like cabaret night. It's like a culture shock for me cause I've never experienced this before. And I willingly did it because I thought it was so important that I got to understand him and he got to understand me, which was the other thing. Cause I--like so what is it like to, you know, asking all kind of inappropriate questions, all kind--and he was like--but he got to understand my particular crazy. And I think he even liked it a little bit after a while, even though he complained about me sitting there. We'd go get Oreos at 3:00, you know, go to McDonald's and get French fries and a hamburger. You know we had our little routine, you know. But that--those were good times. What--why'd I bring that up? Yeah, so I got good at the editorial writing. And then that led to writing columns. Story_ID: 57023 Speaker 1: All right, so now you start doing music reviews too at some point. Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was only to get free music. So I'm writing these editorials and at the time like so Michael Goodwin's like okay, I'm going to give you child welfare, and it's in the middle of a crisis cause some--a little girl named Elisa Izguierdo is killed by her mother's boy--and it was like a huge thing and it shook the whole child welfare system and they brought Nick Scoppetta in to rehab--revamp it. And he gives me education. And we're--our big charge in that is changing the school, you know, getting rid of the Board of Ed [Board of Education]. So those are my editorials. So I had the--two of the biggest, you know, social issues in the city that I'm writing editorials about every day. And I'm into music, cause we talked about that. So I go by--Jim Farber was the music editor. I go by his desk and go through his CDs, cause he had his desk piled high with CDs. And he didn't--rarely did any black music reviews. And he didn't really like that kind of music; that wasn't his thing, he was a rocker, alternative rock, this kind of stuff. And so I'm taking all his CDs and he, he's like why don't you just write for us? Then they'll put you on the, on the list and you get all the CDs you want for free. And I was like word? So that's what I started doing; I started writing reviews. I did the first piece on the Notorious B.I.G. Hung out with him for a couple of days. Got contact high. And it was, it was awful. Was in his--and this is before he's famous, so he's still living in--off the, off his mother's kitchen in her apartment, you know. So I'm hanging out in his room and it's like half the size of this room and it's like junky and it's like giant shoes, cause he was a big guy, big feet and clothes, dirty clothes. And I'm in the kitchen talking, interviewing him in his mother's kitchen, you know, after coming out of the big suburban with the marijuana, it was like crazy. Story_ID: 57024 Speaker 1: So--and I'm doing pieces on Will Smith and I'm doing Queen Latifah--you know, I'm, I'm--so I did a piece on LL Cool J. He's doing his first movie and the big hook on that is we're going to finally see his head. Cause you know LL [LL Cool J] was known for wearing these hats. People were like is it deformed, is something wrong, you know. So it was like a big mystery around what's underneath the hat, you know. So I meet him in Long Island at a restaurant near his home. And you know, we're, we're chilling, eating, talking, you know the whole nine and halfway through the conversation I had an idea. As I always do, you know, with the chicken thing, with skipping. I said have you ever done a book? Cause I'm fascinated by this guy, he's brilliant. And he said yeah as a matter of fact, I, I could--the cover, I'm naked, covered in hats. Like there's hats everywhere, and I could see that, you know what I'm saying Larry? I could see him naked with hats. So, so I said all right, well that's, that's very compelling. Would you be interested in doing a book with me? Now I don't know this guy. I don't know him. He doesn't know--we just met. And he said sure. Now most people would think he's just being polite, and maybe he just was. But I'm not the type person you say sure to unless you gone deliver. So I turned around, got his manager. I said he said he wanted to do a book with me. I got on the phone, I found a agent, Mike McAlary was a buddy of mine, I was like you have an agent? You know he's like yeah, gave me Eddie Hayes, who you'll know from Bonfire of the Vanities. My life is like Forest Gump, except there's no Bubba. So Eddie Hayes is my lawyer. He calls St. Martin's Press, we set up a meeting with LL and his manager. We're-[President] Bill Clinton's being inaugurated, we're in DC with LL who's performing at the inauguration, and we're pitching this book. LL comes with the boom box and he raps for the, for the, for the publisher, the head publisher's there. It's four of us in a room. The publisher, the editor, his manager, me, five, I guess I can't count. Math's not my thing. And they sign him for a very large contract. But I forgot to do a collaboration agreement. So he has a book deal, but they don't have to use me. I learned something--you got to always take care of your business. So I got caught out there cause it was supposed to be, you know, all of this verbal stuff turned into we can go get another writer. Story_ID: 57025 Speaker 1: And I was like shoot, so I had to make a decision, right. Do I take less money, a con--you know a contract that's not necessarily favorable to me cause Eddie Hayes to this day, Eddie you know you're wrong for this, brags about how he sent his kid to college off of this contract. He made more money on that book than I did. But I learned a valuable lesson, right. And that's take care of your business. I was so excited to be doing a book with LL Cool J that it never dawned on me that they might actually not do the book with me and have no re--I have no recourse to do, do anything about it. So we, we finally signed a collaboration agreement, which was totally unfavorable to me, but however, I decided to do the book, and never did a book before, so I didn't know what I was doing. And it ended up being fantastic. But again, once again, Hap Hairston was there for me, right because never doing a book, I would send him every chapter. What you think about it, what you think? And he was mama do this, do this, dah, dah, dah. He was brilliant. What about this, what about that? Can't do these things by yourself. So like you got to have training wheels on your bike before you can roll. You've never done stuff before, you got to train. Hap had me--we knocked that book out and New York Times' best seller. I can write books now. So now I'm like who can I write a book about next? Now that's unusual to ask yourself, but then I said who's next, who's next? Queen Latifah, I'm gone do Queen Latifah's book, that's what I said to myself. So I find somebody who knows somebody who knows an agent that knows her. Get on the phone and they're like she already has a book deal, she already has a writer. But I know something about this group now. Because now we're dealing with a particular personality type, you know and I'm not just talking about rappers, I'm talking about entertainers in general. They're not the easiest people to work with. And I'm gone say LL Cool J to this day was probably my best book that I've ever written because he was so dynamic, and he is dynamic. But you know come, come--what comes with that is, is you know a lot of other stuff too, you know. Very demanding, very--you know, and, and, and his time is important; yours may not be. Do you know what I'm saying? So I may be sitting somewhere for ten hours you know like waiting for him to wake up. Who's going to do that? But you know, I'm not quiet either. So I also know--I had to call his grandmother. You know I know how to, I know how to play dirty. I'm like Ma, Todd won't get up, you know so she's like boy, you better come in here, you know. She was beautiful. His mother--I got--his wife on him. You know like I knew how to navigate that world. And I--so, so I said to the lady, I said okay. She may have a writer, I said but I guarantee you're going to call me back. A year later I get a call from the agent saying girl, what you doing? I'm like who is this? She was like, you know--so she tells me what happened. The, the writer didn't deliver. They had this book, it's got to be done in two months, am I available? I said well I told you last year that you were gonna have to call me back. But she didn't call me back, she called another writer before and that didn't work out. I was the third choice and she finally called and so that was my second book. But I, I went after that. And so from there it just snowballed into this book writing thing off of getting free CDs. Story_ID: 57026 Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did you write for magazines? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Never? Okay. Speaker 2: Why would I have to? I'm at the Daily News [New York Daily News]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I can do as many long, you know, long pieces as I wanted to for the Feature Section, so that was good, and they paid me extra. I had a good gig. Speaker 1: All right, so 1999. Speaker 2: Ninety nine [1999]. Speaker 1: You win, you win the Pulitzer Prize. Speaker 2: Yes, as--not me by myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I cannot take credit for that by myself. Speaker 1: New York Daily News. Speaker 2: New York Daily News, it, it came with a--it was a tour to the world famous Apollo Theater. Michael Goodwin is genius, I will say that. Michael Goodwin--you want to talk about influences in my life. He's the one person that taught me the formula for success, the blueprint for success. The year before we won the Pulitzer for the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York City, New York], he had this plan cause we had--the, the school pieces that I did won a lot of awards and it was--we, we made it to like the finals of the Pulitzer. But he knew that there was a formula to get that Pulitzer, right. Every, every--it's not just performance, right. You, you can do great things, but everything has to line up, right. It has to be--not just great content. It has to be clean content. Because when you submit to the Pulitzer, it can't be mistakes in it. So for the year leading up to that we would have to read every piece that came through with the pack--and he knew it had to be a package. It couldn't be one editorial, it had to be a series, maybe ten, twelve. You know there was a formula. And all of those ten, twelve had to be perfect. So we would all proofread those pieces before they went to the copy editor. Because he understood I want a Pulitzer. How am I gonna--so we, we got close that first year. And then the next year we won with the Apollo series, right. And then the year after I think we got a Polk Award. There were a bunch of awards won under Michael Goodwin's watch, but he had a formula for how, how that could get done. And I watched him put it together, and how he manipulated the team. Not in a bad way, but each person had their strength. Like for example during the Apollo series, you know there was a lot of negative backlash as you can imagine, right, because we're taking on Percy Sutton, we're taking on Charlie Rangel, we're taking on Harlem institutions, literally and figuratively. And so we had to have a meeting with Wyatt T. Walker, Reverend Al [Al Sharpton], you know the black leaders, I'm in that meeting. And I'm the one telling them this ain't racist. The Daily News [New York Daily News] is not doing a witch hunt, you know because it has a history, it could possibly be you know. I then wrote some columns, you know, targeted Percy Sutton, you know, because in my mind if, if you--I wrote a piece that led, you know Percy Sutton loves the Apollo the way a wife abuser loves his wife. And he called me and--he called me and invited me to lunch and he looked across from me and said--very soft spoken. Why do you hate me? And in that moment, you know, the humanity of, of a person who I obviously hurt with a piece that I'm just cleverly turning a phrase or thinking I'm doing something, realize this was some, something much bigger. My intent was never to hurt Percy Sutton or to, to embarrass him or make him look bad. My intent was to, to say that the Apollo Theater deserves better. And, and we can't rape something and then say we love it, you know. We can't take from a community and then say we love it. That was--you know and I felt righteous in that. But I wasn't cognizant of the impact that it may have had on him as a person. Story_ID: 57027 Speaker 1: Okay now what, what, what were the issues on--or what were the issues that-- Speaker 2: So on the tour, you know what, what the Daily News, this covered, you know. I mean and that's--that was what I was saying about Michael Goodwin. We did a tour of the New Hayden Planetarium before it opened, before it opened, it was great to see the, you know this, this landmark transformed in this way. What Michael understood was that you have to feel things. You have to feel them at a personal level in order to really write about them. So he was big on taking us on tours, you know. There was a farm series that we did. We had to go out, you know it's like to apple or--orchards and see how people, you know, how immigrants pick, you know it was--genius. So the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York City, New York], which we see every week, you know those of us who watch Showtime at the Apollo and you see Sandman Sims and the Woodblock and all that and boo and you, you get involved in-- Speaker 1: They had a TV show, they had a TV show, Showtime at the Apollo. Speaker 2: Those would be--you don't get to understand the disarray that the actual theater was in. You got the rickety broken down seats, the ceiling, you know, collapsing in places. Needs--the rug is disgusting. And you're like this is a Harlem landmark? This is a, a landmark and it looks like this. Then you dig, dig into it and you realize this, this thing is being controlled and money is being made, but it's not going back into this building. They're making money off of a show, but they're not putting the money from the show into this building at all. Speaker 1: Now there's an entity that was formed. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From the Apollo Theater Foundation. Speaker 2: Yes and the foundation-- Speaker 1: And too with the goal of preserving the-- Speaker 2: Right, but it wasn't happening. So, so at that point you, you, you say it's not personal. This is really about providing the city and Harlem with something that they--have grown to love and they know is an institution, and making sure that it is preserved Speaker 1: Now, now who, who was on the--who was producing the show and who was-- Speaker 2: Right, Percy Sutton was producing the show. Speaker 1: Okay, he's producing the show. Speaker 2: And he's on the board. And, and so is Charlie Rangel. Speaker 1: And he's on the board, okay. Speaker 2: Right, so there's, so there's conflict of interest, maybe. And all these things were very carefully laid out in the editorials, right. Story_ID: 57028 Speaker 1: So I wasn't the lead on the editorials at all. We had a crack research staff, you know like Mike--Michael Aronson was--every I was dotted, every T was crossed, every number was--numbers were--this was a--this, this series was about the numbers not adding up. Wasn't personal, wasn't flowery writing, it wasn't like you know, a five year old crack head and that, you know that kind of--it was about the numbers not adding up and, and, and the malfeasance that led to the, the, the breakdown of a, of a Harlem institution. But the, the reason why the Pulitzer was awarded was because, because of these series, Time Warner came in and formed a new board that then restored it. So, so it wasn't just ooh, look at this. But now there's a solution. And that was the formula that Michael understood made sense and mattered. Because in order to win a Pulitzer, you have to have an impact on something. You can't just say you have a booger, you know you have to bring the tissue and wipe the nose. You know, you have to fix that, right. So the, the editorials led to a solution that then led to something really great happening in the city of Harlem. Which also kind of was the anchor for all of the gentrification and the wonderful stuff that's going on there now, right. So, so you look at the broader impact of something like that and you go wow, you know, it was not just this one piece and it wasn't picking on Charlie Rangel, and it wasn't just picking on Percy Sutton; but it was holding them accountable, which is what we should do, right? It's sort of our like our vote. You know you just go, go I'm gonna vote for somebody, but they're not taking care of your interests, right. They're not doing the things that, that are helping you get educated and helping you get a job and things like that, but you can just keep voting for them. And that's what was happening in Harlem. You know, you just gone pour your love and support on people and they're rich. You know, they're living like fat cats and you're hungry. There's a problem there. And it wasn't personal. And to be able to--and, and to--if you go back and see, there was no backlash. And it was easy to target the Daily News for racism; easy, easy, easy cause it had a history. But I think we, we did the groundwork in making sure that wasn't gonna happen by, by reaching out to the people in the community and explaining to them, instead of just going off and doing stuff. They were involved in it. They were whistle blowing. You see what I'm saying? So anyone who feels betrayed, look in your backyard because the Daily News pieces could not have gotten done without a lot of people helping. Story_ID: 57029 Speaker 1: Now, now how did the black press, the Amsterdam News and other--how did they-- Speaker 2: Are we going there? Speaker 1: I just want to know. I, I mean I don't know, I wasn't around here, so I--but it just occurred to me-- Speaker 2: All right, I'm very, I very rarely censor myself. But I feel like I have to because I will definitely be misunderstood if I, if I say what I'm really feeling about that, what you just said. So I want to like move forward beyond that. I just really--I'm at a place where just because something's black doesn't mean that it's good for us as, as a people. And sometimes we have to question our organizations, our papers, our outlets and what--and whose pockets are they in, who are they answering to? What's their agenda? I ask this question. I asked this question of Ben Jealous, actually who's the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. If tomorrow a magic wand were waved and all black plights were, fortunes were turned around and it was no black unemployment, blah, blah, blah, would you have a job? And he said no. I said I pray for that day that you're unemployed, and he said me too, to his credit, me too. But I often ask this question, you know. If you're doing so much work for black people, why are things being--why aren't things changing? Unless it's in your best interest for them to remain the same. And then are you really working towards the progress of black people? I have to ask that question. I have to ask that question. If you put out a report every year and the same stats are there or they get worse, and your organization's job is to improve this condition, why aren't our schools better? Why aren't our kids performing better? With income being equal, black kids still perform less. Why is that happening when we have all these organizations where people at the top are making millions of dollars, why isn't anything different? So I'm answering your question without really answering it, but I just, you know, wanted to throw a question back at you, you know. What did they do while the Apollo was being destroyed? Next question. Yeah I went there. Speaker 1: I mean it's, you know a lot of times the black papers aren't necessarily known for investigative reporting-- Speaker 2: Really? Why is that? Why is that? What--I mean man you gone make me so mad. When I was talking about my dad [Donald Hunter] going to Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] and, and the pride and the excellence, they're singing opera, you know. They're, they're doing, you know concertos and there, there has to be a standard of excellence that we cannot dip below, you know. And when I say we, black people when we do things or else it doesn't matter. What good is it to have a black paper if you're not going to be known as excellent? Why would I ever pick that up? Story_ID: 57030 Speaker 1: Now here's another que, ques, question that comes to mind here. Do you think that, that white newspapers investigate black issues with more vigor than they investigate white issues? Speaker 2: Probably. I think institutions are inherently racist, just because of the makeup of this country, period. It's incumbent upon us who infiltrate because they don't, they don't, they didn't know what they were getting at the Daily News when they got me, trust me. I was twenty something years old. I didn't even know who I was when I came in there. And I'm covering sports, so that's really innocuous for them, right? They didn't really view me as somebody that would come in and threaten the very foundation of what they were doing, not that I did. I'm just saying I would, but they didn't know that. It's incumbent upon us like the night I was telling you about Amadou Diallo, that we don't just sit there and be happy to be at the table. I'm not happy to be here at Simon and Schuster just to sit here and be like yay, I got a publishing house. What am I doing with it? And I wasn't just happy to sit at the Daily News. The whole time I was there I was plotting and planning, you know, and, and also pressing, you know. Pressing the envelope. Seeing how far I could go and get away--and I got in a lot of trouble while I was there because I refused to just sit there and be quiet. Story_ID: 57031 Speaker 1: I tell you one thing I'm a little bit embarrassed about. The day OJ [Orenthal James Simpson] got acquitted and I was at the Daily News and we're all huddled around the television, you know, various places throughout. And they came down with the not guilty, not guilty, not guilty and I went bananas, like a fool. Ran around there screaming and hollering like I won the lottery. And I knew that that was cathartic for me to hear that not guilty. It wasn't whether I was processing Ron Goldman's life and the meaning and value of Nicole Brown Simpson, it was that I'd never seen vindication for a black man. And he didn't deserve it, you know, but I wasn't processing that. I was processing that for the first time in my life I saw the criminal justice system actually vindicate a black man and that never happened before. And that was what I was whooping and hollering about. But in that moment I noticed huddles of white people were holding each other and crying. And it--I was like what's going on? I knew that in that moment there was like something's different going on here that I'm not aware of. These people are crying. They didn't know Nicole, you know like I'm you ain't know her, what you crying for? And that exhilaration for me was the biggest blow to them, it was weird and I had to stop and they wanted to say something to me, but again, very few people challenge me face-to-face. And I know they wanted to say something, but no one did. And it was just interesting. And I ended up writing a column about that, not apologizing for my reaction, but apologizing for my insensitivity to what was really happening. And as a journalist, we need to be able to step back and kind of take a breath and not react to things emotionally and just kind of lay it all for people. But getting back to your question, I think it's incumbent upon us to challenge those folks who are just doing what they do. I mean if you imagine growing up in your neighborhood and you don't really know anybody who's black, your, your shaping of a black person is JJ Walker from Good Times and maybe Mr. Jefferson, maybe Bill Cosby. But they are these people, these figures. They're, they're not real, do you know what I mean? They're not real people. And it's the toughest thing. Going to Marylawn [Marylawn of the Oranges, South Orange, New Jersey] was a great experience for me because I'm friends with people who are white and we have the same experience, do you know what I'm saying? Even though I'm, you know, black, we have the same upbringing, the same kind of parents, the same kind of social values. And that's important because now you get to see they're not different. We eat the same kinds of foods. We like, you know, like the same kinds of music. We're okay. And even if we don't, we still think each other are, are cool. And they don't think that's important, but we don't get that enough and we have so many isolated moments, especially at the top of the food chain. So if you're an editor of a major magazine or newspaper or a publishing house, your experiences are probably very limited with this thing called the African American community. It's a caricature to you. So of course you're curious in a way that may not be journalistic. Like we're going crazy right now about Gabby Douglas and I'm cool with that. There's a whole controversy about her hair, and there's a whole--all of these things that we would never talk about if it were a white kid. Speaker 2: And she just won the--gold medals--gymnastics. Speaker 1: Yeah, gymnastics, first African American ever. Speaker 2: At the Olympics just a couple-- Speaker 1: To win the Olympics all around gymnastics gold medal. Speaker 2: Yesterday. Speaker 1: Yeah, yesterday. We have to know that, right, it was yesterday, right. Story_ID: 57032 Speaker 1: So you know I, I think that yes, yes, yes there, there is an inherent racism in our institutions. But if we get into positions to challenge them, we must at the threat of losing our jobs, even, which many people don't want to do. I think I just do it naturally, end up losing my job anyway, so as I tell people, my students at Hunter College [New York City, New York] they, they--you have so many jobs. I'm like I could get fired at any moment. I know this, you know. I know any job I'm in they could ask me not to come back because I will probably say something that makes them uncomfortable. But I can't stop saying things because I think you have to challenge sometimes. And so I have to have backups. Got to constantly work. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard where a community gets--how--so do you ever have to, do you ever explain this position to the community in terms of how--now you're free to, to do a thorough investigation of Percy Sutton or, or, or Rangel or somebody and, and I'm not trying to say they never do anything wrong. But, but when, when these guys are investigated with the power of the New York Daily News and New York Times and stuff, you know they--I mean you're free to just go get them. And I mean I just wonder if--I mean I think the people in the black community sometimes who criticize reporters from major papers think well they wouldn't be free to go get you know, some white figure that's, you know, doing the same thing. Speaker 1: And that may be true, I haven't-- Speaker 2: Because of the political-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Deployment of the-- Speaker 1: Well I was sitting outside of Sol Wachtler's house till they tried to arrest me for a while. I mean I, I think a, a good news story is a good news story, right. But I do--I am sensitive to, to that notion that, you know of, of being a sellout. Cause I've been called all of that, you know. Story_ID: 57033 Speaker 1: I'm not saying you are a sellout, but you know-- Speaker 2: No, but I, I get the notion of like, like yeah you're, you're free to do this because he's black and you, you know we always want to take down the black leader, like all of these stories about Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and that play that was on Broadway and you know you, you--I have two, two schools of thoughts. I wrote a book called Stop Being Niggardly, and in it I said we have to stop dishonoring our heroes. We have to, you know, I don't care if Martin Luther King had affairs. Who cares? That is not germane to the, to the work that he did that, that led to the freedoms that we have today. I'm not gone focus on that. And if he were alive today, he probably would not have been allowed to do those things because we would have been so focused on what's in his garbage, who is he sleeping with, and all the other stuff that mean absolutely nothing. We want to criticize Oprah and she hasn't done nothing in the black community. Really, seriously, stop. How many black women have done the things she's done? Pay homage to that. I'm of two schools of thought. As a journalist however, I also feel that if we don't challenge ourselves and challenge our leaders to do better, then we will continue to have sixteen percent unemployment and, and the worst, you know grades in the, in the country, school, school scores and, and poverty and all. If we don't challenge our leaders to do better. If we keep voting them in. If we keep give--giving them a free pass. Charlie Rangel took over for Adam Clayton Powell. Adam Clayton Powell brought us Head Start, Medicare, Medicaid, he had rent strikes. And he had some affairs on the side, he had bigamy, he got thrown out of Congress, came back. He did things that today there are kids that are benefitting from and old people and young benefitting from the work that he did. Name me one thing Charlie Rangel did that has impacted society that way, or impacted Harlem, one thing. I'm waiting. And that's all I'm saying. It's not personal. And as long as, you know, we get caught up in we got to protect our black leaders, fine, I'm willing to protect them as long as they're working. Don't say nothing bad about Martin Luther King, we gone, we gone get into it. But Charlie Rangel, let's go. Prove me wrong, I'm cool with that. I, I'm willing to say I am wrong. But until we get to a place where we can honestly assess things like that and have dialogue that's not rooted in emotionalism and you know, well you know the black, black man's always getting torn down and all this other crap that we do. It's--I'm looking for progress. I'm looking for what Marva Collins did in, in Chicago [Illinois]. Said all right, you said my kids can't learn, give me the worst kids. South Side or whatever, I don't care where they're from. Let's go, let's go. I'm gone, I'm gone, I'm gone create a school, I'm gone teach them Socrates and we're going to, we're going to learn philosophy and Latin and all this stuff. Yeah, okay they're five and six years old. I'm gonna show you, and guess what, they're going to Oxford and Harvard and these same kids you said couldn't--that's what I'm looking for. I'm not looking to talk about all this other stuff that--that's what I'm looking for. Story_ID: 57034 Speaker 1: Interesting. One, one of our top investigative reporters in Chicago [Illinois] investigated Marva Collins. That's not what she's doing. Speaker 2: That's not what she's doing? What she doing? Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So kids aren't--man, don't make me feel bad. I don't even want hear it. I don't even wanna hear it. Speaker 1: Reporter, one of our, one of our History Makers actually did a, did a report. She was really--she was castigated by a lot of people in the community. They called her up and they threatened to kill her and everything, you know because she, she exposed this. And she said she had, she said she, she had all the information together. She'd been to--she went to the school and she talked to the former teachers, people that knew, that was like you know, she felt bad that she had to do it, but she did it. Speaker 2: Okay, well then I have to applaud her then. I mean but, but it speaks to, you know the--wow that just, you just messed me up. Speaker 1: A lot of people still don't know as you, as you just-- Speaker 2: That just messed-- Speaker 1: A lot of people still don't--aren't, aren't aware of her report, anyway, I should put it like that. Cause I, I can't--from where I'm sitting say-- Speaker 2: Now I have to go home and do homework. Speaker 1: Say it's true or false, but I, you know but that's what, that's what happened. Speaker 2: Wow, I talked to--I interviewed her, it was like the, one of the great--I did a radio show. Somewhere--man I've done a lot of stuff. That--man-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I did a radio show for three years in New York and it was a morning show with a Rabbi, goes back to my Jewish roots, Rabbi Sheahat. Before that it was Rabbi Shmuley Boteak, and they had this notion of putting a black and a Jew together in the mornings to talk about--I don't know what we were--but it turned out to be like a very highly rated, entertaining event. And I got to interview Marva Collins and I was so excited because you know, for me that's the pinnacle of what I, you know, I've always envisioned like somebody coming and taking nothing and making it into something and saying see, see I knew these kids could learn. That was powerful. And you're telling me now it's all a lie. You just told me Santa Clause doesn't exist. Speaker 1: Well I'm just saying--I, I'm not gone tell you it's all a lie, I'm just saying like when it's over, you may want to Google the name first. Speaker 2: I'm going to. Speaker 1: Yeah, Renee Ferguson is the person who did the investigative report. Speaker 2: Well I appreciate that, cause I sure don't want to be ignorant. Speaker 1: Okay, but all right so at any rate, so this is, this is--all the tension that accompanies most black reporters in major media outlets I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: On some level, and when they investigate the black community. Story_ID: 57035 Speaker 1: It's hurtful when you get a letter from people calling you Uncle Tom, Aunt Thomasina, you know, and stuff like that for, for reporting the truth. It does, it hurts a little bit, just a little bit. But as you know I'm already a little callous too, too. I'm impervious to criticism in that way cause I really don't care. I know who I am and I know the--what motivates me. I'm not driven by this desire to be known or, or, or famous in that way, you know. I, I'm driven to be famous for something meaningful, not just to be. I've watched reporters pretty much run over their mothers for a story, you know, to, to get a byline, to, to you know--and they lie. I've seen, I've seen stories where they knew it was wrong information, but they knew it would end up on the front pages, you know. I can say my front pages, I'm very proud of. Even the one that said Puffy [Sean "Puffy" Combs] had a gun, that's one of my front pages, where I interviewed a woman who got shot in the face that night at Club New York where Puff Daddy and Jennifer Lopez and Sean were, were in the club and the gun went off and she said she saw him with a gun and she got shot in the face. So I can't imagine her not, you know, knowing he got acquitted, and that's fine. But I don't believe to this day that he had absolutely nothing--he just was minding his business in the club and it just--I don't know how people got shot. So you know I interviewed Gavin Cato, his father. Gavin Cato was the little boy who got run over in Crown Heights that set off the riots, right. I was the first person to interview him and for, for, for him to have an expression of his son and, and be able to talk about that day and, and have healing, was important for him. And it was important for me, and I'm proud of that, you know. So yeah I, you know I've had some successes, but, but I--lot of times they're rooted in getting at something beyond you know, just personal and aggrandizement, you know--or maybe it was personal aggrandizement, I don't know. Have to process that, now I have to think about that. Go ahead, next question. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Making me think. Story_ID: 57036 Speaker 1: All right, so, so now when did you start teaching? Speaker 2: I started teaching--I was asked, actually asked by Mary Quigley at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] to come in and teach like a summer program that NYU had for high school kids. And I've always loved young people because I am a young person in, inside of my head, I'm like four still. But I did very well in that. So she invited me to, to teach journalism in the fall, that fall. And I'd never taught before, so once again, I'm like I need a blueprint. I need somebody to help me. So I reached out to a few professors and taught journalism there. It was quite an experience. NYU--the kids have a, an expectation of always getting an A. They mostly come from kind of wealthy families, predominantly white. Like the semester I taught my, my teacher's nephew, he was the only black kid in the class. And I don't remember any other black males ever being at NYU at the time I was there. Which is also, you know, it was interesting, you know, to be an authority in a, in a space like that. Speaker 1: So when did you start teaching at NYU? Speaker 2: What was that, '99 [1999]? What year was that? Ninety six [1996], ninth--I don't remember. I know it was two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in between that I was also teaching in Harlem at a program called Legal Outreach. I taught English grammar on Saturdays for a couple of years. So you know, kind of always been in this teaching space, you know. Speaker 1: Now this is a special Saturday program? Speaker 2: Yeah, run by James, man why can't I remember his name cause I'm trying to think of it. Legal Outreach, James-- Speaker 1: Legal-- Speaker 2: James, James-- Speaker 1: Not James-- Speaker 2: In Harlem, James, he's a lawyer. So it started out like they would do moot courts and things like that, really kind of, you know, introducing children to--young people, high school kids to this whole legal, legal process and understanding the law and then, then it expanded because part of being a lawyer, you have to know how to write and read. I mean so, so teaching them grammar. It was a brilliant program. And I learned grammar cause I skipped the seventh grade, so I still--my grammar's still shaky, you know. I don't really know sometimes when you know, my subject and verb agreement is not always there. So, so I was learning right along with them. I was, I, I loved teaching that, you know, so it was fun. I was like I didn't know about when to use which and that, and the which always gets a comma. I learned that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. You have--teaching is the best way to learn anything, right? Speaker 2: My goodness I, I can't stop doing that. Story_ID: 57037 Speaker 1: And so much--let's see, now you, you started at a--on a morning talk show in 2003. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now if I'm skipping anything, bring me back, but I don't want to-- Speaker 2: Yeah I had a, I had a magazine in between there. Got a million dollars from Bear Stearns. Speaker 1: Okay. That's worth--now, now-- Speaker 2: Is that, is that worthy? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, I, I'm actually taking that out of my history, so you'll have to find that yourself. But yeah in between there I started a magazine that failed. Speaker 1: What was it about? Speaker 2: It was, it was a women's sports magazine. Actually we, we were the first online to--online women's sports magazine to have like around-the-clock coverage. You know how you're doing the tape delay stuff now? We had live around-the-clock coverage. I had a student from NYU [New York University] actually, her name was Lisa Derr, brilliant student, staying up 24 hours a day uploading scores and stuff from around the world online to, you know, it was--we were bad. It was, it was really, really good. But we got caught in that whole dot com bubble and I knew, you know sometimes they don't teach you this. It's something that I don't think my dad would have ever been able to teach me either in business, but you know I had the notion that if someone's giving me that much money, I have to listen to what they tell me to do with it. Well what I learned is they're giving you that much money because you know something that they don't know. And if you're not going to bring what you know to the table, then you don't deserve to have that money, which is why I probably didn't keep it. Went, ran through it like a drunken sailor. Not doing anything crazy, I didn't buy a Maybach or anything, this was like all spent on you know, broadband, internet stuff and just craziness. But what I learned was I knew in the back of my mind I needed to have an advertising base, but my partners kept saying don't worry, we're going to get a next round of funding. And this is during the days that, you know, you have like Urban Box Office getting like $150 million or was it $500 million, I don't know. They were throwing around crazy amounts of money to dot coms. And that's what I had and they were like the next round of funding, next round, next round of funding never came. So you know all of the planning, you know, that I put into building this thing just kind of like--imploded. But it was a valuable million dollar lesson. Story_ID: 57038 Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what, what kind of show did you have as a talk show host? Speaker 2: It was a, a--I wanna--I can't even describe it. Four hours, six, 6:00 to 10:00 talking about everything under the sun, you know. I wanna say it was political, cause we had everybody on there from Michael Steel to Hilary Clinton to Charles Sh--you know like we went to the--all the conventions and it was heavy. But we also talked about like arranged marriages, that was one of my favorite shows cause it was the first time I had like Indian people calling up, you know, cause they know. So my, my audience spread that day cause it was like call after call after call, people were in these arranged marriages and why they work, really interesting. Had Dick Morris hang up on me, Ann Colter hung up on me, you know. You know I ask questions, you know, you know I ask--so Dick you wanna talk about that, but what about you and that woman? Click, it was like all right. You know don't throw, don't throw if you not ready to, you know, get down. So it was great. It started with this notion the Crown Heights [Brooklyn, New York City, New York] black, black/Jew conflict. But my thing was blacks and Jews don't have conflict, you know. That was an incident that happened, whatever, you know if anything there, there, there are more incidents and stories of black/Jew relations working than conflict, right. Of, of--there wouldn't be an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] without Jewish people, let's be, let's be real. You know so--or Urban League. I mean you gotta go down the list, don't get me started. I can give you a history on that. But so it was artificial construct that started with this, this Rabbi Shmuley and he lasted for two weeks, he got fired. I don't even think it lasted two weeks. He, he wouldn't let me talk, but then I wouldn't let him talk and then it got really contentious on the air. And it wasn't very good. Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name? Speaker 2: Shmuley Boteak, B-O-T-E-A-K, he's most known for trying to pimp off of Michael Jackson as being Michael Jackson's advisor or something and he wrote a book about it after Michael died. But you know he's got a--you, you--he, he's pretty famous in certain circles. So you can Google him. But first day on the air, I'd never done radio before. So I'm filling in, I tell the program director something really ballsy, even though I don't have any. I say to him you know, if you have me on your show, you're gonna end up offering me a job because it's gonna be the most incredible thing you've ever heard. I just knew it. And he was like no woman can host a radio show in the morning. No woman could ever host a ra--you could be a sidekick, you can be--but it just doesn't happen. Talk show, no it doesn't happen. It's what he tells me. And I was like all right, we'll see. First day, Shmuley opens the mic, you know, he's the lead person. He closes his eyes and goes on this like fifteen minute monologue. And I'm sitting there like--but he can't see me, his eyes are closed and he's--he's in the mic like that. And I'm sitting there, I was like this is incred--so in my mind I'm saying--and he's disrespectful and he's not letting me talk. So we go to commercial break, we come back and I start with my thing. And I start calling him Shmucky, Shmicky, Snooky, whatever, and cutting him off and just being a complete total jerk. And, and then he loses it because he's not expecting me to come back at him like that. He runs out of the studio. I can't, I can't deal with her. You have to, you have to do something. So they did, they fired him. So he got a letter--don't come back on Monday. So then they put me in with this rabbi from Crown Heights who's a wonderful, wonderful rabbi, Lababich [ph.] leader, Shea Heccht, H-E-C-C-H-T. But he's like kind of like a really, soft, warm, fuzzy type of personality. And I'm not, so the dynamics changed and it was great radio, you know. We had like, you know Tavis Smiley and Michael Dou--Dyson Cornel West in the studio when they were doing pass a mic too and I was killing them. But you know and Shmuley's like all--you know he's just such a great personality. So it just worked, you know. He let me be myself, he wasn't trying to dominate me and at the same time we started, you know, getting into questions about like the Bible, without it being a Bible show. It was just really fascinating to watch it play out. And again, I never did radio so I didn't know what I was doing wrong or right, but it was working because we went from like two callers to like having a show that was rated. Story_ID: 57039 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so the radio show had good ratings I take it and-- Speaker 2: Yeah I was named one of the heavy hitters in talk radio three years in a row. Which was great, by Talkers Magazine, which is the, the trade for the talk radio circuit. Speaker 1: So you're doing the show and you're working for the-- Speaker 2: Daily News [the New York Daily News]. Speaker 1: Daily News and you, you got-- Speaker 2: Teaching, I'm teaching adjunct at this point at Hunter [Hunter College, New York City, New York]. I don't have a life, so this is it. What, what do you want me to do? I know kids, you know this is, this is perfect. And again, you know I'm much like my dad [Donald Hunter], I can't really sit still, you know. You sit still, you die. So--and all of it's rewarding. So if you think about it, the Daily News, I was writing a column at the time. At this time I've become the first African American news columnist, black female news columnist. Bob Herbert was there before me as a news columnist, but I was the only--first African American woman news columnist. And then I started doing that and so I'm, I'm parlaying my editorial writing into column writing and I'm doing some news columns and I'm doing also some editorial columns. And so it just feeds the radio show. So the topics that I may, you know, broach in, in my column ends up on radio. If I--if something's really hot going on in the radio, that becomes my column for the next day. So it worked--symbiotically it was, it was great. It was great flow. So there was no like this is extra work, it was perfect work. And then I'd leave there, on you know Wednesdays. I think I taught like two days right after I'd leave there, I'd head across town to Hunter, teach my one class. I only had--well I was adjunct, so I taught one class. So that's like, you know an hour and 15 minutes, so that was nothing; I was done by two, you know. Get up the next day at four, 4:07 and head back out to the radio show. So it was, it was great, you know. Miss, miss the radio dearly. It was the one, you know if imagine reaching into people's living rooms, bedrooms, bathrooms or whatever and having these intimate conversations about things that everybody--you know and I'm the type of person again, I just say whatever I'm thinking. You, you know, you talk about the phone lines lighting up. So we go from like two callers from Brooklyn [New York City, New York], the same two people calling every day, to like I say having people from India call up and it just--the show just kind of took off and it became bananas at some point for the kinds of responses we were getting from the public. It was awesome. Story_ID: 57040 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the first part of the--I guess of the, of--middle of the first term of George Bush [President George W. Bush], I guess you got like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It was a lot of Bush. But then Kerry Ran and Obama--I wrote the first column that said Obama could be President; I wrote that. I went to the conf--conference, I was there with the radio show and I quit that day too from the Daily News. That was, that was another funny--my last column was about Barack Obama. And I watched that speech and I said this man could be President of the United States in that column. You could look it up. Nobody else was talking about him being President. Speaker 1: So this is 2004? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: At the convention. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the last column I ever wrote for the Daily News cause they, they hired--Michael Goodwin left to become the, the--actually he left and I'm there stuck with the guy that got the Daily News sued for racism as my boss. So guess what? We ain't hitting it off too well. So I said--cause he wanted me to come into the office. I'm like man I'm not coming into the office. I'm working. You know like who checks into the off--what columnist comes, you know, is coming into the office every day and sitting at a desk? No, not doing it. So this is my last column, you know. He was just messing with me, you know, cause you, you know cause he felt he could, you know. Have you come in, you're gonna check in, you're gonna report in. No, not doing that, I quit. Take that. That's why you gotta have multiple jobs. And I'd be able to say I quit at any point in time. You gotta be able to do it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you, you quit. Speaker 2: You're like, "Bad idea." Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004] then, right? It was 2004. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 57041 Speaker 1: And now, now you started work, working for Random House, right, in 2005. Is that true? Speaker 2: Never worked at Random House. Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well that's another big-- Speaker 2: Never, ever worked--I've, I've worked-- Speaker 1: We got a research gap here. Speaker 2: I've worked as a writer for Random House. I had a, a book called On The Down Low at Random House that sold a whole lot of copies and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you wrote a book. Speaker 2: I wrote a book called On The Down Low with J.L. King, he ended up on Oprah. It was a runaway best seller. Speaker 1: Okay, and I saw that show. Speaker 2: Yeah, where he talked about being on the down low. I didn't put my name on the cover cause I couldn't condone his behavior. That's my rule of thumb, by the way. If you don't see my name on the cover, you, you know that I'm not down with that at all. I'm just writing, I'm just being a reporter. Speaker 1: So you, you actually wrote--did you actually write the book? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but, but your name is not on it. Speaker 2: It's on the, on the, on the title page so I get my best seller credits. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So all these little tricks you gotta do. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah cause this fella, he was on O-Oprah. Speaker 2: Yeah he was everywhere. Speaker 1: He was everywhere. Speaker 2: I was like keep going, keep going, go, go, sell, sell, sell, sell, sell. I'm still getting checks from that book, love that book. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a, that was impactful because you know--and actually Random House was a little nervous about it because you know, the stories were so crazy. But I said to him you know in your community what's going on. But it's sort of like you never talk about it. And he was the first person to put a face to something that we knew it was going on, you know. And as a publisher I published a book called Faith Under Fire by LaJoyce Brookshire who was a, a publicist at Arista who I knew, and I knew her back story. Her name was Hunter before she got married. So we, we used to joke about being sisters. And she married a man, gorgeous guy, and he had AIDS and never told her, right. Never told her and he, and he died and she didn't find out until he died that he had full blown AIDS when they got married and he knew it. Thank God that she was healthy. So you know I published her book. She self-published it and then when I got my publishing deal I went back and got it cause I'm like people need to know, women need to be protected. People need to stop lying. So doing that book with J.L. was important because finally we could have a dialogue about you know, listen, there are gay men in our community, just be gay. Stop getting married and infecting people and having children and lying and you know, making people feel bad. It's terrible. Speaker 1: It makes it hard for the rest of us too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You try and get a girlfriend-- Speaker 2: Yeah it's like everybody looking at you, you down low? I can't tell. I don't--you know it just made very complicated relationships, you know it's like my goodness. So that's all. That was, that was that book. Speaker 1: Okay so that book--did you go on tour with the book? Speaker 2: No, never do. I've never gone on tour for any book that I didn't write by myself, and I've only done one book by myself. So as a collaborator, it's all about the, the main subject. Speaker 1: Okay now this-- Speaker 2: I'm lucky to get an autographed copy. They're like, they're done with me. Story_ID: 57042 Speaker 1: Okay now, now the, the big thing here, 2007 the launching of Karen Hunter Publishing. Speaker 2: Publishing, yeah. Speaker 1: So this is, this is really a big deal. This is--it's an imprint label for Simon and Shuster. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what does that mean for those of us who are not in the publishing business? What does that-- Speaker 2: It means that--technically what it means is that I operate and function just as any other publisher. I own, you know I, I select what I'm gonna publish. They cover advances. So like I, I couldn't afford to do Janet Jackson's book if I had to do Janet Jackson's book on my own. But because I'm in partnership with Simon and Schuster, they, they covered the advance and they facilitate the, the process, you know. Publishing, you know there's all of these, you know photos, inserts and everything has a, you know a, a, a whole kind of process that publishers do extremely well. So they took the burden of all of that away from me and allowed me to focus on the, the words. The person, you know. And bringing in great books, hopefully, books that matter. So-- Speaker 1: You're, you're almost like a producer for a television-- Speaker 2: I guess I would--I, I don't know anything about television, but that's my next frontier. So I'll probably jump into that not knowing anything about that either, being successful. But I guess it's, it's like--not like in the music industry, it's a little bit--it's like own, owning a label. Like, like Interscope is to, you know, like Def Jam is to you know, Universal, right. So, so I'm like Russell Simmons or whoever's running Def Jam now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or Rockefeller, you know. Speaker 1: You pick the subject matter and kind of determine how it's gonna be presented. Speaker 2: All of that, all of that. Which is you know, which is why I got into it. Now I wrote, I had seven New York Times best sellers, bunch of books. Did about eighteen, twenty books before I, I started thinking about it, you know because at the end of the day you either are producer or you're owner, right. You either, you either are the worker or you're the person, you know driving the work. And I decided that, you know the most powered impact comes in the decision making positions. I don't--I, I love writing with other people and I love taking direction, but I think when we talk about legacy and history, and again I'm always that person that's thinking about that moment. How many people are in this position who look like me? And I been--I've worked for ten, maybe ten different publishing houses writing books, Penguin, I've written books at Harper Collins, I've written books, you know, Saint Martin's Press. I've done Random House, I've done Kensington. I've worked for just about every publisher in the industry, I've done about three, four books for Simon and Schuster before I came here. And I've not seen anybody who looks like me in a position of power, in a decision making position. So I said it's time, right. I think the, the highest ranking person in publishing whose black is Marilyn Duckworth over at Penguin. She's on the business side, right, which is powerful, it's great. But on the editorial side where things are directed--so you asked me about, you know, an editor paying attention at a magazine or a newspaper to the African American experience, who's paying attention to, to this experience here? And it was poignant for me to be at Simon and Schuster, not just because of the Kangaroo on pocketbooks, you know the logo there that I grew up, you know, recognizing as this is the only kind of book I can read. But Richard Simon, who's one of the founders of Simon and Schuster, he was married to a black activist. Like people don't know that, right. Yeah, look it up. Carly Simon's daddy and mommy, right. So Carly Simon, You're so vain, I bet you think this interview's about you. Her mother was a, was a black--she was mulatto, a black activities, New York, 1920's, how radical was he? How radical was this man who started Simon and Schuster? I'm honored to be here and I wanna carry that, that, that, that same vein of, of out-of-the-box thinking and, and going against the grain, you know, producing with, with everything that I do. So you know I wanna be an extension of that. I, I'm, I'm a student of this, you know. Like so it's not just like I'm at Simon and Schuster. But Richard Simon and his story and his wife's story matters to me. So I want to embody that in the works that I produce. I wanna, I wanna make him proud, you know. Story_ID: 57043 Speaker 1: Yeah, some, somewhere in the back of my mind I see the logo, the Simon and Schuster logo that I said I--when we first came in here, that I loved for some reason cause it represented almost a activism. Speaker 2: It touches you, right? Speaker 1: Or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was something-- Speaker 1: Walking with the-- Speaker 2: There's something there. Speaker 1: Getting ready to do something. He, he's on-- Speaker 2: He's going somewhere. Speaker 1: He's going somewhere, yeah. Speaker 2: He's going somewhere and I think, you know today we're so--I wanna say anesthetized and, and is that right way to pronounce it? I don't know sometime. We're so numb, we're so numb to what's going on around us. We're so bombarded with this, this, this reality TV experiences and these, these fake wanna be untalented people rising to power and fame for no particular reason other than we see them all the time. That we forget that the, the, the real tenant of this American dream is about that thing, that statute, that walk some--going somewhere, doing something, being productive, meaning some--mattering, right. Not just doing. I'm not doing a publishing house because I wanna get rich and famous. That may be a byproduct and I'm okay with that, I'll accept it. But you don't do this for that. I can keep writing books and be wildly rich. It's a lot of money in that when you do it with--you know the, the level of folk I, I was working with. But you do this because you have a, a bigger vision. And if you're in publishing and you don't have a vision, or if you're in anything. If you're in, you know, car making or, or, or movie making and you're just putting things out because you can make money doing it, I don't know how, how much you're really adding to society and I really feel on some level we, we turn into that movie Idiocracy. Did you see that? Where it's like the future, nobody can read. It's like the dumbest person in the world is the President. And it's just, you know it's, it's-- Speaker 1: I've heard of that movie. Speaker 2: Yeah and like the dumber you are, the higher up you, you are ranked. If you're smart, you're, you're, you know you're, you're executed. It's just--it's really--I feel like we're, we're heading towards that and, and mediocrity is more the norm and it's something that's applauded. And we're oh, you did okay, no it's, it's not, you know. Perfection is what should be the, the goal. And how do we get there and the work that it takes to get there. You know, but I guess I'm a throwback in that way. Story_ID: 57044 Speaker 1: Okay, now--now are, are you familiar with--now at one time you know there was a, there was a, a black publishing boom. A lot of black publishers. They were small, but they all jumped--Drum and Spear Press, Third World Press, I think Federal Press is the only one left, but at one time there were forty six of them I think-- Speaker 2: Wow, you did a count-- Speaker 1: And they formed an organization called Combined Black Publishers in Chicago in 1978, no '60 [1960]-- Speaker 2: That was before my time, so-- Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]. Yeah I know, I know. But all this was going on--I just want to know-- Speaker 2: So what happened to it? Speaker 1: Most of them died out. Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: Well there are a lot of--well money basically. They, they--you know, the visionaries that started them ran out of cash. Speaker 2: So we're in, so we're in this supply and demand culture, right. And you have success in certain areas, right, where there's a lot of money being thrown at--not being thrown at, but generated. Like let's say music, hip hop, fashion, you know. So, so if something's not successful it, it means you're not resonating. And even, even in this arena for me the, the question's not doing a black book or doing a black--a book that appeals to black people. But doing a book with my blackness that appeals to all people. Doing a book with my sensibilities with my authenticity that can appeal to all people, right. So even when I collaborate, that's what's on my mind. Like how, what about your story's gonna resonate with somebody in Iowa? What about what your experiences are will, will move somebody in Botswana or some--do you know what I'm saying? So if, if we do things--this way when we talk about black press earlier, which we really didn't. That's part of my issue with black TV, black press, black, you know. Is that--in, in trying to have something of your own, you lose sight of what, what the grand mission is. And it's not about integration, cause I'm not an integrationist and I probably would not have been--I think integration is probably the worst thing that ever happened to black people. I do believe that. But I look at folk--the Tulsa, Oklahoma, the Greenwood Section, black wall street, very black, very--but excellent on all levels, vision, plan, everything had, you know--it was just a grand vision for what they did in that town. And it succeeded. And they didn't need outside help to get there. But somehow it worked and, and the outsiders wanted in, right, cause it was that hot. And they got mad when they couldn't--and bombed it, and set them up, you know what I mean? So for me it's like how do you do something that's so exciting, that people outside want in? People outside Oprah [Winfrey] want in, right, they want in. Why? Because she's bringing something and she's her, you know, you say what you want about her. And you talk about people that--I admire her. I may not always agree with her, I may not always like and her I mean no. But I admire her because she found the formula, which is primarily just being you at a, at a level that is excellent, and people wanting in. So that's, that should be the goal. Not being over here like Daffy Duck, mine, mine, mine. You know, closed fist, you don't get nothing, you know with that. So I, I don't know. I--you ask about the black publishers. If I thought of myself as a black publisher, I probably couldn't continue to do this successfully, so I don't. I happen to be black. I like being black, but it's not the thing that drives what I do. You know, it's a larger, larger question that I ask myself when I get up every day. Story_ID: 57045 Speaker 1: Okay, well I think that--I, I never heard of, until I did this, this interview came up, I didn't know that there were black imprints within the major publishing-- Speaker 2: Yeah Amistad is at Harper Collins. There was Harlem Moon, they got disbanded at Random House, which is where I did the J.L. King book. But you know if you're publishing work yourself, like it freaks people out, I did Kris Jenner, right, Kris Jenner's book. And I'm doing Kendall and Kylie Jenner's book, right. Speaker 1: Is this Kris Jenner and-- Speaker 2: Kris, Kris Jenner, Kardashian. Speaker 1: Kris Jenner. Speaker 2: What's wrong with you? Speaker 1: I thought you said Kris-- Speaker 2: The Kardashians' mama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kris Jenner. Speaker 1: Jenner, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Right, I know I speak fast sometimes, a lot of times. Speaker 1: I, I'm not up to speed with my Kardashians. Speaker 2: That's all right, you--and you may not be missing anything. But I say all that to say Kris Jenner was up here last week, actually and, and she brought somebody. I'm not going to talk about--to meet with us. And she says this is the best publishing, you know I've done books with my daughters at different place--it's the best publishing experience I've ever had. That felt so good because what it said was not because we're black, she's not black. Not because--so she now has entrusted us with her babies, her two little girls, fourteen and sixteen year old, Kendall and Kylie, are doing a book with us. They're not black. I am now, you know to me that says that I have done publishing at a level that it doesn't matter what color I am, and that should be the goal. That I am gaining, you know an audience, regardless, because the stuff that I do is good. That's what we're here to do. Story_ID: 57046 Speaker 1: You want to talk about the Facebook boycott that you--did you call for a boycott? Speaker 2: Yeah I called for a boycott of Donald Trump. Speaker 1: Donald Trump. Speaker 2: All things Trump. Yeah, I did, I called for it. It's like that made it, that made it to the news. Yeah, I mean you know I mean who am I? You know, other than a person that understands that the power of your, of your dollar matters. And if you--and the power of your eyeball and your, and your decisions matter to advertisers. We saw you know, Don Imus get drummed off of television because advertisers started pulling out because people started calling advertisers and boycotting. You know when he called those Rutgers players nappy headed hoes. And I think that I you find someone so distasteful as Donald Trump has been with his, you know, claims of the President's birth and all these other things, if you find him so distasteful, yet you know he has Arsenio Hall on, so you're going watch him, then you're betraying the very thing that you say you believe in. So my thing is just let's be authentically real, you know. If this guy is, is a pariah, which I think he is, if he's out there, you know, doing all this stuff that's dividing this great nation of ours, let him know that you can't keep doing that and still profit. So we got to stop watching him even if it hurts. I love Arsenio, but I couldn't watch this, this, this season, or last season. And I'm not going to any Trump, you know casino and you do owe me money cause my dad spent a lot of money there. But I feel like you have to put your money where your mouth is. We would not have had any movement in the Civil Rights whole--you know I don't want to repeat movement, but if the Montgomery bus boycott had not have happened, and that was clearly about, not about like us, please like us white people. That was I put money in your thing every day to get to work and you disrespect me, you pull off, you leave me, take my dime cause I got to get off the bus to get on the back. I got to get on the back of the bus even though I'm paying the same fare as a white person. I might have to stand because it's too many white--I might not get a ride, but I pay my money. So guess what, I'm not paying my money. And what they found was we need that money. I don't like these negroes, but we need their money so we got to change what we're doing. And they didn't want to change. As a matter of fact, they went bankrupt and the parent company had to come in and say what are we doing? Take their money and let them sit where they want. That's all I care about, I don't care if you like me. I do not care. But you're going to respect me because I matter. And the only way I can show you I matter is through my, my spending habits and where I choose to put my eyeballs. And we need to be as a people more cognizant of that power. Cause it's a lot of it. We drive fashion. We drive music and culture, yet we don't--we have sixteen percent unemployment? We're not, we're not, we're not profiting in our communities? We're not doing something right, cause that's power right there. We're not using it. So I'm just saying let's use our power. See if he can get canceled; see if he likes that. See his birth certificate. Speaker 1: Okay, so did, did it go anywhere? I mean in terms-- Speaker 2: The ratings were the lowest they've been. I can't say I'm taking credit for that. I can't, I'm sure other people more powerful than I went on Tom Joyner. He's got a huge audience, glad that people are listening. We'll see, we'll see. Speaker 1: I don't watch it, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, good, you better not. Don't watch Donald Trump. Story_ID: 57047 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well what are some of the projects that, that you've published through your in-print with Simon and Schuster? Speaker 2: We did Patti LaBelle cookbook, proud of. Did Janet Jackson's first book. It was a number one New York Times' best seller called True You, which is probably the only book she'll ever do and I'm very, very, very proud to, to have published Janet Jackson. I grew up like idolizing her, and so I was honored you know, sit in a room and explain to her why I thought this was a good thing for her to do. And, and for her to actually say okay; she could have gone anywhere. She could have gone anywhere and that--her saying yes to us kind of set the table for everyone else saying yes to us. So we're doing right now Vincent and Tamar Braxton. We're doing, like I said Keith Ellison, the first Congressman from the Islamic faith to be elected to Congress. We, we're doing some projects I can't talk about yet, but what, what I can say is that you know it's very, very mainstream, very big. And, and it's competitive in the sense that every other house wants them. But what we're doing differently is using our relationships. So I'm not dealing with a lot of agents and it's not a lot of, you know, auctions and all that stuff. I'm talking to people. I sat in a room with Janet at, at her place--I'm not telling you where it is. But and I said this is what I think. I think, you know, legacy. What you say, you know, will have an impact on a lot of lives. And you wanna say it in a certain way and you wanna say it now as opposed to never saying it. So--and we will give you the opportunity to not just say that, but to express the things--she did a whole thing on bullying and self esteem and talking about her childhood and how she felt growing up. And most people had never heard Janet talk like this before. And, and she did that in a book that we published. Kris Jenner who people know as, you know, the mom-manager of Kim Kardashian and all this, she had a book that said something beyond just managing her daughters, but talking about growing up. Her, her grandmother leaving her grandfather, which was unheard of, and being raised in a candle making shop and--but the work ethic, you know, brought her to this place where she now is managing her daughters, but because of what happened to her in her childhood. And that story is res--resonates with a lot of people even though they may not like the Kardashians, they may not like this or that. When they read that book, they come away with something. And that, that makes me extremely happy. I published a kid in Brooklyn [New York, New York], a sixteen year old kid. His teacher called me and said you know I got this student, kids are picking on him. You know he wants to be a writer, will you talk to him? And I said sure. So I talked to him, I said so what you, what do you have? He sends me 360 pages and I read it over the weekend and I was like seventeen, sixteen year old writing this full book. I've seen manuscripts come in from adults who've written a lot of books didn't look like this. So I sent--I'm gone publish your book. Changed his life, changed his life. He's now--he didn't know whether he was gonna go to college, he was, you know just kind of like surly and you know just angry. You know, living in Brooklyn and being different and having kids bother you and you not really finding your way. And now he has a purpose, he's an author. He's writing his second book for me. And he's about to do some great stuff with an advertiser I can't talk about yet. But I'm looking at this and I'm like that's why I'm here. Who's going to give this kid an opportunity to write a book, this black kid from Brooklyn? To be an author, to be an author. Story_ID: 57048 Speaker 1: Not just about celebrities, it's about-- Speaker 2: No, not at all. Celebrities pay the bills. Book like Nameless by Kyle Chase, pay the soul, you know. I'm doing a book called An Angry Ass Black Woman that comes out in October by a woman--she's a wonderful author, but she, she goes through her--it's like a snapshot of Harlem in the '70s [1970s], you know. But she's in a coma. This is a true story, but it's fictionalized a little bit to preserve some, you know her memories of her parents or whatever. But she was in a coma and, and she goes through this journey of, of some horrific things that happened in her life with the backdrop of Harlem in the '70s [1970s], and why she's so angry. You know cause they always say black women are angry, angry black women. But at the end, you know I won't give it, give it all away, but she comes to this revelation. And this is a book like Manchild in the Promised Land. And so excited about it because who would give her this opportunity, you know. I'm in the position to do that, thank God, you know and, and some books don't work. But I'm still happy that I did them, you know. So because Don't Bring Home a White Boy and other notions that, that keep black women from, from marrying, you know. So, so while I may not be a proponent of interracial marriage, this woman you know, came to me with this story that I thought needed to be, you know, explored. We need to have a dialogue about this. There are too many black women who are single who wanna be married. Maybe you need to think about going outside your race and it's okay and she did it, and here are her experiences and she share that in this. Helpful, you know. Why Black Men Love White Women, a History of White Supremacy in America. It needs to be talked about. It's one of my best-selling books that aren't by a celebrity. But the author brings it, you know, and pisses people off and makes people talk. But we need to have these discussions about race. So yeah, it's, it's, it's all of that and being a publisher is so much more rewarding than I thought it would be and much more challenging than I thought it would be. But at the end of this journey after you sit and you watch the, the, the books stack up, the titles stack up and you start to see a picture being formed from something you just thought about in 2007 actually come to fruition and you have 20 titles and a few best sellers and seen lives change. This is why we're on this journey. Story_ID: 57049 Speaker 1: Ma'am, at this juncture when you look back at everything you've done and you still got a lot to do, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: You know that's a, that's a tough question. I, I've been accused by friends of mine of not stopping to smell the roses. I'm always busy, right, and it's true. I, I don't stop and reflect often. I'm doing it more and more now because I'm kind of forced to doing things like this. But I, I don't even think I've scratched the surface. Like I'm--all of this stuff that I've done I think preparation for what I'm supposed to do. And I haven't quite reached that yet. And, and I'll know when I've reached it when the impact on lives is more massive than it is now. You know I'm hitting one or two, or there's a cow chase here, there's a Karen [unclear] Miller there, there's, you know a Maya [ph.] Sloan here or a Sali [ph.] Abrams, a young lady who, whose mom was Chinese and was raised by a man she thought was her father, who's white. And grew up thinking she was white and then was told--her world was shattered when she was told she was actually black and what does it really mean to be black? To explore that, you know for millions of Americans, you know, that's a question. To give that voice. But I hope you know when it's all said and done that I will--my legacy will have been one to help people reach their own personal truths and, and, and press their own envelopes to see how far that they can take this thing called life. You know and not just live ordinary lives, but constantly try to improve and learn and grow and make mistakes and be fearless, hopefully, you know, the things that I've been able to do will, will be an example for that. Story_ID: 57050 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now I know you don't have children right now, but, but who would you consider to be your family or your extended family at this juncture? Speaker 2: My mom [Margie Sweeper], my--like that? My, my family? Speaker 1: Well yeah, yeah. Who, who would you consider to be your family, and tell us something about-- Speaker 2: Well you know my ma, my dad [Donald Hunter] just died last July and that was very, very, very, very painful. Still kind of struggling with that. And you know, my mom, you know is here. But you know the roles have changed. Like I'm, I'm more--not, not I'm not her mother. She keeps reminding me you're not my mother. But you know it's a little different, you know and it's not like she's old or anything. But I, I guess you know, coming from where she comes from, it is strange having this daughter who may be on MSNBC one, you know and doing all these things and then you know I have to tell her not to talk about me to people and I'm uncomfort--you know she's in this kind of weird box. I wanna brag about her but I--she gets mad when I talk, you know. So, so that's a kind of in--interesting relationship and I just wanna just keep it simple, you know and just hang out. I got a couple of friends that I, you know, enjoy going to the movies with and hanging out with and just doing regular stuff. You know like nothing. Most of the time I, I actually spend by myself. I'm really kind of like a very solitary being. I love to sit and read stuff that I'm--don't have to read. Stuff that I'm not publishing, just read. Abraham Lincoln Vampire Hunter and you know, A Modern Witch and stuff, you know like I'm reading that kind of stuff just for fun, reading freaking--The Great Gatsby again. That's my toilet reading--too much information. But--it's a thin book, you know. But that's it, you know and it's--I'm kind of like very, very, very right here with it. So that's a difficult question for me to answer. Story_ID: 57051 Speaker 1: Okay. Well is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Like what? What is this--I, I--no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. We'll probably come back forty years from now and get--and have some more questions, but ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I just would, see. Just wanna be remembered, yeah. Positively. That's like--not like the guy in Aurora [Colorado], no I want to be remembered for, you know these fingerprints we have. You know, and each of them are unique. And I do believe we're all put here to do something special, something special; not just to have an ordinary life. I don't think we're meant to do that. I don't think we're mean, meant to be born, go through life, retire and die. We should do something while we're here. So I wanna be remembered for somebody, as somebody who did something; left her fingerprint on, on her little dash between the birth date and that date death. That little dash I left my fingerprint on there and you know I was here, I was here. You know, carved into something. And I want more importantly, that those people that I've touched, to be better than, than I am. So I'm looking for Kyle Chase to be the best writer of all time. And I'm looking for any kid I've taught to go on to do greater things than I've done. That's what I'm looking for..