 Story_ID: 316349 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Charlayne Alberta Hunter-Gault, C-H-A-R-L-A-Y-N-E, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, H-U-N-T-E-R hyphen G-A-U-L-T [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story behind the spelling of your first name? Speaker 2: I think I was supposed to have been Charles, and my brilliant, creative southern girl of a mother [Althea Brown Hunter], once I wasn't Charles, came up with Charlayne, and I've never quite known exactly how she got the spelling, but I am passionate about my name. There are so many Charlenes, and nowadays there are few Charlaynes, spelled--one is spelled exactly as mine, and others are spelled differently. But I am absolutely insistent that people pronounce my name correctly, because I've actually always loved it, I've loved the uniqueness of it, and I've always been very happy with it. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have any nicknames or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the way I was supposed to be Charles (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. In those days, we didn't have ultrasound or, you know, any way to determine-- Speaker 2: No, they had not a clue, and it took me days to be born and in my house, with just a doctor and a midwife, in Due West, South Carolina. And it was apparently a very hard labor. My head was apparently very misshapen, and they actually took a rolling pin, the doctor did to roll it and make it make it smooth, and when I think of that, I feel (laughter) I feel pain, but I'm sure it was fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: February 27th, 1942. Speaker 1: And that's in Due West, South Carolina. Speaker 2: D-U-E W-E-S-T, two words, South Carolina. People say, "Due west of what?" I don't know. It was due west of Abbeville [South Carolina] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there, was that your--basically the whole of your family or, I mean, your--is it like a stronghold of your family, Due West, South Carolina? Speaker 2: No, and there's no stronghold of the family. They--my mother was born in Macon, Georgia and grew up around Macon and Covington [Georgia], and my [maternal] grandmother, Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones moved to Due West to be with her then-husband; she had five. And that's how she happened to be in Due West. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I, I want to get into that deeper, a little later but I'm just--we're just trying to verify some things before we really get started but, okay, so. Speaker 2: I guess you could say that Georgia was more of home. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, and ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a writer. Speaker 1: All right-- Speaker 2: Two different things (laughter). Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 15th, 2006. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 316350 Speaker 1: Before we get in depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I almost forgot (laughter). It's perfunctory to ask, and the first one is: do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I have two favorite colors, purple and green. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if I had to choose one, I suppose it would be purple because it's like amethyst which is my birth stone. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I just like food, I don't think a have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like it when it's hot: summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I've always enjoyed the Caribbean, probably more than anywhere else that I've been. I like being in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I think the thing that I've always identified with probably as an adult is--it's actually not so much a phrase as it is a concept that the values of my family, both my biological and extended family served to create a suit of armor for me that I've worn throughout my life and that has protected me in times of difficulty, times of challenge, times of trouble. It's always there; I always wear it. Suit of armor. Story_ID: 316351 Speaker 1: How much do you know about your mother's [Althea Brown Hunter] side of the family, and how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I suppose I can trace my mother's side of the family back to her father's father whose name was Ike Brown. He was a prominent white southern gentlemen in Covington, Georgia, who had liaisons with many black women and apparently according to what I've been-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Full name and spell it for us. Speaker 1: Her full name is, was Althea, A-L-T-H-E-A, Ruth, R-U-T-H, Brown, B-R-O-W-N-- Speaker 2: And what is her date of birth? Speaker 1: --Hunter. Speaker 2: Okay. Hunter. Okay. Right. Speaker 1: It was May 20, 1918. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now, all right, you were telling us about-- Speaker 1: Her father-- Speaker 2: --Ike Brown [sic. grandfather]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. The interesting thing about these liaisons and the issues from these liaisons is that apparently Ike Brown never denied them. He didn't marry any of them. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: He never denied any of those children. He never married any of the mothers, but he never married at all. Speaker 2: Well, he couldn't marry any of those mothers, right? In those days. Speaker 1: Well, I suppose not. I mean you can do whatever you want to do, but it would have been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In terms of segregation law, he wouldn't have been able to do. Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have been, but he didn't marry any white ones either. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And with my own grandfather [Rochell Brown], my mother's father, he acknowledged him openly, gave him his name, Brown, and in fact, set him up in the barbering business in a very prominent shop on the town square. So, my grandfather was a barber, and on my mother's side, my grandmother was the daughter, as I understand it, of a rape: one of those domestic household rapes, where the master of the house impregnated her, and then she either was thrown out of the house or left the house, and my grandmother was born and made it to about the third grade. I think her mother's name--her name--her mother's name was--my grandmother's name I've given you--my grand--her mother's name was Ellen Wilson, E-L-L-E-N. Speaker 2: That's your great-grandmother on your-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Ellen Wilson, I never knew her. And she needed assistance and so she took my grandmother, Frances [Wilson Layson Brown Jones], out of school in the third grade to help her manage, and that is about as much as I know about that side of the family. Story_ID: 316352 Speaker 1: On my father's side, they came up around Florida. Speaker 2: Now, what's your father's full name? My father's name is Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Sheperd, S-H-E-P-E-R-D, Sheperd, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Hunter, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a long name. Speaker 2: See, he was known as C.S.H. Hunter, Jr., and his father was [Charles Hunter] Sr. Speaker 1: What is your father's birth place and date? Speaker 2: Where he was born, I don't remember. Somewhere in Florida, and his birth date was February 13th, but I don't remember the year, I'd have to look it up. And-- Speaker 1: How much older was he than your mother [Althea Brown Hunter] or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: About fifteen years. Speaker 1: Fifteen years older? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, you can figure that out. Speaker 1: Okay. So, about 1903 or so, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was fifteen years older than she was. And his father--they all because these, they had these long names, they called my father Charles and they called grandfather Shep, and they called my brother [Charles Hunter III] Henry (laughter) because he's the third. And his father was the presiding elder in the African Methodist Episcopal [AME] church. So, they lived all around Florida. He was known as the preacher's preacher. That is, he trained preachers how to preach. And his wife was Alberta--same as my middle name--Hunter. I don't know her maiden name, and when I was writing my book 'In My Place' [Charlayne Hunter-Gault], I was on a deadline, so I wasn't able to do extensive research, but my grandfather was a very beautiful, unique color of black. It was almost like the Dinkas, it was kind of, of Africa's southern Sudan--it was blue-black. And so I began to wonder, you know, 'cause clearly, this was African origins. And, as I spoke to members of the family at that time, with limited time, I got as far as Barbados. Apparently he had talked about the family being from Barbados. And recently, I've looked into some immigration from--forced immigration--from Africa and some slaves did in fact come from the Gambia and ended up in Barbados, but I don't have any idea. I just know that he was just extraordinarily beautiful black man, really black--almost blue-black. And my grandmother, Alberta Hunter, was a very beautiful brown, and I've heard over the years that she was part Indian [Native American]. I know that there were Seminoles around there, but I don't--I can't say for sure what Indian she was. And that's about as far back as that goes. Speaker 1: Now, she shares a name with a famous blues singer, Alberta Hunter. Just to point that out, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: But she's not the same woman (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: No, she was a saint; anything but a blues singer. She was--my grandfather was the preacher, but she was the saint. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well how, how so, I mean, what--tell us a little about her, her personality. Speaker 2: Well, she was very religious. She fasted; she prayed. Every day at noon, she went to church, and I think that a lot of my own religion and faith, probably goes back to her. But my other grandmother, Frances [Wilson Layson Brown Jones], was also active in the church and very religious, but not to the same kind of degree, that my--that my grandmother, Alberta was-- Story_ID: 316353 Speaker 1: She [Hunter-Gault's paternal grandmother, Alberta Hunter] was almost like a nun in her devotion to the church. I mean, every single day at noon she went to pray. And when I--my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] used to send me to visit her in the South, in Florida, from Georgia, when I was very little--four, five, six years old, I don't remember exact ages--but when I was there, she would be sure that I learned bible verses. And her favorite was the twenty-third psalm [Psalm 23], which she got me to learn, and it was such a useful verse for me, as I have gone through my life because there have been times I have walked through the shadow of death, and I feared no evil, and it's a wonderful legacy that she passed on, I think. They were all religious, my mother was religious; my mother and father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] met in the church and, you know, and like most black people, I think the church was their rock, their salvation, you know, their anchor in stormy, racist, segregationist seas. You could always be a full human being and recognized as such in your own church. It was our one institution that was independent of white people. And, I think that, you know, it was--it was a center of cultural, social, educational and religious activity. And I used to go as a child to church conventions and, oh, I just had the best time. I just loved those conventions, because I met people from other places, and-- Speaker 2: This is the A.M.E. church, right? Speaker 1: African Methodist Episcopal church. Speaker 2: This was the first African American church-- Speaker 1: Yes, it has a long tradition and history, and many of its bishops and preachers were race men. They fought segregation. In fact, the high school that I went to, Henry McNeal Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia], was named for Bishop Henry McNeal Turner who served in the Georgia legislature before it was outlawed for blacks to participate at that level. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a great leader, I mean, he was a, you know, I have a book of eulogies by A.M.E. pastors to him at home, you know, where they eulogized him. He proclaimed from the pulpit that God was a Negro, and he sent like a--was part of a couple of schemes in to repatriate people to Liberia and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: Yes, the church, for African Americans, has always been, as I said, has always been the center of our universe and prepared so many of us, I think, to later take on the challenges that we did. Story_ID: 316354 Speaker 1: So, you spent a lot of time with your [paternal] grandparents [Alberta Hunter and Charles Hunter, Sr.] when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I did; I spent a lot of time in Florida, climbing the mango trees and eating mangos 'til my mouth turned inside out. I just loved that. I think that it was in those years that I spent in Florida, among other things, that I developed a taste for the exotic. I always had a taste for the exotic, and my grandmother, as religious as she was, I think she inspired a lot of that, because, for example, long before I knew anything about health food, my grandmother, the saint, ate health food. I mean, she ate olive oil on her grits instead of butter. We drank goat's milk, and then in the backyard was all these mangos and things, and so, I mean, early on those influences were extremely important to my development and formation and even psyche, because I'm never happier than when I'm out--I don't climb trees anymore, but I loved climbing trees, I loved--I think that's, when I write in my current book, 'New News Out of Africa' [Charlayne Hunter-Gault], about going to Africa. It was the fulfillment of a childhood dream, because I used to go behind the house--this was my house, our house in Covington [Georgia], but I guess to a certain extent, you could also say Florida. I loved climbing trees; I loved pretending that I was in the jungle, I guess it's primal memory (laughter). Story_ID: 316355 Speaker 1: Did you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't know. That would be hard to say. I mean, all the things I've been talking about-- Speaker 1: What's the first thing, the very first thing that you remember that you remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I remember growing up in Covington [Georgia] and being in a very secure place, being in the neighborhood where I was able to run free from sun-up to sun-down, although I had to be in by dark. My parents, my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] was--she wasn't permissive, and she wasn't strict, but I had rules, and one of the rules was I had to be in by dark. But I loved climbing trees and going out in the backyard in Covington and, and--it was like a--it was a bit like a jungle back there. You know, just overgrown trees and vines and things hanging down, and we used to go to the segregated movie theater in Covington. Every Saturday was the show, and we would see 'Tarzan [the Ape Man]' and '[The Mark of] Zorro' and 'Pinky'. I remembered going with my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] and grandmother to see 'Pinky.' Speaker 1: That's like a race drama, right? Speaker 2: It's like race drama with Ethel Waters and who was the white woman [Jeanne Crain] who played Pinky? I'll think of it, but anyway, I think my images of Africa, for example, were probably formed in part by the Tarzan movies, which I only years later realized, were pretty racist, actually (laughter). The hero was always white, and the villain was always these hapless--either villains or hapless victims, and Tarzan had to come along and save them. But, you know, it wasn't all bad, because it stimulated my own imagination, you know, for eight years I was an only child, and only children take refuge, I think, more than others in that unique loneliness of imagination, and mine just ran wild, I mean, fed in part by these movies. And I used to, as a little girl, I had named myself, because I also read a lot of comics, too, so I took a name: Nyoka, Queen of the Jungle. Speaker 1: Now, when did you do this? How old were you (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I must have been, you know, under eight. Speaker 1: And you took this name. Now, how do you spell--how would you spell that? Speaker 2: I don't know, N-Y-O-K-A, Nyoka, Queen of the Jungle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I would--we would play in those, you know, in those overgrown bushes, and actually when I got to Africa, years later, I was in an area called the Tsitsikamma National Park and forest, or something like that in the Eastern Cape of South Africa. And I remember walking through that forest saying, "This is it, I'm actually in an African jungle." Of course, they're not a jungle as such any more, you have-- Speaker 1: That part of Africa there's really no jungles, I mean, forests. Speaker 2: Well, you have forests, deep, deep forests, and you have animals of all kinds, and they're trying to repopulate, but, you know, it's nothing like the Tarzan movie jungle. They exist, but not with Tarzan in them. Story_ID: 316356 Speaker 1: What do you know about how your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] grew up? Now, he was the son of a-- Speaker 2: Minister. Speaker 1: Presiding elder. Speaker 2: Presiding elder. Speaker 1: An A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] presiding elder, right? In Florida? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I suppose to a certain extent, there was a certain comfort, economically, within the family. Although, you know, I don't know. I know that they had values. I remember when I was writing 'In My Place' [Charlayne Hunter-Gault], talking to my uncle, Ted [Theodore Hunter]. My [paternal] grandparents [Alberta Hunter and Charles Hunter, Sr.] had two sons and one daughter, Louise [Hunter Anderson], and she was quite a bit younger than the two boys. Education was so important to them. I remember my father saying, or my uncle telling me that my grandfather used to say, "Get an education, boy, because education is going to be the key to your liberation." That uncle was kind of wild, so he had to tell him that a lot. But, here's the beauty of that family, one of the many beautiful things about that family, when my uncle and my father started to go to school, my grandmother then who had had two children, went back to school with them. So, they were all in the third grade together, and I asked my Uncle Ted, I said, "Did that embarrass you that your mother was in school with you at the same time?" He said, "Oh no, we were very proud." And sometimes now when I'm in Africa, I think about that, because so many of the young people, because of their poverty, their parents' poverty, they haven't been able to go to school on a regular basis. So, some of them you'll find, eighteen years old, and they'll be in the sixth and seventh grade, and they're not embarrassed either, because they all so desperately want this education. They don't pay any attention to the fact that they're so much older-- Speaker 1: So, then the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) than the other children. Speaker 1: --the school is primarily, I mean, is what--its educational value is primary, rather than the social you know-- Speaker 2: No, education was the--is, as my grandfather said, the key to liberation and salvation. And I think you'll find that running through the values of black families everywhere, and certainly it was a part of my family, and reading, whether it was the Bible or whether it was the black newspaper, they all read the written word. Words were important. That was another thing my uncle said that my grandfather used to tell them, "Study words." And my father was a brilliant linguist, I mean he--I don't know--I don't think he actually ever spoke a second language, but he was also a minister and a chaplain for many years, and he was a wordsmith. And my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] loved words, too. She read a lot, sometimes even a whole book a day, she would read. And so, I've always been extremely attached to words. I just come by it honestly. Now, I have a brother (laughter) who is a lot younger than I am, excuse me, my youngest brother, and he has no use for words and books. I used to (laughter) every birthday I used to give him a book, and he'd just roll his eyes up in his head, but I just, I knew he didn't want books and didn't like books, but I just had to give him a book, 'cause it was--it meant--I guess it was all about me as opposed to about him, but I just--I have so many books, and I think I should probably get rid of some of them, but I just like the tactile feeling of books. Story_ID: 316357 Speaker 1: Did your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] ever want--to your knowledge--ever want to be anything other than a minister? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. So he sort of inherited this, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. He inherited the mantle of being a minister, and for a short while, he did preach in civilian life. But then in nineteen--around 1940, '41 [1941], he joined the [U.S.] military, and because of his education and background and also because of the needs of the [U.S.] Army at that time--the segregated Army--he rapidly rose to the rank of officer. Speaker 1: And this is during World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 316037 Speaker 1: So your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] joined the U.S. Army during World War II [WWII]-- Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: Became a chaplain. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: He started out as a lieutenant, and then eventually, by the time he retired, he'd become a lieutenant colonel. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did he ever talk about the segregation in the Army, 'cause I know those are the days when we were really (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He talked a lot about it, and he was, in his way, too, he was a race man, and he was forever affirming for the young soldiers under him their dignity. And I was told after he passed on, I found some of the men who had served with him, on the battle fields in Korea and in Japan, all the theaters he served in, and they talked about how he would cradle them in his arms and tell them they were somebody. And, his sermons were always--not always, I mean, sometimes his sermons were just strictly religious, but he was always affirming black people and their dignity. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And also talking about the--I think he talked a lot about--respect meant a lot to him. I remember once, we never moved around with him, we visited him in Army bases. But, for the most part, we kept--my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] kept the home in Covington [Georgia] and then Atlanta [Georgia], and then he would come home on leave. But in 1954, we moved with him to Alaska [Territory; Alaska]. We went there to live with him, and it was the first time that we had actually lived with him in the military situation. And I was the only black girl in the school, and I went to a teenage club one day, and I was turned away, and I went home, and I was telling my father and my father just--he was very tall--and he stood up his full height, and he said, "Well, we're going back right now to change this, to deal with this." And, I was a little bit embarrassed, but he said, you know, something to the effect that, you know, "No one is going to ever deny you or me, for that matter." I mean, he was very strong about who he was, and he insisted on respect, and he took me back, and oh, he gave those people the royal hell. Speaker 1: This is interesting, because, you know, they write in history books Army's desegregated in 1948 but it didn't really happen like that, you know. It wasn't the wave of a wand. Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was slacking in America. Today, there's no real legal segregation, but everybody's segregated, you know, still. And, but, you know, he just, he said you have to stand up for your--and, he cultivated these young black soldiers, you know, in their twenties in Alaska, you know, not many black women around. And, one of the ways that he helped them to stay whole, he would create these choirs and glee clubs and give them an opportunity to use their talent, but also to be together, so that they could affirm each other, because it was still tough for black men in the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Now, did he, was he--did he go to college? Speaker 2: Yes. My father was a graduate of Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and then Gammon Seminary--[Gammon] Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia]. He was a college graduate and a seminarian. Story_ID: 316038 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your mother [Althea Brown Hunter] and how she grew up and what she did for a living. Speaker 2: Well, my mother, when she met my father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] she was quite young, and they got married-- Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: I think they probably met in some church functions, you know, in and around Covington [Georgia]. She was quite beautiful, very fair, and she was strong in a quiet kind of way. She was very--and I think, as I recall, she was giving a talk about the church and how the church, you know, needed to get with the modern times, and it was a very kind of challenging speech to the church, because she said something like it was still operating as a--I can't remember the exact phrases, but like a Mobile T, you know, what do you call those cars--. Speaker 1: Model T? Speaker 2: Model T Ford [Ford Model T]-- Story_ID: 316039 Speaker 1: So, I think they met, you know, in this church environment, and he [Hunter-Gault's father, Charles Hunter, Jr.] was very impressed with her [Hunter-Gault's mother, Althea Brown Hunter], because she was at once very soft and gentle, but she had a strong solid core which, I think, came through in this speech, and so I think they began dating, and it wasn't too much longer after that that they got married. Speaker 2: Back to that speech on some level, we were getting into that, but what was her critique of the church. You said, they were like a Model T Ford [Ford Model T]--they need to get back, get with the times (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, I don't know, I mean, I just think she--I don't know why she was saying that other than--I don't know. I would just be guessing, but I remember that was what she told me she had talked about. And, you know, maybe it was just not even getting with the program of women and their role in the church. I would suspect that that might have been part of it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know we have--yeah, I think we--[HistoryMaker] Jamye [Coleman] Williams at the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, we interviewed at one time was talking about the struggle in getting women, you know, get the first woman priest (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So that may have had something-- Speaker 2: Minister at A.M.E. church. Speaker 1: That might have had something to do with it. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Okay. So when did your parents get married? Speaker 1: I don't remember. Let's see, I was born in '42 [1942], so maybe around 1939, somewhere along in there, because I know that they were married about four years before I was born, I mean. And of course, by the time I was born, my father was already in the [U.S.] military, and she was in Due West [South Carolina] with her mother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones] who had married her third husband then; that's how she got to Due West. And my father was in California, in Riverside, California, and I was born, I think I was nine months old before he ever saw me. Story_ID: 316040 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Althea Brown Hunter] go to school, too? Did she-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother finished elementary school in Covington [Georgia], and then she went to high school, actually, in Chicago [Illinois], to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] which was then a very classy high school-- Speaker 1: That was mostly a white high school when she went there. Speaker 2: Yeah. And it had a very--I mean, her education was as, you know, the equivalent of, among her peers back in the South, of a college education, because when she graduated from Hyde Park after living there with my father's--her father's [Rochell Brown] sister and then she came--when she came back to the South--Due West [South Carolina], I guess, she was--she taught school. I mean, she was really bright. Speaker 1: And now, now just for those who don't know, Hyde Park High School in Chicago, in those days, was the school that--the students were the sons and daughters of teachers at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] in those days. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now it's not like that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but in those days it was (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was a classy school, and I remember her telling me that Nat King Cole was just starting out, and he used to play for their high school dances. And, she had a really very rich experience there. And, of course, she was so pretty that I'm sure she didn't lack for suitors and guys around. But she was a good--I think you would describe her as a good Christian girl, so she probably behaved herself, although she had a bit of a--an adventurous streak, too. She was a delightful person, because she was smart, and she had a great sense of humor, and she loved life, you know. She wasn't--she wasn't a loud person, but, you know, she enjoyed her life, and so she came back from Chicago, and she taught school for a while in Covington--in Due West, and then she--when they eventually--my [maternal] grandmother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones] left her then-husband, Ollie Jones [ph.], who was a drunk, and moved back to Covington. And my mother pretty much during that period--the Covington period--was a housewife. I remember, she was very frugal; she had extremely wonderful taste, fabulous taste, and from time to time, she would drive to Atlanta [Georgia] and go to Rich's, which was the exclusive store--segregated, but it was, you know, everybody went there, and she always shopped on a particular floor that had the best clothes. But she never overspent; she was very careful to live within the budget and save money that my father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] was sending from his various overseas destinations, places. And--. Speaker 1: How did that--just out of curiosity--how did that work in those days, shopping at a segregated department store? I mean, is it--. Speaker 2: It was fine. I mean, you just couldn't eat in there or go to the bathroom, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they respected you-- Speaker 1: Trying on clothes, and they let you--you know? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I don't know whether they could try on clothes or not, but they use to always look at me and my mother, because I'm darker than she is. She is very fair skinned, they thought she was white. She had straight hair, and they would look at her with this little brown child, and they would always go to her thinking that we weren't together, and then, you know, they would ask her could we help, and she said, "Oh, well my daughter--" and, you know, she'd get these looks. Story_ID: 316041 Speaker 1: But, then when I was in the sixth grade, we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], and I entered the E.R. Carter Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], and in time, I think my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] was bored or just, you know, I had two brothers [Charles Hunter III and Franklyn Hunter] by then, small brothers two years apart, each eight and ten years younger than me. Speaker 2: So she would only see your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] every now and then? Speaker 1: Every now and then, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: Once a year on furlough, so. Speaker 2: Once a year? Speaker 1: Maybe. Speaker 2: That, that-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, we he's off in the war, he couldn't just check out of the war for-- Speaker 2: So he was-- Speaker 1: Plus transportation-- Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s], was he stationed in-- Speaker 1: Different places, Korea and Germany (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Germany and Korea. Speaker 1: --and Italy and North Africa. And, you know, you couldn't just hop on a plane and get somewhere. It was hard getting around. So, she and my grandmother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones] were each other's best friends and best companions and solace and comfort. And then my mother began to work. She took, first, a job in a real estate company, Wilson Realty Company [Atlanta, Georgia]. Kind of as a secretary, but she then rose to ultimately become the chief bookkeeper, and eventually she got her real estate license and began to do real estate. So, she--now, years ago she had worked for the Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] as a bookkeeper, and so she was very good with math and very good with concepts. So this time, she really just rose steadily, and at her funeral a couple of years ago in Atlanta, one of the men she had worked with came up to me and said, you know--he has one of the biggest real estate companies now in Atlanta, and he said, "You know, if it hadn't been for your mother, I would have nothing." I mean she was just that good. Story_ID: 316042 Speaker 1: Now, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Althea Brown Hunter] or your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.]? Speaker 2: I used to think that it was my father that I took after most, because my father was very confident and very outspoken and could be--well, aggressive is not quite the word, but you know he just took no prisoners (laughter) in a way, and he loved being with people. He loved the public, and, you know, I've always been the public speaker, I've always enjoyed, you know, being out there with an audience or whatever. And, I think a lot of that came from him, I mean, my mother had this funny way of telling me, when she was angry with me, she would say, "You're just like your father," and when she was proud of me, she'd say, "You're just like your father," and--but, as I have, you know, grown and matured over the years, I think I have a bit of both, because as I said, I think my mother had--my father was an adventurer, I mean, he was all over the world. So, I get a lot of my wanting to explore and wanting to travel and see and understand different cultures and things like that, and relate to people. I think I get that from him, but my mother also had this great sense of adventure. I mean, we used to go on field trips all the time (laughter), I called them. We'd, you know, we'd get in the car, and we'd drive from Covington [Georgia] to Atlanta [Georgia]. That was a big deal in those days, and, and or we'd go to social circle and visit our cousins. We were always going somewhere, doing something. Story_ID: 316043 Speaker 1: And my grandmother was an adventurer, too. My [maternal] grandmother, Frances Brown--[Frances] Wilson Layson Brown Jones, she and I used to travel from Covington [Georgia] on the train. We'd come to it--my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] would bring us to Atlanta [Georgia], and we'd get on the train and go to New York [New York]. And, you know, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni talks about how she, in 'Nikki-Rosa,' you know, how white people shouldn't look on her as that poor little black girl growing up and you know, deprived, she said, because, you know, all of our days were holidays. They were great days, and we ultimately wanted an end to segregation, but the beauty of black people is that we had a wonderful--we created our own environment within segregation. We didn't let it get us down. And so, my grandmother and I would get our lunches, packed at home, and get on that train, that segregated train, and we would meet the most wonderful people in those segregated cars. I mean, young women, young girls my own age, I still have this image of this one young girl, for example, where, you know, she had fried chicken in her little lunch thing, and I had something else in mine, and we started sharing, and all the way to New York, we just talked and chatted and laughed and had fun. And this was in the segregated car, but we didn't feel bad about it. I mean, unfortunately in retrospect, we should've been able to eat in the dining car, but we made the best of what we had, and I think that's how I grew up not feeling like a victim, and how I was prepared when I ultimately challenged the state and its segregation. I mean, I've been--I was not a victim. I was entitled to this. And, you know, we didn't know it all in those days, but in a way we were being prepared for this ultimate role that we played at that particular time by all of these wonderful encounters within the confines of our segregated society. So, we'd get on that train. My uncle would meet us at Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York] in New York, and I remember the first time I wrote an article about it. It was called--for The New Yorker magazine, I think it was the first piece I ever sold to The New Yorker--it was called 'A Hundred and Fifteenth Between Lenox and Fifth,' ['115th Between Lenox and 5th,' Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and it was about the trip my grandmother--it was almost like a tone poem, it wasn't a real story actually. But, we would get off that train. The first time we ever got off, and my uncle met us, and we got in a taxi, and we drove through Central Park [New York, New York], and then all of a sudden there was all this concrete and these tall high-rise buildings. Nothing I had like I had ever seen in Covington [Georgia], and I think it was my first exposure to a different culture. I mean, there were two different cultures--there was the urban culture, but that was the urban Hispanic [Latino] or Spanish culture. Because in the building right next to my uncle's lived these Spanish people, and I'd never known anybody other than black people and white people. And, there were these brown people speaking a different language. And the kids in the street were playing different games. They were playing--they were making dolls out of Coca-Cola bottles and, what is that stuff, not straw--you know, that you tie boxes with? Speaker 2: That's sisal rope? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was like rope. It has a different name, but anyway, you know, and using Coca-Cola bottles tops to play hopscotch. So, all this urban thing was so new to me and this lyrical, lilting Spanish and these pretty little Spanish boys. I mean, all of that was just--oh, I thought I had died and gone to heaven. And this was all my grandmother, you know, this young, this woman who had been ripped out of her third grade classroom to go to work to help support her mother [Ellen Wilson]. And yet, she had this great adventurous spirit, and my uncle was just so amazing, taking me everywhere with him and at that time my father's brother, Ted [Theodore Hunter], the one I talked about earlier, was living in Harlem [New York, New York] and he was a rolling stone. I mean, he just was a bad boy, and he was somebody I just adored, and he had all these girlfriends, and they adored him, and they all wanted to be in with him, so they would be nice to me and buy me things. And, I'd go back to Covington, and I'd have these cute little tight skirts and things that I had gotten in New York and that set me apart from everybody around because I-- Speaker 2: How old were you when you--I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I was five-six-seven. We went more than once and-- Speaker 2: So, several times over the course of growing up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Story_ID: 316044 Speaker 1: Yeah and I learned about--we lived in a railroad flat, which I just thought was so exotic. I mean, we always had a nice house. I mean, I guess to a certain extent, if you look at class, given my father's [Charles Hunter, Jr.] position in the [U.S.] military and so forth, we might have been considered middle class. But we always--in Covington [Georgia], we had the first TV. Everybody on the block used to come and watch TV and all that. So, in a real sense, we were privileged, but you know--I mean, to the extent that I have humility, we were privileged, because we--you know, with my father's income and my mother's [Althea Brown Hunter] frugality and education, but--and I may, this may have to do with the church as well and their own Christian upbringing, but they never acted as if they were better than anybody else. I mean, my mother wasn't all that social, but if somebody got sick, she was the first one to take a pot of greens or some bread, freshly baked bread, or a cake. So that there was always that kind of--I don't think leavening is the right word--but it was--they kept me honest, in a sense. You know, I never felt that I was better than anybody else. I always felt I was as good as everybody else. So, they always somehow managed to have this nice balance in our lives. But, in a sense, I was privileged. I was privileged. Story_ID: 316045 Speaker 1: About 1954, you all joined your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] in Alaska [Territory; Alaska]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had graduated--in '53 [1953], an area in Atlanta [Georgia] called Mozley Park [Atlanta, Georgia] was opened up to black people. One black family moved in, then all the whites left. And it was the most amazing (laughter) neighborhood. There was a swimming pool that was so huge, and it had a great rec [recreation] hall--everything that black people never had, and we didn't really care that the white flight had taken place. We were happy to have this. At the top of this park was a school called the Frank L. Stanton Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia]. He was the poet laureate of Georgia at one point. That's F-R-A-N-K, then L, then Stanton, S-T-A-N-T-O-N. And it was a beautiful school--I mean, you know I'd been at E.R. Carter [Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], and I'd transferred to Stanton, and it was the first year that the white--the black kids attended that school, so I finished Stanton and graduated, and I was--had enrolled at Turner, Henry McNeal Turner [High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and I was so excited, because there was this boy I was absolutely crazy about. He was the captain of the football team, and he paid me absolutely no attention, but I had this huge crush on him, so I was very pleased to be going to the school where he was the big man on campus. (Laughter) Just as I started to settle in, my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] announced that we were moving to Alaska, and I thought I would die. I hated that. I hated that so much. But, we left, and I spent 1954, the year--actually, the May 1954 [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] came down while we were at Stanton. And this is very interesting: nobody talked about it. The teachers didn't talk about it; they didn't talk about it in the home; it was as if nothing happened. There might have been some conscious family somewhere that talked about it. I don't know about Hamilton Holmes' father--parents, because they were very race conscious people and very enlightened. But, there just wasn't a lot of talk about it. "Oh, the '54 [1954] decision. Now school desegregation is going to happen." And I think that may be the result of the oppressiveness of segregation, because all of the administrators of schools were white, and they held the purse strings, so that, you know, anybody who stepped out of line, so to speak, could be easily moved out, and so nobody much talked about it. So, go to Turner High School, get settled in. I'm just about to become this cool teenager in high school. I was still twelve, but I was about to be thirteen, and my mother said we were moving to Alaska. And in '54 [1954] Alaska was not a state. It was still, like, the frontier. Speaker 1: It was a territory, I guess. Speaker 2: It was unbelievable. When we got there, I just--my father took me into Anchorage [Alaska Territory; Anchorage, Alaska], 'cause I'd to--he was taking me to some black woman he knew up there who was to do my hair, and it was like something out of the Wild West. Story_ID: 316046 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of Alaska? Speaker 2: Well, it was very much like an old cowboy movie. You know, Anchorage [Alaska Territory; Anchorage, Alaska] was a one-horse town. One street down the middle, and, you know, most of year, snow up to here, and the Indians [Native Americans], the Aleuts, and other Indians were all around. They looked different than anything I was used to, but. And everything smell like whale blubber (laughter), but that was a delicacy, whale blubber, so. And Anchorage was few miles from the base [Fort Richardson; Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Anchorage, Alaska] where we were. So, that was kind of a treat to go into town, but it was like going into, you know, one of those old--it was like being on a Hollywood movie set of a Western, is what Anchorage was like. And the people there were different, in a way, because they were all kind of pioneers, you know. A lot of prostitutes. Lot of people who had gone in, you know, in search of gold and hadn't found it, so they were just hanging out on the streets, you know. Little tiny stores where you get the parkas and stuff. I used to--I got into babysitting. I was babysitting on the base, so I always had a lot of money, because I'd get paid for it. I babysat--I was an officer--I was the chaplain's daughter, so I was the perfect--and I was big for my age. I was twelve, but I was real tall and had these two little brothers [Charles Hunter, III and Franklyn Hunter], so I knew about taking care of babies. So I was in huge demand for babysitting. And I played the piano in those days, so my father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] and mother [Althea Brown Hunter] would often take me into Anchorage to buy sheet music with the money I had earned, and I'd buy a few little things here and there. As I said, my father would take me to this black woman who lived in this tiny little hole of a house to get my hair fixed, as they say. And it was-- Speaker 1: But there wasn't--was there a black community in Anchorage? Speaker 2: No. (Laughter) No. Speaker 1: Just one black woman and-- Speaker 2: Me and my daddy, my mother, we were the black people. Speaker 1: And the one black woman that did the hair? Speaker 2: Yeah. There might have been some others, but I didn't--we didn't--there was no--you know, it was all frontier. You know, everybody up there was, you know, like digging in the ground for gold. There was not a whole lot of socializing. I don't know who they social--who she socialized with. But there weren't many black people. Story_ID: 316047 Speaker 1: You remember the name of the school you went to in Alaska [Territory; Alaska]? Was it--. Speaker 2: It was just the--I think it was called the Fort Richardson on base school [at Fort Richardson; Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Anchorage, Alaska]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, when you're up there now, your parents [Althea Brown Hunter and Charles Hunter, Jr.] split up right? Speaker 2: Well, after about nine months, my mother decided this wasn't working. You know, they'd been away, apart for so long; they never actually continuously lived together, and--. Speaker 1: They have been married a long time at this point. Speaker 2: Well, at that point--yeah. Speaker 1: Thirteen years, fourteen years? Speaker 2: Well, I know longer than that, because I was--I became thirteen there, so they must have been married at that point, seventeen years or so, and I think it was just the difficult--that they'd been separated for too long. My father was, as they say, set in his ways. I mean, he was highly respected in the military base, and I think he had been alone long time and had just learned how to--he had become kind of a loner and, you know, to have a young family with two little boys [Charles Hunter, III and Franklyn Hunter] running around. My brothers were one and two, and then, this emerging teenager--he and I just was so much alike at that point that we used to knock horns--lock horns a lot, and my mother had a lot of medical problems that I think frustrated my father, and we just petered out. And after nine months, she said she was going back home, so we left. I was happy--I mean, I had an amazing year, because I'd never been in an integrated school, and I was, you know, had had this substandard segregated education, but I quickly caught up and did all right in school, you know, I was a good student. I had a quasi-okay social life--I mean, that incident at the teenage club was one thing, and then you know, I'll go to the dances and, first of all, they weren't the dances they were doing at [Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. They were doing dances called the schottische and square dancing--things like that, that white kids do, but I learned how to do that, but I never had a date. You know, I mean, the [U.S.] military was integrated and all like that, but still, you know, people stay with their own. So, you know, I didn't have anybody asking me out. I was thirteen, so I was too young to be going out anyway, but I mean, you know, you pair up at the dances and stuff like that. So, these two white teachers--turns out, I think, they were gay--and they would come--one of them would come over and dance with me just so I wouldn't feel so isolated, but that wasn't the--I mean, that fine, that was nice, but you know, it wasn't what the other girls were experiencing. So, I think I probably grew up a lot, I think a layer of that armor was added to my suit of armor in that whole experience. But, I was very happy to come back home to Turner High School, where I then proceeded to just do as I would have done from the eighth grade, you know. I just got involved in everything (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us--. Story_ID: 316048 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about [Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia], now, named after Henry McNeal Turner--. Speaker 2: Henry McNeal Turner (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We talked about him a little bit, but-- Speaker 2: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop-- Speaker 1: --it was, like, special in turns of the black community, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--you know, Booker T. Washington [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was older, but Turner was a newer school, it had a lot of the middle-class elite--the children of the middle-class elite in Atlanta [Georgia]. Ralph Long [Sr.] was a great principal in town, and his daughters were my best friends, Carolyn Long [Banks] and Wylma Long [Blanding], and we were sort of a bit of a triumvirate, and we did a lot of things together, and we came to own the school. I mean, we did everything, 'cause we were good students, we came from good families, and so the teachers respected us, and we were, you know, being smart and creative, and we took a lot of initiative. I became editor--I joined the school newspaper [The Green Light] in the ninth grade, I think, and I became the first--the youngest editor ever of the paper. I got to be editor--excuse me--in my junior year, and we were always taking on causes and crusades and-- Speaker 1: Now, you were used to your [maternal] grandmother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones] and your mother [Althea Brown Hunter] reading a lot of black newspapers-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the papers that you read and what were some of the issues (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we read the Atlanta--my grandmother read the Atlanta Daily World--that was the only one at the time--and probably the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], although I'm not sure, I don't quite remember that, but I know the Atlanta Daily World was the oldest black daily in the country, and so that was the staple in our house. Also the Atlanta Journal-Constitution-- Speaker 1: Did you have Jet magazine in the house? Back in those days? Speaker 2: I don't--I'm not--yeah--later, we had Jet. I was on the cover of Jet, you know, when I was like, nineteen I think or twenty, because of the desegregation of the University [of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], and I had gotten a job in Louisville, Kentucky as an intern for the Louisville Courier-Journal and [Louisville] Times, and so Jet did this feature. But anyway, high school was simply amazing. I mean, we were the leaders of the school; we did every. I initially went out for cheerleading, and for some reason, I didn't make that, but I ended up--maybe I ended up--I also went out as a drum majorette; tried to be a drum majorette. That didn't work out either, for some reason, I don't remember the reasons, but I became the one who announced the half-time activities. I wrote the half-time shows and announced them over the PA [public address] system for all of our football games. So, I did that and we were in, you know, Wylma and Carolyn and I were in all the clubs, you know, the academic clubs and the social clubs and the honor society and, I guess you could say in a certain way, we were probably teacher's pets, but we earned it, you know. I mean, we weren't bullshitting. We genuinely loved school. Carolyn and Wylma and I, when we get together now, and we're in our sixties--we still, sometimes start singing this song. We were auditioning for a show--you know, every year you have a school show, you know, and we were auditioning to be in this show, and we sang this song called 'Lollipop,'--(singing) "Lollipop, Lollipop oh Lol-li- Lollipop"--and we were so off key. I was leading, and I could never start in the same key, and they could never catch up with me, and it just--we just became the laughing stock. Well, you know--here it is, you know, fifty years later, we're still laughing about 'Lollipop,' but we just--it was idyllic. Story_ID: 316049 Speaker 1: [Henry McNeal Turner] High School [Atlanta, Georgia] was idyllic. We just had the best time and, you know, my work on the newspaper [The Green Light] had me in everybody's business. That's when I realized my true calling was probably going to be journalism, because I couldn't sit still. I was very energetic, and while I was a good student, I didn't like to sit still, and working on the school paper, I could always be out of class for legitimate reasons with a hall pass, you know. And so--and then Hamilton Holmes was on the football team. He was a quarterback, and he became ultimately the captain of the football team. And the year that we graduated, I was voted most popular, and I was also elected queen of the school, and he was the football captain, so he had to present me with the pigskin. And, you know, it was just-- Speaker 2: Wasn't he the valedictorian too? Speaker 1: He was valedictorian, and I was number three. I think the class was 156. By this time, Wylma [Long Blanding] had taken early admission to Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Carolyn [Long Banks] was already at Clark, and their father, Ralph Long [Sr.], had gone to Clark, so that was kind of a tradition in that family, and I had missed them, but not enough that I didn't really enjoy my last-- Speaker 2: Is [HistoryMaker] Richard Long related to Ralph Long? Speaker 1: Which Richard? Speaker 2: Richard Long here in Atlanta [Georgia], he's an art historian-- Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: Other members of the family but not him, I don't think. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So--but you and Hamilton Holmes--now, you all had it all. You were the queen of the class, and he was captain of the football team, valedictorian. Speaker 1: And we were big rivals. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I actually wanted to be number one in the class, but Hamilton was just absolutely brilliant, and I would have been number two, and I think I'll never forget this, because I had taken all the tough courses, the chemistry, the zoology--you know, all of the--and I didn't--I don't think--I might have taken one home ec [home economics] class, but I always tried to get out of home ec and phys ed [physical education], but--I even went out for the basketball team once. That was a disaster. But the person who edged me out for salutatorian had all these home ec classes, and that just really pissed me off, because, you know, I missed it by taking these chemistry courses and stuff like that, where, you know, I slipped maybe a notch. But, I mean you know, fine. I had a great third place out of 156. So, that was disappointing, but I was still up there. Story_ID: 316050 Speaker 1: Well, the Montgomery Bus Boycott's going on when you were in high school, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know-- Speaker 1: Civil rights had started to make national news. Speaker 2: Yeah, a bit. Emmett Till was murdered, and that had a resonance, but it didn't--you know, it didn't--we related to it in a certain way, it made us sad in a certain way, but, you know, it hadn't--the Civil Rights Movement hadn't started, hadn't captured any of us. I mean, that didn't happen 'til we hit--graduated. Speaker 1: How was--when you mentioned Emmett Till, I mean, his experience in Mississippi is really different from what your experience was here in Atlanta [Georgia], I guess, in the situation that you were in at [Henry McNeal] Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean, a teenager growing up here in Atlanta would not be subject to the same kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, this was--you know, I mean this was a very--you know, Atlanta was called L.A., lovely Atlanta. Black people here lived better than black people in many places. There were two cars and a lot of homes, even if both of the people were teachers or civil servants or something, you know, which isn't to say that segregation didn't have a terrible consequence in many instances, because I remember my favorite--I had two English teachers who kind of rivals for me. One was my homeroom teacher, Mrs. Victoria Simmons Sutton [ph.], and she just adored me, and then there was Elsie Foster Evans [ph.] who was English teacher and my advisor for the high school newspaper, The Green Light. And, they both--I mean, as I said, you know, I was okay, and they kind of had a little rivalry for my affections. Although I adored them both, Mrs. Sutton was the minister's wife, and she was a fabulous homeroom teacher and a good person who embraced you and took care of you. Elsie Foster Evans was the more sophisticated--she'd been to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and you know, she had been out of the South, and plus she had a real sharp tongue and, and--you know, she, she had read a lot and she made a lot of literary allusions and references that just captured my imagination. And she was a very good role model for me, because she was sophisticated and articulate and been out in the world and, you know, had come back to work with us. Story_ID: 316051 Speaker 1: The thing about those teachers is that they, too, gave us a great layer--they contributed a layer of armor. Elsie opened up my--Elsie Foster Evans [ph.] opened up my horizons to the possibilities of a little black girl from Georgia being a journalist. Now, I had a counselor who shall remain nameless, who told me at one point, when I told her this is what I wanted to do--be a journalist--she had told me, that I should give up those pipe dreams and go on over to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and become a teacher. And, when I told Elsie Foster Evans what she had said, she just looked at me, and she said, "Now, we know what to do with advice like that, don't we?" In other words, don't--and you know, this has been a blessing in my life that I've had people who have not--who didn't discourage my dreams. Let's go back to my [maternal] grandmother, Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones. She used to read three newspaper a day, and I would sit at her feet, and I wasn't interested in--I mean, she was interested in the news, she was interested as I told you, we had TV. So, she watched the news on TV, she watched wrestling on TV, that was her favorite thing, and so I grew up around news, but when she would finish reading the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, she would put it aside. She loved the sport pages, and I would pick it up and read the comics, and that's when I discovered 'Brenda Starr, [Reporter]' and her tremendous adventures, all over the world, including this lover she had, this one-eyed mystery man, Basil St. John, who cultivated black orchid. She got all the choice assignments, and she was just a star, and I thought, "That's pretty interesting." And, and my mother [Althea Brown Hunter], this little country girl, but you know, as I said, she had this Chicago [Illinois] experience [at Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School], but she always reminded me of this sweet little country girl, although she was very sophisticated. And I told her that I wanted to be a journalist. This was early, before high school, you know, and she just simply said to me--she's very nonchalant and soft spoken and understated--she said, "Well, if that's what you want to do." And I've often said, and I think I wrote about this too, that my mother just somehow instinctively knew that dreams propel ambition, and she didn't sit on my ambition by saying, "You can't do that, 'cause you're--I mean, black girls don't do that. There's no place for black--" I don't know how many black parents may have stifled their children's ambitions. I would hope not a lot, but she certainly didn't. And then I had the support from people like Elsie Foster Evans who told me, "Of course you can go on and be a journalist and you can go and study and do this thing." And, of course, as I said earlier, I was editing the school newspaper [The Green Light]. And I just--I was, again, I guess I was blessed to know my own personality early on, because I knew I could never sit behind a desk. I just had that itch. Even now, I can hardly sit still if I've got things to do, I'll just do them right up until dinner time. And sometimes after dinner, I'll go back to the computer, because this is what I love, and I've always known that, that I have to have something that engages my energy, and it can't be executed behind a desk, and Elsie nurtured that and nourished it and massaged it and just always affirmed me, as did all of the teachers at [Henry McNeal] Turner High [School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean, too numerous--names too numerous to mention, but I think you talk with any student who was in that era at Turner, and they will talk to you about how we were nurtured and prepared for the, as they say, for the coming conflicts. But it wasn't about--I mean, we didn't talk about challenging the state or challenging the system or anything like that. It was just nurturing us to be whole human beings, and we used to take trips. I would travel with the football team and the cheerleaders, 'cause I was the announcer for games--for the half-times. So, we got to other schools around the state, Lucy [Craft] Laney [High School, Augusta, Georgia], various other schools. And then, we would also traveled with the choirs and the glee club and, and we would go to other schools. And so that, those were, you know, great adventures. But I can't think of a more affirming time than my high school years at Turner. Story_ID: 316052 Speaker 1: Now when [Henry McNeal] Turner [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] played football against other schools, they played against other black schools- Speaker 2: Yes, we played other black schools. Speaker 1: --in the city and state, right? Booker T. Washington [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] here-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and Howard--David T. Howard [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and we'd go to Lucy [Craft] Laney [High School], where is that, in Augusta [Georgia]? I can't remember now where all these places were. But, we traveled quite a bit as students, you know, to these other venues, and we also traveled--Sunday school, you know, when I was growing up, the Sunday school--go to Sunday school conventions, so we weren't static. I mean, we weren't stuck in our neighborhoods, although we were stuck within the confines of our segregated societies. Speaker 1: Sounds like a dynamic upbringing in terms of the experiences of-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was totally dynamic. You know, and Hamilton's [Hamilton Holmes] parents, his grandfather [Hamilton Mayo Holmes] and father [Alfred Holmes]--his grandfather was a doctor, and he challenged--they were golfers, and they challenged Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] golf--segregated golf courses to allow blacks to play on them. So, he came out of--and they'd been Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and all that, and so, he came out of, also, a strong and affirming family who were race people and who had fought for the rights of black people in this town. So, we were comfortable; we were confident, and Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] wanted to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--I mean, he loved Morehouse, and the thing I started to say earlier and didn't is that Atlanta had a vibrancy that maybe many of the southern cities didn't have in part because of the complex of black universities and colleges. The Atlanta university system, Morehouse, Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had not fallen on hard times in those years, of course, it was--I think it's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school. You had the Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse, did I say Clark? So, so--and we knew the history of those schools, of [W.E.B.] Du Bois, and we knew of Booker T. Washington and those debates, and we knew black history. I mean, in our environment, we didn't have black history once a year. We might have had a celebration during Black History Week and then that later became Black History Month. But if you went to a black school that was named for Henry McNeal Turner or E.R. Carter, every day that you walked in through those doors was a black history day, and so you knew that you came from something, and--. Speaker 1: Who was E.R. Carter? Speaker 2: He was also from the--I think he was also from the African Methodist Episcopal church [sic. Baptist church] and was also an activist, and he may also have been a legislator. I have to go and check. I used to know history back and forth, but yeah, I think he also was an agitator for race. Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to meet Du Bois or Benjamin Mays or any of them? Speaker 2: I knew Benjamin Mays. Du Bois had gone to Africa, you know, long before this, but Benjamin Mays, I met at Morehouse. Not in the early years--I don't think I met him when I was in high school, maybe college. But we knew him. He was a larger than life presence. Story_ID: 316053 Speaker 1: Hamilton's [Hamilton Holmes] great ambition was to go to the House [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and he often said even after we--even before we went to [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia] when we would be interviewed, he would say that there was nothing wrong with Morehouse. In fact, he wanted very much to go to Morehouse. At the same time, Georgia had superior medical facilities, and he wanted to be a doctor, and so he wanted to take advantage of that. But I think his heart was always at Morehouse. I think--you know, we started--he started at Morehouse, and I started at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: It had to be, I guess--for him especially and others like him--that must have been a real hard decision to make, to not go to the school of your fathers, you know, of your ancestors and had to go someplace else. Speaker 1: I think it was probably a difficult decision for him. I know that when the men who were part of this Young Turk group of African Americans in an organization they call the Atlanta Committee for Cooperative Action came to visit us at [Henry McNeal] Turner [High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in our senior year and said, "Look, you know, we're looking for young people who might be interested in going to the state university." They meant Georgia State [University] in downtown Atlanta [Georgia]. And it was interesting. I mean, I think at that point we had not been seized with making the civil rights statement or anything like that. I mean, the movement hadn't really started in serious earnest at all. Everything was pretty acquiescent in 1959. But we were, as I've described for you, you know, we were adventurous students, we were creative and imaginative and that caught our imagination somehow. And the two of us decided, said, "Okay, okay, just that simple; alright, we'll try it." I mean, it was such a concept that was so far away from anything we'd ever thought of about. Speaker 2: What did you mother [Althea Brown Hunter] think about all this? Speaker 1: My mother--I think one of the things I've always loved about my mother was that she always respected my judgment. I mean, not that I didn't get in a little trouble here and a little trouble there and had to have mother come--but when it came to things like this, it's just like when I said I wanted to be Brenda Starr--like Brenda Starr and she said, "Okay." I said, "This is what we want to do," and she never said, "Oh, I don't know about that, that could be dangerous." Because initially it was about Georgia State, and also, I think the people who had brought the idea to us like [M.] Carl Holman, who was an English professor at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], somebody she respected, and Jesse Hill [Jr.]. My mother worked for the Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], and Jesse was an upstanding member of the community. [HistoryMaker Dr.] Clinton Warner was a prominent doctor. And so, the people who brought us this idea and who introduced it were people that she respected and didn't--I'm sure it never entered her mind that they would be involving us in something that wasn't good. But when we were taken down to Georgia State, Hamilton and I looked at that curriculum--and here again you know, it's probably a surprise to people--it would be a surprise at that time, because you know, here was a larger white society always telling us that white was always right and was always superior. But the kind of grounding that we got in our home and at Turner, in particular had so equipped us mentally and psychologically and in every other way that, when we went to Georgia State and looked at the curriculum, we said, "This isn't good enough." I mean, it was white, but it wasn't right. Not for us. I mean, we were the creme de la creme. And, so Hamilton--I have to give him the credit, rest his soul--Hamilton said, "I want to go there," and he pointed north, and I wasn't about to let him get a mark on me. So I said, "Yeah, me too." And between the two of us, we totally confounded these adults who had taken us down there, because it was beyond their wildest dreams. I mean, the University of Georgia was seventy-three miles away, through some of the most hostile, conservative, white territory you can imagine. It just had not entered their minds. Story_ID: 316436 Speaker 1: You were saying that you and Hamilton Holmes had really changed the scenario from Georgia State [University] here in Atlanta [Georgia] to wanting to go to University of Georgia at Athens [Georgia], and then the committee had to readjust itself, right? Speaker 2: Well, the committee members quickly huddled and decided that that's what we had decided; they'd figure a way, and that was the whole way of the movement, you know. Make a way out of no way. And so they began to set in motion the necessary things we needed to do to get our applications in. It was already late, you know, we were getting close to the end of our senior year [at Henry McNeal Turner High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Just a word on this though. This is counter to what a lot of people would think happened in those days. I think that people have the impression that the Little Rock Nine and, and, you and James Meredith and other people were shepherded by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] through every step of the process or even recruited and really told what to do rather than deciding on your own what you wanted to do. I mean, is it-- Speaker 2: No, I mean, I think that people, like those ones I've mentioned, the members of the Atlanta Committee for Cooperative Action, did in fact approach us. But it was our decision to go to the University of Georgia. I mean, anybody will tell you that. Probably if we had not been put into that--put there at Georgia State, we might not have made that decision, but we made that decision, and Hamilton was the one who said, "If we're going, I want to go there." So then we had the involvement of the Atlanta Committee for Cooperative Action, eventually Don Hollowell [Donald Hollowell] at [NA]ACP. He was the--on the ground ,as I just finished a documentary on him called '[Donald L. Hollowell]: Foot Soldier for [Equal] Justice,' and he was the lead attorney here, Donald, D-O-N-A-L-D, L. Hollowell, H-O-L-L-O-W-E-L-L, and then he had a team that ultimately consisted of Horace T. Ward, W-A-R-D, who had applied to the University of Georgia in '54 [1954] at the law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia] and been turned down, and he went on to Northwestern [University] Law School [Northwestern Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] where he succeeded in graduating. [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jordan, Vernon E. Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N, Jr. was a young law clerk for Hollowell at the time, and then eventually Constance Baker Motley came in from the [NAACP] Legal Defense and Education[al] Fund, and in the background, of course, was Thurgood Marshall and the whole team of people at the Legal Defense Fund in New York [New York]. But the people on the ground essentially were those I've just mentioned. And, you know, we began the whole legal process of registering--well, the whole application process, and of course that took from 1959 to the time we went to court in 1960 and the week in December in '60 [1960], and then finally in January of '61 [1961], the federal Judge William T. Bootle [sic. William Augustus Bootle], B-O-O-T-L-E, after having heard all the evidence, ordered us admitted. But in the interim, Hamilton, so that we wouldn't lose any time--plus we didn't know what the outcome was going to be, we could have been fighting this case for years. Speaker 1: Two top students that want to go to college, and you couldn't just afford to wait around and not go? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So Hamilton enrolled his beloved Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I took a flyer on a school I've never heard except that one young woman from our school had gone there, and there was a journalism--wasn't a school, it was more of a department, Wayne State University, so in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Now, if I had known any better and had better advice, I probably would have gone to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. But Wayne turned out to be fine. I enjoyed it a lot. Story_ID: 316437 Speaker 1: Part of the motivating factors for us with University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] was that university had a journalism school, and no other--no black school in the state had a journalism school, and it had these superior medical facilities. I mean, Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] always says--has always said that the academic excellence at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was equal to if not superior to the University of Georgia. It was the facilities, and of course, in those days, the way the white system kept blacks out of institutions that offered something that the black ones didn't have was to pay what they called out-of-state aid. I mean, they went to extraordinary lengths to keep black people out of their institution. So, if you wanted to study say like I did, journalism, and there was no black school in the state that offered it, they would--the state would give you money to--give the black student money to leave and study elsewhere where people didn't care whether they mixed with blacks and whites. It was just that ridiculous. Speaker 2: We've heard this story before, but it is really sounds crazy every time I hear it, you know, that they would actually pay you to-- Speaker 1: To not to mix and mingle and go-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they pay your way to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] or Columbia [University, New York, New York], or-- Speaker 1: Michigan, anywhere. Yeah. Speaker 2: Any of these schools that some consider better than University of Georgia to go to study. Story_ID: 316438 Speaker 1: But we were determined to do this, and so, I enrolled at Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] and Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] enrolled at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I think he was enjoying it. I certainly was enjoying Wayne. It was a--you know, it wasn't a typical university, it was more like a city college. You know, there was one building that was about fifteen or sixteen floors, and it had university office building, offices, et cetera, and I think the student dormitories were in there, student rooms on the, you know, on three of the floors--three of the higher floors, one for graduate students, one for guys and one for girls. So, it wasn't a huge boarding school, because most of the students who went there were from Detroit [Michigan] or within commuting distance. And a lot of them were older, too, you know, because it, it was a city college. Some of them were coming back from [U.S] Army stuff or, you know, having to work their way through. But still, I got into it and enjoyed it and, you know, made a lot of friends and, in fact, I came back in--for the court case in December of '60 [1960], and it was just before Christmas, and the case lasted a week, and I had wanted to go after I finished testifying, because it was all the parties that were leading up to the end of the term and the judge--the state refused to let me go. I think it was just totally punitive. And so we stayed and then I flew back to Detroit, got my things and came home for Christmas. It was home however long the Christmas holidays were. And then I went back to Detroit for the next term in January, and I had just arrived. And one day, I had walked from one of the buildings into my dormitory and everybody was saying, "You got a phone call, you got a phone call," and I found that it was a reporter. I must try and remember her name, I thought I would never forget it, and she said it was such and such, so and so from the Associated Press. And she said, "Congratulations." And I said, "For what?" She said, "Oh, you haven't heard?" And I said, "No." And she said, "Well, you've just been admitted to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Federal Judge [William Augustus] Bootle has just ordered you admitted to the University of Georgia." And I said, "Oh, my God, I can't believe it!" And of course, you know, I hadn't heard from [Donald] Hollowell who was like--he was more than a lawyer to me, he was almost like a father, and I certainly thought that, you know--but he just hadn't had--I mean, they just--it was just so big they hadn't--because this was the first major desegregation case in the South, other than Little Rock [Arkansas], but at certainly at the level of higher education. Speaker 2: This was before the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], I think that was in '63 [1963], or before [University of] Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Well--actually, Autherine Lucy had applied [to University of Alabama] earlier and been admitted under court order, but had been suspended for the riots which happened similar to us, but that's getting ahead of the story. And she wasn't re-admitted because she was very critical of the administration. Speaker 2: Now she was in, in-- Speaker 1: Alabama. Speaker 2: Alabama. Okay. Speaker 1: And, so this was the first big opening. Story_ID: 316439 Speaker 1: So then eventually, [Donald] Hollowell called, and everybody was so excited then and I think this was a Friday, I believe, and I said, "Well when should I come?" and he said, "Immediately." So by this time, the word was getting out and I had joined the sorority, Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority], and I had always--I was drawn to that sorority, because they required the highest grade point average, and also because everybody had expected that, being my complexion, light, that I would pledge AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and, you know, that sort of annoyed me that people would take me for granted like that. Even the Deltas didn't rush me because they were sure I was going AKA. But I pledged Delta, I had these wonderful sorors, and they all--it was such a moment--they all converged at the dorm and started helping me pack, and one of them I remember was--I looked at her, and I said, "Well, what's the matter?" 'cause she was looking so sad. And she said, "I don't know what's going to happen to you; I'm worried." And of course that had never entered my mind to, to be worried, and I said, "Oh, don't worry about it." I mean, I just didn't even think about it. Speaker 2: Did you--had you read about the Little Rock Nine and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what they were going through? Speaker 1: Yeah. But, you know, that was them and this was me. That's how I looked at it. You know, we just--I don't know if it was just our God-given defense mechanisms or what, but it just--the, the, the, the--there was no fear anywhere. I know Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] didn't feel it, and I didn't. And I think--I actually think I might have been on a plane that afternoon, certainly by the next--but I think on the plane that night, but certainly by the next morning, I was in Atlanta [Georgia]. They--and my [maternal] grandmother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones] had this beautiful picture, and I had this--I was always a little bit out there with my clothes, and I had this fake leopard jacket, I remember, and my teddy bear, and my grandmother had this beautiful picture of her hugging me at the airport. Everybody was at the airport when I arrived, and we had the press conference and the news media, and we were--I was nineteen years old, and there was all these--this thing. Hamp was--Hamp has always been much more--his demeanor was always much more serious than mine and more, you know, straight ahead, and I was a little bit more--girl (laughter). Not so much girl, but, you know, we just had different personalities. I think I was a lot looser than he was, but he was very intense and, you know. And then it began, and it was like a whirlwind, I mean, the preparations into--and Monday morning, we were on the way. We were ordered in on a Friday morning, and Monday morning we were driving to Athens [Georgia]. Story_ID: 316440 Speaker 1: Hamilton's [Hamilton Holmes] father, Tup [Alfred Holmes], was in one car with him, and I was in the car with my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] and [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.], and to show you how innocent we were, there was no security. There was--we hadn't made any preparations for anything untoward happening. We just drove straight on to Athens [Georgia], and, of course, when we got there [to the University of Georgia], there was a huge crowd of students that we had to walk through, and I think that, although there's been this perception that they were hostile, you know, every now and then you'd hear of some terrible slander, word or something. But for the most part, I think those students were just curious. But we didn't know and, and Vernon, of course, was real tall and lanky and lean, and he and my mother was real short, and we walked through those gates, and we walked into the registration, and then we had to walk somewhere else, and we were always surrounded by these hoards of students, and I think some not students, probably some agent-provocateurs in there. And my mother would call out, and she'd say, "Hey, you two," or "You got long legs; don't walk so fast," 'cause she couldn't keep up with us. We weren't running; we were just, you know, walking with a purpose from one building to the other, and then we got to the journalism building and right in the middle of my registering there, we got the call that, that the judge that who had ordered us in had ordered a stay of the order, and so then we all regrouped and went back over to the home of one courageous black couple, the Wares, Ray Ware and his wife, and we stayed there while [Donald] Hollowell and Constance [Baker] Motley went back, drove back the seventy-some miles to Atlanta [Georgia] to go to court to overturn the stay. And we--I went to sleep on the sofa at the Wares', and I don't know what Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] did, and adults paced back and forth, but there was nothing to do but wait. I mean, you know, hour and a half to Atlanta and then the argument and then this. But by afternoon, Federal Judge Elbert [Parr Tuttle], E-L-B-E-R-T, Tuttle, T-U-T-T-L-E, had overturned [William Augustus] Bootle, and, and I remember the call coming through saying we could resume, the judge had ordered us to continue, had ordered the registration to continue, and my mother stood up and she said, "God is good." And we bundled ourselves up--it was January, coats--went back and completed registration, and I was assigned to a dorm, because all the girls had to live in a dorm. Hamilton was allowed to live off campus, so they had found a white--a black family, the same black--they had a restaurant [Killian's Four Seasons, Athens, Georgia], the Killians, K-I-L-L-I-A-N-S, had a restaurant, and we used to go there during the trial and have lunch or dinner, whatever, and they offered to allow Hamilton to stay with them. And they were some kick-ass black people. They would tell you--they talked about how they--Mr. Killian used to talk about how he sat there with his shot gun at the window, and he dared anybody to come anywhere near the house. Now, I didn't have that at my dorm. Story_ID: 316441 Speaker 1: The second night, the word had gone out during the day that everybody should converge at my dorm and be prepared to do whatever they had to do. And, as coincidence would have it, the University [of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] had a hotly disputed--hot, hotly disputed loss to their arch rival, Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], in basketball in a double overtime which-- Speaker 2: So they weren't happy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fueled the crowds, so they all, given the word that had gone out, and then also the word had gone out to the girls in my dorm. I was on the first floor, because they had created a space for me in the student government, in the room that was two rooms that were used as a student government rooms, to keep me from being on the next level where all the girls were. See, the first floor was a lobby where the girls received company, et cetera, et cetera, and the house mother was on one side and all the way on the other side of this room--of this floor was my space. Speaker 2: So you were not on a floor with the rest of the girls? Speaker 1: No, no, and there was nothing over there but me, and so the first night, they were chanting and yelling and screaming, and I just got my things and, you know, eventually went to sleep. And then the second night I could hear the intensity of the crowd growing. And I--and, and there came a point when I was--there was a two-room suite, and I was in one of the rooms, and then in the bedroom, which was immediately adjacent, was my suitcase which I hadn't unpacked yet, and all of a sudden I heard a crash, and I walked into this second room, and there was a brick that had come through the window and splattered glass all over my things, and I've never--I've always been a girl about clothes (laughter), I mean, I love things, clothes, and here were my things, and there was glass all over them, and this was what I was focused on, not on the fact that this thing was escalating out there, and I heard all the noise and surveyed the scene, and then I thought to myself, okay, so this is how it is in the middle of a riot, 'cause I'm in the middle of one. But somehow, I just felt that it would all work out, and so I stood there for a little while and not long after that, the dean of students came and told me that I was being--Hamilton [Holmes] and I were being suspended for our own safety. And this is exactly what had happened to Autherine Lucy. Riot; teasing; suspended for your own safety. And the one thing we, I think, instinctively knew, but we may have also been told not to say anything. But we didn't know--no, at that point we hadn't, because there hadn't been this anticipation that we would be--and it took a very long time to organize getting us out. Story_ID: 316442 Speaker 1: And in the meantime, it also took a long time for the Georgia State Patrol to come and disperse the crowd [at University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], clearly because they didn't intend to disperse it before it had achieved its purpose. But eventually they came and they broke up the crowd with tear--they threw tear gas. And all the white girls had been told to strip their beds so that the tear gas would not get into their bodies and stuff, and some of them were crying and stuff. But by the time I got myself together and my things and was led out of my room, come out of my room, round to the right and a couple of stairs down into the recessed lobby, and they had allowed all of those girls to come down and stand there and watch me leave--watch me be taken out. And just as I got to the--you know, they were there sort of like that in a circle, arc, and as I started to walk past them, one of them threw out a quarter and said "Here nigger, come and change my sheets." And I was a very strong Catholic at that time, and I had this statue of the Madonna. The Catholics had embraced me, and, like the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], they were all so supportive. Speaker 2: You became a Catholic in Detroit [Michigan], or? Speaker 1: No, before I went. Speaker 2: When? In Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 1: In high school [Henry McNeal Turner High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I think. And, I walked to the car, and there was just a fury building inside of me. It wasn't fear, it was fury, because I felt at that point that somehow I had failed. You know, it's like when things happen and children are involved, and their parents get a divorce, and they blame themselves, and they're not at all to blame, and I was blaming myself how--'cause I was blaming myself for not being able to think of something that would keep me there, 'cause I felt really defeated, myself personally, that I couldn't figure out how to stay there. So, I started crying, and somebody snapped the picture, I had the Madonna up to my lips, and people have mistaken that for--who saw that--had mistaken it for crying out of fear, but I was really crying out of anger and frustration, and disappointment. Story_ID: 316443 Speaker 1: Then they drove me to where Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] was, and of course, Hamp was several blocks away and didn't know what had happened, and we got there, and his grandfather [Hamilton Mayo Holmes] had given him a little Opel car which he was very proud of. We both had to have cars, because they told us that while the--you know, [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia] campus is huge, you know, it's like a little city unto itself, and it's hilly and stuff, and you have to walk from one campus to the other often to classes. And they had told us that while most of the young people hitch-hiked, especially the girls, that it was too dangerous for me, because they never knew who might be picking me up, or they might not even pick me up, but it was a concern. So, my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] had sacrificed and bought me a little [Ford] Falcon, a little white Falcon. Taught me over--over a weekend how to do a stick shift. I didn't know--I knew how to drive, but I didn't know how to do a stick, and Hamp had this Opel, brand new Opel that his grandfather--he was so proud of that car. And so when we got there, he was--and everything had been explained to him, that we had to go back to Atlanta [Georgia]. This was like late at night, dark, pitch black; he wanted to drive his car. He didn't want to leave his car. And I thought that was really crazy, and the adults tried to talk him out of it, and he said no, he wanted to take his car. And it was one of the times when, you know, I cared a lot about Hamp despite our differences in personality and sometimes clashes about how we wanted to go about this thing. But I was determined he was not driving that car, because anything could've happened between Athens [Georgia] and Atlanta, and they could have said, well, you know, he was in his car, he insisted, we didn't know and this and that. So, I just started pitching a fit. I started jumping up and down and screaming, "You can't, you can't," and I knew--I don't know to this day whether I was really hysterical or if I was putting on an act, but what I did know was that Hamilton hated being embarrassed, and I was embarrassing him by my behavior. So, to just short circuit all of that, he said, "Okay, okay, okay, I won't drive." Now, he may have been convinced that I was acting out of his best interests. He may have--I don't know, we never talked about it, but I sure talked him out of driving that car home, and they put us in their state patrol cars. Oh, I think the one thing I did before I left, I called my mother and I said, "Are you watching TV?" She says, "Yes," I said, "Well look, it's not as bad as it looks, don't worry about it," 'cause I knew she would be seeing all this and be terrified. So they sped us to Atlanta in record time, and everybody met at my house. Story_ID: 316444 Speaker 1: When we arrived, they were all there. Hamp's [Hamilton Holmes] father [Alfred Holmes], my mother [Althea Brown Hunter] was in her housecoat, [Donald] Hollowell was there, I think [M.] Carl Holman was there, and my mother hugged us both as we came in the house, and we sat around for a long time and figured out--we had to figure out what to do the next day. Sure enough Hollowell and [Constance Baker] Motley went to court the next day and ordered us back in. This was a Friday, I believe, or may have been a Thursday--I think, let's see, Monday, Tuesday, this might have been either Tuesday night or Wednesday. I can't remember now, but we decided once we were readmitted [to the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], the weekend was coming, the adults felt we could use the break, 'cause it had been fairly intense. So, we decided to stay in Atlanta [Georgia] until Monday and go back Monday. And over that weekend, I happened to be listening to the news, and they said that there was a guy who had shown up in my dorm with a gun asking where I was by name. Turns out he really, literally, was from the insane asylum (laughter), but he had gotten into the dorm, and he had a gun and again, you know, it was just that we were so at peace with what we were doing. I called Hollowell, and I said, "Have you heard about this guy in my dorm?" He hadn't, I told him, and I said--he said, "Uh huh," and Hallowell had this very sort of slow, deliberate way of talking; deep voice. "Uh huh." So I said, "Are you going to take care of this--you are going to--" I don't think I asked him. I said, "You're gonna take care of this, aren't you?" "Yes," and that's all there was to it. I never asked another question. And Monday morning, off we went back, and by this time there was residual hostility that manifested itself from time to time and ugliness, like they'd let the air out of our tires or scrape our cars or whatever. But at--or yell at us from time to time, but things quieted down. Story_ID: 316063 Speaker 1: So you go back to the campus [of the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] on that Monday. What happened when you got back? Speaker 2: It was relatively quiet from that point on. Always incidents here and there and, but I remember Robert F. Kennedy came, and everybody was hostile to him, because they felt that--what was it? "The long arm of the federal--." What was it? "The long arm of the--." It was a mixed metaphor, but it had to do with the long arm of the federal government putting their boots on the necks of the southerners, or something like that. Speaker 1: The long arm putting its boots-- Speaker 2: And Calvin Trillin of The New Yorker wrote about it and said--he loved that metaphor, mixed metaphor. But you know, things kind of quieted down and Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] went his way, and I went my way and pursued separate tracks, except, you know, if anything ever happened to one of us, and it was me, I was always getting some kind of--I was very calm outwardly and even in my head, but my body sometimes would react to things, and I would get these terrible stomach cramps, and sometimes I'd be admitted to the infirmary, and the first person there always was Hamp. He'd hear about it, and he'd just get right over there, and we-Hamp--eventually, I--initially, we came home every weekend, and sometimes my little brother, Henry [Charles Hunter, III], would come on the bus and ride back with me in the car, so I wouldn't be by myself. He was, let me see, if I was nineteen, he was eleven, and he would ride back with me, and most of the time, though, I'd go back by myself. Speaker 1: I just want to make this point, too, and I think, probably, and correct me if I'm wrong, that you were certainly an irritant to the campus, staying on campus, but if Hamp had stayed on campus, it would have been a totally--they would have really torn that place up. Speaker 2: Yeah, they might have, yeah. Speaker 1: A black male and, you know, with all that fear about black males they would of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe, and you know, they resisted to the--in every way they possibly could. It took time to open the cafeteria. Initially, I couldn't eat in the cafeteria and use other facilities. I couldn't--I didn't want to take physical ed. [physical education], but it was like that rabbit in the briar patch thing. I said, "Oh please, oh please, don't throw me in the briar patch," as it related to phys ed. I thought physical ed. was an unnecessary evil, and so I would deliberately choose classes that I knew that they wouldn't allow me to take--like swimming. Now, you know, as a black girl in the South in the '60s [1960s], I did not want to go swimming every day, 'cause what would happen to my hair? But they didn't want me in the pool, because it would contaminate the white girls. So, I chose swimming, they said, "Oh well, you can take your physical ed. next term." So then the next term, I chose bowling, because the bowling alley was in town and the town was not desegregated. They said, "Oh well, you can just take your--next time." So, I played that one as it laid, but eventually it got me; I ended up taking archery. I just thought that was all--I didn't want to take phys ed. But Hamilton [Holmes] went on to--he went home every single weekend, and every afternoon, you know, he was so smart that he'd get his homework like that. And the way he unwound was to go play basketball with the brothers in the 'hood, and he loved that. Story_ID: 316064 Speaker 1: I tried to take part in things on the campus [of the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]. I sometimes got rebuffed. I sometimes didn't. I made friends. Some of my friends went with me to--first time I went to the cafeteria, risking the opprobrium of their classmates, but they went any way. These were journalism students, and eventually I stopped going to Atlanta [Georgia] altogether. I would stay home--stay in--you know, because I was doing enough on campus to keep me entertained and also, you know, I mean, people laugh at me when I say this, but I'm really kind of a loner, and I'm very comfortable by myself. It's a little bit like Alice Walker [sic.] saying, "I found God in myself, and I loved her dearly." Well, I find good company in myself, and I enjoy it muchly (laughter), you know, to paraphrase Alice Walker, and so I would read, or I always had something I was doing, some project I was working on or something I wanted to read, and then as I said, I had a few friends, and I had some friends on the faculty who would invite me to dinner, and across the street from my dorm was a wonderful woman name Francis Wallis, W-A-L-L-I-S, and she was in the English department, and she was this very cool--some people might refer to her as a--well, not an old maid exactly, but she was single, and she was singularly dedicated to teaching and English, and she'd invite me over to her place sometimes, and I'd go over. We'd talk about books and things like that, art, and then there was another guy named Joe Schwarz, who was a--I think Joe Schwarz taught art in the art department, I believe, and he would invite me to dinner with other faculty members, and I think it was S-C-H-W-A-R-Z or it could have been T-Z, I'm not--it's in my book. We can double check the spelling, and I remember one night, I went there for dinner, and they had pork and they had alcohol, wine, martinis, and of course we weren't supposed to drink, and I thought, "Well, am I being set up?" 'Cause they offered me one, and I didn't drink, and I said, "No, no, it's fine," so I took this martini, and I ate this pork, and I went back to the dorm, and by this time, I think this was the next year, because there were two young freshman who had been admitted--black--and they put them in the same room, room as me. They were just determined to hold out 'til the end. And I got back, and I don't know whether it was the pork or the martini. I think it was the martini, because I haven't been able to drink martinis ever. I think it's the combination of the vermouth and gin. I was so sick, I threw up all night long. So, that ended the drinking for my part, you know, that was it. But the social part of being invited to a professor's house was good, it was different, you know, and, and so I had developed a little critical mass of friends, mostly journalism students. Speaker 2: Well, some of the hostility kind of died down? Speaker 1: Yeah, a bit. It wasn't as overt as it had been (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did a professor--was a professor in those days who invited you over, were they like taking a risk or something? Did you perceive that as-- Speaker 1: Well, you know, the professors, actually after the riots had got together and signed a petition to have us readmitted and, you know, the riot had been supported at the highest levels of the state. The Lieutenant Governor Peter Zack Geer had come out and praised the rioters. I mean they encouraged them, in fact, not to take this lying down. So they were going against the thing--but, there was also, I think, a sense among the academics that the time had come to take a stand, and then there was this old guy by the name of Dean Tate and he was one of these dyed-in-the-wool segregationists, but he also believed in the law of the land, and he had the oddest shape. He was shaped a little bit like a penguin, and he looked--I mean he had this funny face, and he was sort of like almost like a caricature, but he took no prisoners. I mean, he drove us around the campus to our various registration points and when the students--some of them converged on our car to shake the car, he got out and he took 'em by the collar and scruffled their necks and flung them here and there. He and Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] got to be pretty close--he was kind of man's man and Hamp was a man's man so they got on. Story_ID: 316065 Speaker 1: But I had my side of people who supported me [at University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], and so it wasn't all terrible, and as I said, I had things that I did on the weekends when everything was quiet. I would study and read and, you know, as I said, I had this little group of friends, including one [Walter Stovall] of whom I eventually married. Speaker 2: Now that, that's got to be kind of a story for those days. I mean, so this was a white guy on campus. Speaker 1: Um-hm. But he was wonderful. I mean, he was very, he was very southern. He had this very southern way of talking, Deep South accent, but he also had been in the [U.S.] military, and he'd been stationed in France, and he had learned to speak French, and the difference--he would just become a different person when he spoke French, because he spoke without that southern accent. He spoke French like a Frenchman, and that was appealing. And then, he and this other friend of mine, Joan Zitzelman, Z-I-T-S-E-L-M-A-N [sic.], and Marcia Powell--she worked on a newspaper and Joan did, too, The Red & Black. They sort of became my three good friends, and then I went to the Newman [Center] club a lot which was the Catholic club, and I had friends there. There were some foreign students there, and I was made to feel welcome at the Newman club. I mean, I really--that was one of the big differences between Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] and me--I really tried to have a normal (laughter) college experience, and Hamp, I think, always saw it as a mission. And so that sometimes created little tensions between us, but as I said, it was always superficial. We cared about each other, and you know, when things got tough, we always found each other, you know. But for the next two years, you know, which is as long as we were there, we had our little challenges, but basically things were relatively quiet. Story_ID: 316066 Speaker 1: I remember my bigger breakthrough. I wrote about this in my book ['In My Place,' Charlayne Hunter-Gault], I called it the Bosch breakthrough. We had been assigned in our Greek classical culture class to write about--to describe the shield of Her--Her--whose shield was it, Herodotus [sic.], maybe--one of those warriors in Greek mythology, and I wrote this way-out paper, because at Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan], I had become quite an aficionado of art. I loved art. I used to go by myself to the art museums in Detroit [Michigan] and stay for hours looking at the art, and Hieronymus Bosch really appealed to me. Speaker 2: That's a weird--he's a very--he paints demons and-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, but, you know-- Speaker 2: --an old medieval painter, a Dutch painter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's fantasy. Speaker 2: --a Flemish painter [sic.], I guess. Speaker 1: Flemish, yes, but his fantasy world was--appealed to me, I think. And, so I described this shield as being very much like a Bosch painting, and it was very original paper. So, when the professor, after several days, got all the papers graded, and he came back and, and he, as soon as he opened the class, he called my name, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Charlayne] Hunter[-Gault], and everybody sat up, because nobody talked to me. Everybody acted like I wasn't there, you know, I was the elephant in the room, but nobody dealt with me. And, so I think they all sort of gleefully anticipated that he was about to embarrass me. And he said "So you think that the shield of--" Homer's shield? Speaker 2: Achilles or-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. I have, oh God, I can't remember now, but anyway I'll look it up. Speaker 2: Somebody in the Trojan War (laughter)? Speaker 1: He said, "You think this shield looked--reminded you of a Bosch painting?" I said, "Well, yes." And (pause) he just nodded for a few seconds, and then he said, "Well it's one of the most brilliant papers I've ever read in the classroom," and then he just picked up and went on. And that was an amazing thing, because after class everybody--I mean, not everybody, but a lot of the students who had not acknowledged my existence began coming up to me and saying, "Now, who was that again?" and "What was that painter?" and "What was your piece?" and "How did--can we see your paper?" and this and that. So that was a good breakthrough in a way. Hamilton [Holmes] had less success like that because he was always--this was a--you know, University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] was not Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know. Most of the students were from small town communities in Georgia, farmers and people like that, and, you know, the teachers graded on the curve. And so, you know, before Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] entered the class, the curve might be at 65, 70. That could be an A, and Hamp would go in there, and his grades were always 98, 99, 99.9, 100, and they hated him (laughter), you know, because he just blew them away academically, and he ultimately graduated Phi Beta Kappa. I did okay, but again, you know, I excelled in the things that interested me, and the things that didn't, I didn't. Story_ID: 316067 Speaker 1: I wanted to get out of there [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], but I didn't let the system oppress my head. I didn't let it oppress me, I didn't--I wasn't petrified that I might not get straight A's, you know. I just followed my interests. I even had to go to summer school once so I could graduate on time. Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] was on the dean's list, I was on academic probation (laughter) which pissed him off no end, 'cause he thought I was letting the side down, but you know they needed to see that we weren't the same. They thought we were, when we first went in there. They thought we had been picked, and that we were this and that, and I think our different personalities and our different way of approaching the thing was actually good. I mean, yeah, wouldn't have minded being Phi Beta Kappa, but I was also happy with what I was. I was on dean's list a couple of times, I think. I know at least once, but I was someone who excelled at expression. So, when I had to go to the deep sciences where you had to accept absolutes, I just refused (laughter) which is a little bit silly, but it made me happy. Story_ID: 316068 Speaker 1: What happened to Hamp [Hamilton Holmes]? When he graduated what did he do? Speaker 2: He went on to go to Emory medical school [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia]. I think he might have been the first black student in medicine there, and he was brilliant there, as well. And he became an orthopedic surgeon and had a very successful practice. He ultimately became head of Grady Hospital--Grady Memorial Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], which is the big public hospital here in Atlanta [Georgia], and then, you know, he had some problems with Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] actually, because Hamp was a purist. He really believed in merit, and he believed in excellence, and he didn't believe in giving extra points just because you were black; you had to earn. And so, he unfortunately lived to see students who were critical of him and his way of doing things, but he didn't make any apologies for it, and ultimately, he decided to leave as head of the hospital, but he remained head, I think, head of orthopedic surgery at the hospital. But, you know, Hamp was a very brilliant young man and very intense. He married a lovely young woman, Marilyn [Vincent Holmes], who was from--I think she was from Detroit [Michigan], and they had two or three children. But, he was so intense about everything, and early in his fifties, he passed away, and it was one of the most devastating things that's ever happened to me, you know, because we had this bond that was unique in the world. There're no two people who've ever been through what we went through together. I mean, people went through challenges, and they went through civil rights movements. Some of them got killed and all kinds of things, but we had a unique history together, and we would always be bound by that history. So, even today, I mean, I can't talk about him without tears, hardly ever. Yesterday, I was interviewed by The HistoryMakers--no, I was being interviewed by The Foot Soldier Project [for Civil Rights Studies], 'cause I'm doing this documentary--they're doing a documentary on Donald Hollowell, and I had warned them in advance. I said, "You're going ask me about Hamp but, you know, it's hard for me to talk about Hamp without tearing up," and sure enough we got to that point, and I saw somebody come in and slide a tissue to the guy who was interviewing me, and he didn't realize (laughter) what the deal was, so he kept the tissue and, but I remember that right after Hamp passed away I came for the funeral. It was at Morehouse, and I think it was the next week, I had to go to speak before the Council on Higher Education or something, and the conference was in Florida. It was all these college presidents and administrators from around the country, and this was like a week later, and the president of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], this time, he was not the one who stonewalled our admission, he was a new guy, and he was liberal and embraced us, and he introduced me, and he introduced me as this renowned journalist and this and that, but of course, he said, you know, "She's known at the University of Georgia as being one of two black students, and Hamilton Holmes, who just recently passed on." And I had nev- "the late," he said, "the late Hamilton Holmes," and it was the first time I had heard Hamilton described as "the late," and I realized I was having difficulty with my emotions, but by this time he had finished introducing me, so I got up to speak, and I opened my mouth to speak, and nothing came out, and I just stood there and wept before all these people. Must have been fifteen hundred people in the room, and they couldn't figure out what was wrong me, and I just gave in to it. And then when I finally got my voice, I said, "You may be wondering what's happening here." I said, and I'm sniffing and wiping my nose and wiping my eyes and everybody's looking, and I said, "It's the first time I ever heard Hamp referred to as 'the late' and this was just too awesome." By this time everybody (laughter) in the room has joined me, you know, it was just a moment but, you know, and that was fifteen years ago maybe, however long it was, and it's still a very emotional thing for me to just think of this brilliant person who just carried too much in his head and his heart and his soul. Story_ID: 316069 Speaker 1: It's just this quest for excellence. Speaker 2: Yeah. This, I mean, when you look back--when I look back, I was in, I guess, grade school when this was going down, but I remember the example that that generation of students, you know, presented. It was, anyway, I guess, I don't know, I guess it was a special generation of students, I guess, who inherited kind of a position of leadership and, I mean, and the bravery of a group of students including you and Hamilton Holmes and all the others, I mean, it's just such a great example. I, you know--must be something to feel like you got the whole--you're carrying the hopes of the whole people with you. Speaker 1: Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] felt that way. I think I came to that a long time after. I think if I had carried that weight on my shoulder, I don't know. I didn't think of it quite that way. I didn't even think of--you know, what did I say, we--you know, we took to the streets, we took to the campuses, we did what we did, not feeling any sense of courage, you know. It, it just--courage was not something we thought of ourselves as having. We would, we, as I say in my book ['In My Place,' Charlayne Hunter-Gault], we were simply doing what we were born and raised to do, and we used to sing this song 'Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me Round'. You know, I mean, I actually--there was no scientific survey ever conducted, but I would bet you that--somebody was talking about [HistoryMaker] John Lewis the other day, interviewing him and how many times he had been beaten viciously and, you know, so many others. I would bet that's interesting exercise, to go and ask all of those people who were on the front lines, "Did you feel you were being courageous?" I would bet you there wouldn't be one who said yes. It just wasn't in our lexicon. We were doing what everybody was doing. Our friends were sitting in at lunch counters knowing that the billy club any minute could come down and crack their heads. Or they were working in the back fields of--in the backwoods of Mississippi and Alabama and all these places, and they were perilous, but I don't think the word courage would ever have crossed any of our lips in terms of describing what we were doing. Story_ID: 316070 Speaker 1: The circumstances around meeting the, the young man at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and, and actually going with and marrying a white man in 1960, what '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, now that is probably quite a story there. I mean, I just imagined--how--what did your--how did your family take this news? Speaker 2: I don't remember what my father [Charles Hunter, Jr.] said. My mother [Althea Brown Hunter] was initially opposed. I don't think because she was opposed to him, and she came to really love him and adore him, 'cause he was--is a wonderful, sensitive man. But I think she was just thinking of the societal implications for me, you know, "What is this gonna do to your life?" But even his parents eventually came around to accepting. They came and visited us in New York [New York] and, you know, my father-in-law then--we had a child. We had one child, and then we had a second child, and the second child--baby died within two, three days of being born, and my father who was the chaplain called and spoke nice words, but my white father--Deep South, southern father-in-law, got on a plane and came to New York and helped us through that, and he said, you know, "I don't even--" you know, "I don't know why I'm here," he said, "but I just felt like I had to come." So they came around--I mean the mother was a little more reticent, and we had--but the father initiated the trip, the first trip, before the baby, the first baby came, and they came to make peace and to say that it was--because his father, Walter Stovall is the man I married, and the newspapers had a field day, of course, because that was what everybody had predicted, that you let them go to school together, the next thing you know, they'll be marrying, and that's exactly what we did. And his father was quoted in the newspaper as saying, "This is the end of the world." Well, he never said that. And I have the greatest respect for my colleagues in journalism, but there are those who do things like that for reasons that I can't explain, you know, it's kind of National Enquirer stuff. People make up stuff to fit whatever they think. It goes on even today. He never said that, and he wanted us to know that he had never said that, which I thought was good of him. I liked him. He's still alive and, you know, he was a good man, and Walter was a good guy, a great father to our daughter--she--you know, Suesan [Stovall], S-U-E-S-A-N, she spells it. And it was a challenging time too, but, you know, I was just determined to live my life on my terms. Story_ID: 316367 Speaker 1: What was the, I guess, the journalism department of University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] like in terms of being able to place students, and what was their reputation like? Speaker 2: Well, Henry W. Grady School of Journalism [Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication, Athens, Georgia] was the best in the state. It was highly respected and that was one of the reasons I wanted to go there. Speaker 1: Did they have any national reputation at all? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, now, over the years it has, because it's the school that gives the Peabody [Award] and, I mean, it comes out of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. And, of course, you know the Peabody is the top prize that everybody goes for in journalism. I mean, it's like the Peabody is like the Pulitzer [Prize], or whatever. I have two. And-- Speaker 1: So, the committee meets at the University of Georgia and they decide. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The Peabody-- Speaker 2: But it had a good reputation as a good school of journalism. Story_ID: 316368 Speaker 1: Were you married before you graduated? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, then you went right to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you married here in Georgia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it wasn't against the law then? Speaker 2: We don't talk about that. Speaker 1: Okay. (Laughter) Okay. Because, you know, I think it wasn't that long ago when they, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know. Okay. So-- Speaker 2: But, we also had a second and a third ceremony, so we were married a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In different kinds of ceremonies. Speaker 1: All right. So, so you moved to New York City. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have job already in New York City? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I had a job at The New Yorker as an editorial assistant. And I had been--William Shawn had asked to meet me before I graduated, and when I went there, I--Calvin Trillin, who had covered the desegregation of the University [of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] for Time magazine, had decided to write a book about the whole case. He had covered the South and the Civil Rights Movement for a time, and so I went. I flew up there and talked to Mr. Shawn, Walt William Shawn, and he was--he said that, you know, he understood I wanted to be a journalist, and would I like to work for The New Yorker? And I said, "Oh, that's fine. I would like to do that." And, you know, he said, "Many young people out of college come here as editorial assistants and stuff and then they just take it from there. If they're gonna develop their writing, their poetry, the whatever, they can do that." And I happened to mention Calvin Trillin, because he was waiting to take me to lunch, we were very--we had become good friends when he was--when he was covering the riots and stuff like that, and--at Georgia. So I said, "Oh, that was friend, Calvin Trillin, he's writing a book about University of Georgia." And--so subsequently, I was hired, but I had to go back and finish school. And subsequently, they got in touch with him after I had left and said, "We hear you're going to do this long piece, book, whatever, why don't you come and do it for The New Yorker?" So by the time I got--this was like in or months before I graduated. So by the time I got to The New Yorker in June of--May or June, June of '63 [1963], he was already there and had written the piece and was involved in the proofreading and copy editing and stuff. And that became a book called 'An Education in Georgia[: Charlayne Hunter, Hamilton Holmes, and the Integration of the University of Georgia,' Calvin Trillin], which was about the whole desegregation of the University of Georgia. And, it was a wonderful book; captured completely the story and the feel of it and the differences between me and Hamp [Hamilton Holmes], and the disingenuousness of the state, and, you know, how it all kinda came together. Story_ID: 316369 Speaker 1: Gradually, I began to look around me and see how--see what was getting into the magazine [The New Yorker] and I wanted to write, and so I started playing with little things and I, I think the first thing I wrote was this piece called 'A Hundred Fifteenth Between Lenox and Fifth' ['115th Between Lenox and 5th,' Charlayne Hunter-Gault], because I saw that established writers there, the ones with reputations and track records, were writing reminiscences. Mary McCarthy was writing reminiscences. Everybody was writing reminiscences. Ved Mehta, an Indian writer, was writing reminiscences. So, I wrote this piece about coming to Harlem [New York, New York] with my [maternal] grandmother [Frances Wilson Layson Brown Jones]. And, I didn't tell anybody about it, 'cause I didn't want to be embarrassed when it got turned down, but I still sent it straight to Mr. [William] Shawn, and I did while Mr. Shawn, you know, in the interim, I showed it to [Calvin] Trillin, and he came up and said, "Well, you know, this all about how wonderful this is. Harlem is a terrible place," and this and that. And my piece was lyrical, I mean, it was about this child that I described earlier going and meeting these different cultures and stuff, and I was so--I said, "Oh, God, I made a fool of myself," 'cause Trillin was sailing at that point at The New Yorker; he was really doing well. And, actually, I think it was the very same day, not long after I had been deflated by my buddy, Mr. Shawn called, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Miss [Charlayne] Hunter[-Gault]"--he was a very soft-spoken, quiet man--he said, "Miss Hunter, this is Mr. Shawn and I'm calling to say that I like the 'A Hundred Fifteenth Between Lenox and Fifth' very much, and we'd like to publish it in the magazine." He just spoke just like that. Oh, I almost died. So, that was the first piece. And then I wrote subsequently a piece called 'A Trip to Leverton' [Charlayne Hunter-Gault]. I don't know why I call it 'Leverton.' I was sensitive about Covington [Georgia], but it was about Covington, actually. And it was a reminiscence again about my grandmother and a story that wrapped around her. And, Mr. Shawn called me again and he said, "Could you come and talk about it?" And, he was just a brilliant editor, and this was a classic example of what a good editor he was, because he--the piece wasn't ready, but he didn't say--he said, "It's not quite working yet." He said, "But you have a great character here in your grandmother." And I had put all these curly cues and Arabesque and everything, just like I saw the other writers doing, you know, padding the stuff with all these descriptive things. So, I had done the same thing, talked about the kudzu growing along the road and roadside and stuff. He said, "I would suggest that maybe everything that doesn't build this wonderful character who is your grandmother, come out. And everything that leads to her character and development, stay in." You know what? I got--I went back to my office, and I just--it was like a vacuum cleaner. I just sucked out all that stuff that was ancillary to the development of the story, or superfluous, I suppose I should say, and I had that thing rewritten in like an hour, and I sent it back, and they published that one. And then--and then the last one--or maybe, I can't remember the sequence, but there were riots in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York, New York], and I rode home on subway, and when I got out on my street in Brooklyn [New York, New York] where we lived, I saw all this stuff. And so I wrote them a notes and comment piece, and I turned that in, and they bought that. That was for the front of the book. Story_ID: 316370 Speaker 1: And right after that, I got promoted to the Talk of the Town staff, and I used what I knew best, the people that I knew best, because nobody much was writing about black people as a general rule as ordinary human beings (laughter). It was always as something exotic or something different or criminal, or whatever. So, I began to, and I was competing with the best. I mean, you know, to get a piece in the Talk of the Town, it was some of--I think it was [Calvin] Trillin, used to say, "It's not the A pieces; it's the A plus pieces." And so, how do you do that? Well, first of all, you stake out a territory where nobody else is, and you write about something that nobody else is writing about. And I was always in the magazine [The New Yorker]. I had nice pieces in the magazine. I mean, they weren't all about black people, but most of them were about Harlem [New York, New York] and there was a book store, a guy--black guy who had at that time the largest collection about blacks in the world called Louie Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], and I wrote about the Michaux's book store [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]. Little--how Michaux would go in, and he used to speak in couplets: "The white man's dream of being supreme has turned to sour cream." And I wrote all those things, and they were just delightful; I wrote about the corner of 125th [Street] and 7th [Avenue], which was then 7th, and all the street corner artists that used to declaim from the ladders there. Oh, I found wonderful things to write about. I found some sad things too, but I was beginning at this point to develop a consciousness as a journalist trusting who I was and what I was and where I had come from to inform my work, and it was a critical time of development, because I had this gentle genius of an editor [William Shawn] who never deflated you even if your piece was a piece of shit. I mean, he never let you know--think that, and whenever you left his office to go and maybe rewrite a piece from scratch, he had a way of making you feel that that you had come to those decisions, that it was yours and when you finally finished it, it was still--it was your work and not his. And not many editors I work with since have that gift, you know, especially in television. They just tear you up one side and down the other. But fortunately, I had already formed. I mean, you grow and you develop, and I'm still growing and I'm still developing, but those early lessons there, and then subsequently at The New York Times. I mean, they were--they were great lessons. They were--the word I'm looking for I can't think of it, but they, they were lessons that exist for all time. For example, New York Times, I went in 1969, and there you learn that by the third paragraph, you got to tell. They call it the universal paragraph when you're writing a news story. You got to tell what the story is about, and if there're antecedents to the one you're writing, what is the background and the history and the context. The universal paragraph. But I would say the best lessons I learned about writing, I learned from William Shawn, and then when I wrote my first book 'In My Place' [Charlayne Hunter-Gault], Shawn had left The New Yorker by then and was consulting editor to my publisher, and I asked that he be allowed to edit my book, and Jonathan Galassi who was the editor--who was the head of the Farrar, Straus and Giroux agreed, and it was just wonderful. We edited in the restaurant in the hotel up on Madison Avenue (laughter) just sitting there talking, and it was just so special. Story_ID: 316371 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at The New Yorker for how long? Speaker 2: I was there from '63 [1963] to maybe '65 [sic. 1967] or so, and then I got a--I was getting itchy. I--and I was also--my marriage was not working out, and so I needed to leave New York [New York], so I looked around, and I found this fellowship at Washington University in St. Louis [(Wash U), St. Louis, Missouri], and I applied for it. It was a Russell Sage [Foundation] fellowship. Speaker 1: Now, that's a school that is famous for journalism. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they then had a magazine called Transaction, which combined social science with journalism, and so I went there as a fellow, and I took my little girl, Suesan [Stovall] and enrolled her in school there. And my, my separation and later divorce from her father was probably one of the nicest ends to a marriage you could have, because he was her father, and I wanted them to keep their relationship, and I wanted to be his friend. He was a wonderful man. And he even drove us to St. Louis [Missouri], because after I lost my second child, something happened to my chemistry, and there was some imbalance, and I became claustrophobe, and I hated to fly, so he drove us to St. Louis. And I set up shop there and began to edit social scientific pieces and turning them into journalism, and taking classes and how to apply social scientific techniques to reporting. Speaker 1: Is that--but back to the--I guess the break-up, is there anything you can discuss about--you can tell us as to why you all split up? Speaker 2: No, I don't think that is anybody's business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I don't discuss it, and I don't plan ever to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, but suffice to say that we've remained friends and that's all I'm going to say about that. Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan]--I mean, Wash U was great, but by this time, I had gotten my feet wet in the streets, and the longer I was in the halls of Ivy--or, not Ivy, but, you know, academic--looking at it academically, it just--it wasn't happening for me. I was learning, and I was working on Transaction which was interesting, and then the thing that crystallized in my mind, the feeling I was having and the need--that I needed to be not there but out. I probably would have stuck it out that year, but then Walter [Stovall], actually, my ex, well, we were still married, we were just separated, and he was coming to visit. And by the time his plane landed, there were riots all over America. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had just been killed, and I think one of the reasons I've always loved him was his own tender heart and capacity for expressing emotion. Because when I picked him up at--I don't think he had heard, and I told him on the way. In fact, it was a perilous trip to the airport, because we didn't know what was going on in the streets, and the streets were totally empty, and I told him what had happen and, oh, he was devastated. He said, you know--God--he was this man, you know, who just--I remember we talked about this, and he said--he just, you know, went on with his marches when nobody was paying any attention. He was back in the back roads and the byways and the highways just doing what he thought was important to do. He was devastated, as we all were, and shortly after that, the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]--the, you know, Lyndon B. Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], the president, ordered a study of the riots, you know, looking into the disorders--Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders]--and, you know, the conclusion was that--well, in addition to the fact that there were two separate societies in America, one black and in decline, one white and prosperous, was also placed blame on the media for failing to report what was really going on these communities and why nobody knew about the rage. It was a surprise, the riots of '68 [1968]. Because people just didn't have a clue how fed-up and frustrated black people were. So, they had a meeting, the justice department and select people in St. Louis, after those riots, after the Kerner Commission report, and I was invited to come and talk, and I talked, and we talked about the causes and the failure of the media, et cetera. And I was subsequently invited to a smaller session out in Aspen, Colorado, and there I talked about my observations, and at the end of that, I was offered a job by the NBC affiliate and the guy ran the NBC affiliate in Washington, D.C., a guy named Irwin [M.] Margolies, M-A-R-G-O-L-I-S [sic.], to come, and he had this idea of setting up a team that would report exclusively on social issues. This was 1969, 'cause that wasn't happening in the media in America, you know, episodically they would, but not consistently. Story_ID: 316372 Speaker 1: Were you aware of, I mean, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] when you were growing, I mean, as a-- Speaker 2: Yea. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --the King family here and Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and all that? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I had met him when I was at [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia], and he--I stopped him on--he stopped me on the--stopped on the street one day right on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]. And I was so bowled over by him, and before I could tell him what a great man I thought he was, he began to tell me what an important job he thought Hamp [Hamilton Holmes] and I were doing at the University of Georgia. I never even got to say, "Well, I think you're pretty great too." Yeah, we knew, and it was painful, and so I made the decision to leave the [Russell Sage Foundation] fellowship early, much to the consternation of those who had brought me there, but I couldn't stay in the classroom [at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] when America was going to hell, or certainly in a transition. Story_ID: 316373 Speaker 1: So, I went to Washington [D.C.] and took up that challenge with two other colleagues [at NBC], and we began to report on the social issues in Washington, D.C., of which there were many, and we got awards for our work, and then I got promoted to anchoring the nightly news, and then I met my now-husband in the morgue in Washington, D.C., where we both--he worked for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], and the justice department at time was engaged in trying to act as a mediation and conflict resolution entity, you know, trying to pre-empt some of these terrible disorders that were going on, but in Washington, D.C., they had killed--the police had killed a guy, and they had ruled justifiable homicide, and the neighborhood was upset, because they felt the cops had killed him in cold blood. So, this was the second incident, and everybody was covering it, because of the outrage that had greeted the first justifiable homicide thing, and I was on deadline and this and that. And a friend of mine had met me at the Aspen [Colorado] conference and said, "Oh, you got meet this guy in Washington. The two of you, I know how you will hit off," and this, and she was a wonderful young white girl from Bryn Mawr [College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], but I did not think she knew the kind of brother I would be interested in. I said, "Yeah, yeah, right." So he came up to me during this inquest which was just going on and on into the night, and my deadline was approaching, and he introduced himself, and I said, "Oh yeah, it's nice to meet you," and went on, and eventually, they came out with a verdict, and I was able to get back to the office and report it. But then we, you know, had business relationships after that and eventually decided that we were gonna be together. And I spent a year there in Washington, and then the administration changed. Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] did not want to work for the next administration. I think it was [President Richard Milhous] Nixon, so we moved to New York [New York], and I then got a job at The New York Times where I stayed for the next ten years, and he worked for the Ford Foundation and subsequently for the mayor of New York [Ed Koch] and then eventually to banking. Speaker 2: Okay. When-- Speaker 1: But, let me just say the one thing that came out of--in addition to causing my life to change and take a turn, 'cause I had initially planned to go back to The New Yorker, but eventually the--out of the recommendations of Kerner [Commission; National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders], at Columbia University [New York, New York], we established a program to train minority journalists to bring more, in a big way, into the media. And it was a special project that was led by Robert C. Maynard who had been a reporter at The Washington Post, and Walter [Stovall], my ex, Earl Caldwell, [C.] Gerald Fraser, all [The] New York Times, Washington Post, Associated Press people, and we designed the program primarily Bob [Robert C. Maynard] and others, but we all were participating that eventually became the Michele Clark Program [Summer Program in Broadcast and Print Journalism for Members of Minority Groups], 'cause she [Michele Clark] was a young black woman who was killed in a plane crash, a journalist at CBS, and within three months we took all of the--our first month--week was called the demystification of journalism. Bob taught that, and it said look this is not rocket science, and we took all of those young black, and some not so young black people who had had aspirations of becoming a journalist, but because of the racism and the barriers, et cetera, couldn't, and we would take secretaries, you know, people in low-level jobs, and in three months, we'd turn them into journalists, and that program was responsible, for the longest time, for 20 percent of the minority journalists in this country, and these ones many of them are now in positions of extreme power. They're editors, they're on at running editorial pages and just being very successful, and I think that was one of the biggest and most positive outcomes of that whole thing, that we integrated American newsrooms. Speaker 2: But were you--what role did you play in the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]? Did you play any role in the-- Speaker 1: I wasn't a founding member, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I've always been a supporter and been involved one way or another, but not like people like [HistoryMaker] Les Payne and those who were actually on the ground as it started. Story_ID: 317690 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just want to go back and ask you some questions about being an anchor for NBC in Washington [D.C.]. I mean, did you have to--we've interviewed other early black anchors and stuff. Did you have any special training to become an anchor or did--well, how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, I--it was kind of an outgrowth of this News4 probe thing that we were doing that sort of started to go in different directions, and I started anchoring and, you know, there's nothing special about anchoring. It's much more challenging being a regular journalist in the field. You just get there and read--but you know, some are more challenging than others. I mean, you get to ask questions and so forth, and I think I continued to report from the street, you know, bigger, bigger stories as well as doing the anchoring. There was usually some story I had, if I recall, that required me to go out in the field. I've always loved being in the field. I've always felt that anchoring was a bit overblown, and I know all young people today want to be anchors, but that's not where the fun is in journalism. The fun in journalism is actually interviewing people, writing stories and stuff. So I kept my hand in in that and did both. Story_ID: 317691 Speaker 1: We had you in New York when we ended, and then you're--you are--you were in New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Let me just say one more thing about Washington [D.C.], because when I was there, you know, it was a time of ferment in the black community. Things were changing politically, and I think one of the big challenges to black journalists like myself always has been how you report a story that affects you personally, and as an African American, and I was affected by the things that were going on relating to African Americans, and be still a journalist. And I remember when Ralph Featherstone was blown up, and I had to cover his funeral, and I arrived there, and I'll never forget the scene where they weren't letting journalists in. It was supposed to be private. But of course, I had come out of the movement, and they knew me, and they believed they could trust me. And so through Courtland Cox, I was given access to the chapel. Speaker 1: Just to put it in perspective, Ralph Featherstone was with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], right? Speaker 2: Ralph Featherstone was a SNCC activist and he and-- Speaker 1: Mississippi. Right. Speaker 2: He and [H.] Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] were driving, I think from Maryland to [Washington] D.C. or somewhere along that way, and their car blew up, and many people suspected sabotage. There were those who said that, you know, they were taking a bomb somewhere to set it off, but most of us believed that it was the work of agent-provocateurs, whatever. They were dead--he was dead. Rap Brown then went on the lam for quite some time. And as I walked into the chapel, I think it was Roberta Flack, they were playing, "You see this girl, this girl is in love with you" ['This Girl's In Love With You'] and there was his, Featherstone's, wife [Dr. Charlotte Orange-Featherstone] coming to the coffin. And then Courtland Cox, who had been a civil rights activist and was his close friend, gave the eulogy. And I remember being so affected by it, because he gave this talk and this eulogy in which he ended by saying, "Brothers and sisters beware, the danger zone is everywhere." And it was so powerful, and I had been let in as a former activist, but I went up to him afterwards and I said, "You know, this was just too powerful a service not to be reported. Could I please report on it?" And, especially, you know, the things that he had to say, and he said fine and gave me the remarks that he had made. And some people were annoyed, because they felt that I had breached the agreement, but I had it from the highest person there to do this, and that was a one of those times when you have to really work hard at maintaining your distance, but I don't think that you have to be what they call quote, unquote objective, because I think we all see things through the prism of our own experiences which is why so many black people in their lives were left out for so long, because the white people who were reporting the news didn't have those experiences, so they weren't reporting them even through the prism of their experiences; they weren't reporting them. But when they did report them through the prism of their experiences, there were presumptions that they made that just weren't accurate. So, I constantly check my own emotional reactions to things as an African American and as a journalist. But I think that over the years I've, I've been very comfortable with seeing things through the prism of my own experience and being fair to the story and balanced as opposed to necessarily objective which is a word I've grown to distrust and dislike-- Speaker 1: Do you think it tends to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) over the years. Speaker 1: --indicate looking at the world from the point of view of the majority owners of the paper rather than necessarily (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm not sure that--I mean, I just-- Speaker 1: --objectivity is, you know-- Speaker 2: I think objective is, like, one of those phony pretentious words. You know, how can a human being be objective? We're all creatures of our experience. We can be fair. We can make sure that the other side is heard when it's necessary, but objective is a term I find offensive and inaccurate and wrong, actually, when we talk about what we do and how we do it. But, anyway, those were critical times, those years. Story_ID: 317692 Speaker 1: Then, you know, I moved to New York [New York], and I had had some conversations with The New York Times about coming there and Arthur Gelb who's the legendary city editor, he wrote a book called 'City Room' [Arthur Gelb]. A marvelous book about an amazing time, over time when he presided as city editor, and I'll never forget that he asked me in my interview, if I were assigned to do a story in Harlem [New York, New York], and I had people I knew and friends--meaning other black people--would I be able to tell the truth. And, that was a concern as--you know, look, it was a time when there weren't--this was the beginning of the entry of black journalists into mainstream media, although some like Tom Johnson [Thomas A. Johnson], had worked at the Times for a while, and there were blacks here and there in the--but in the main, there were not a lot of--and, so, you know, white editors just didn't quite know how to approach the, you know, the interviews of these black journalists who were now coming into mainstream media, and I just said, "Well, you know, it depends on what the truth is and who's telling it." Story_ID: 317693 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you--it just occurred to me I didn't ask you anything about Malcolm X. Were you--you were in New York [New York] when he was assassinated, right? And, that would have been earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was early. I didn't have anything to do with that. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, but, how did that--you knew Harlem [New York, New York] fairly well. You knew about [Lewis H.] Michaux's [African National Memorial] Bookstore [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Well, this was much later. I mean, I wasn't around when that--I forget what year it was. Speaker 1: Well, the culture of Harlem, with the street orators and stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know-- Speaker 1: He was one of them and stuff. Speaker 2: I, I know but-- Speaker 1: I just wonder if you knew what you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but those ones--when he was doing that, I wasn't there. I mean, like I wrote about Marcus Garvey. I mean, he used to speak from the street corners and what people said, but I never saw Malcolm X doing it. Later I became pretty close to people like [HistoryMaker Minister Louis] Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam, because nobody was reporting them in anything other than negative ways, and there were a lot of things that the Nation of Islam was doing, just like the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] later were doing, that was positive, although there were some other aspects to it. But, they just, they were--you know, like a lot of black people generally, they were just so pleased to have someone who was willing to try and tell their story right. One of my best examples was 1973, or thereabouts, I was--I subsequently, after I was hired at The New York Times, I eventually was--proposed establishing a Harlem bureau, and so I established the first internal bureau of The New York Times in the city, in Harlem. I was the bureau chief and the bureau as well. It wasn't like a huge operation. But it was good to be in the community all the time and have the people there know that The New York Times was there. It was very good for me; it was good for the Times. And one day, I went to cover a Black Panther meeting, and this Panther, when he found out that I was for The New York Time, he said, "Sorry, but you work for the man. You're not going to be able to tell the truth. I'm not going to let you come here." And I said, "Have you ever seen anything I've written?" He said, "No." And I said, "Well look, let's make a deal. You give me the opportunity to report this story," which was fairly benign, "and if it isn't an accurate reflection, tomorrow, of what happened here, then don't let me in the next time, but give me a chance." So, he agreed. He said, "But sister," he said, "you can come in under one condition." I said, "What is that?" He said, "That you come in right." And I have used that even as I have talked about going to Africa to report on Africa, you know, no matter where you go, you need to come in right. Which means, in my view, check your preconceptions and predispositions at the door, and come in and let the facts dictate how you tell the story. So, I wrote the story, and subsequently I ran into this Black Panther. He didn't say anything about the exchange. He just said, "Power to the people." And I said--he said something like "Right on brother, hello sister," or something like that. And I said, "Power to the people." I forget exactly how it went. But, you know, it was that kind of richness and challenge and meeting those challenges, and you know, if you could cover Harlem, you could cover the world, because it had this whole range of life experiences and people and so on. And my goal there, I mean, I had written about Harlem when I wrote for The New Yorker, but now I was writing about it, and I eventually moved out to cover other stories in the community and--I mean, the larger community. I went to Chicago [Illinois]; I went around the country from time to time. Not constantly, but from time to time. Story_ID: 317694 Speaker 1: And on one of those trips to Chicago [Illinois], I was covering the Black Women's Community Development Foundation, or something like that, I can't remember exactly now what the title was, but I had filed my story. You filed--used to file over the phone, and by the time you get to wherever you're going, there would have been transcribers to type out and spread out to the various editors who had to look at it, and by the time I got to New York [New York] from Chicago, the paper was on the street, and I began to read it. And it was just at the point where, you know, there was this call to use black instead of Negro. And I respected that, because I could see there was just growing momentum behind this, so I had used black throughout the story and some copy editor, white copy editor, had changed it and alternated it. I mean, sometimes it was Negro, sometimes he'd put black. I hit the ceiling. I went straight home. I dictated what turned out to be about an eleven-page memo, and the thing about that was that, when you went in that way, it was usually to file a story, and it automatically went to all the editors, and that's what I did. Because, I mean, later the national editor who was a good, good guy, southern guy, great journalist, Gene Roberts, he was hurt. And I hated at the point that he was hurt, because I respected him, but I was trying to make a larger point. And I knew that if I talked to him and convinced him, that would be just one editor. I wanted bigger change throughout the paper--or at least to have them, and the thing went on and on about the presumptions of white editors who live in the suburbs and never come in contact with black people, and they're going to presume to make judgments about what term to call black people when black people themselves are saying they want to be called black. So, the then-managing editor, A.M. Rosenthal, took it up with me, and he sent out a memo and that was the big institutional change. I mean, it might not seem like a lot in retrospect, but it was the change-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's a big change (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a big change. Speaker 2: I think anybody that was alive in those days remembers how that drama--we remember the change, but nobody knows the details of how it changed. Speaker 1: Well, that's where it came from. Speaker 2: The New York Times being the most influential paper, and the other papers sit around and read The New York Times and try to be like it. I mean, is this--do you think that's--I mean, I guess what I'm asking you is that do you really think that's the what turned the tide in nomenclature from Negro to black? This is about 1968 or '69 [1969] I guess. Sixty-nine [1969], I think. Speaker 1: I think it was--I can't remember now. I don't know where that memo is. I know a guy name Ernest Dunbar who used to work for--was it Look or Life magazine [Look]? One of those magazines. He had it at one time, the memo, and I don't know what's become of it. I would actually like to have it. Because it was--I just poured out my soul. Speaker 2: That had to be late '68 [1968] or at least--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I went to the Times in '69 [1969], so it might have been '70 [1970] or '71 [1971]. But, it was when the Black Women's Community Development Foundation met, and they met for some reason in Chicago, I think that's what it was. But it was a big change. In fact, someone asked me about it recently. I think it was [HistoryMaker] Richard Prince at Journal-isms, you know he does that column, that online column. And, we had battles like that. But that was a big victory I think, and I had a good ten--almost ten years at the Times, in which I unapologetically spent my time covering the story of African Americans and, you know, from time to time I do something on (unclear) or somebody--you know, something that had nothing to do with race, just as I had done at The New Yorker. But I never felt that I was being pigeon holed. I thought I was there for a purpose, and the purpose was to interpret the movement of African Americans in American society. Story_ID: 317695 Speaker 1: Just incidentally, around the black and Negro, did you--what did it--I guess the way you frame is, like, an act of self-determination on the part of black people to rename themselves, basically, amongst ourselves at first, and then to inform others that call us by our right name. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That pretty much-- Speaker 2: Well, it just seemed to be that, you know, not everybody was for it, but it seemed to be a groundswell, and people were embracing it, and you keep your ear to the ground on these things. Speaker 1: It seemed to mean something in those days if you said you were black or if you said you were a Negro. If you said you were a Negro, I think there's a certain cast you had on you, and if you said you were black it mean something else too. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It wasn't always, you know, accurate, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But that's, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know in Africa, sometimes Africans get very confused when I say that I am black, 'cause they think I'm white, a lot of them. Because they haven't seen anybody as fair as me or, you know, and I have to explain, "No, I'm black." I mean, when I first went to South Africa in 1985, I found black people downtown working. I didn't expect to see any black people working downtown in Johannesburg [South Africa] which was in a white preserve. So, I found this beauty parlor, and I didn't necessary need to have my hair done, but, you know, I was looking for the voice of the people and the sentiments of the people, et cetera, so I figured where else but a beauty parlor. So I stopped in this black beauty shop and I said to this black woman when I walked in I said--she said to me, "May I help you?" She was very sweet, and I said, "Yes, I'd like to get a wash and set." And she looked at me very sweetly and said, "I'm sorry, but we only do black hair." You know, and that was 1985 and, of course, South Africa had a particular kind of stratification based on color. It was the blacks and the coloureds and the Indians, et cetera, et cetera, and I looked like a coloured, I guess, or even white. I've been mistaken for white in Nigeria. Like, I have braids a lot of the time, and this one young man who was working for me as a fixer-translator in Northern Nigeria, and after we had worked together for two or three days, he said, "Can I ask you a personal question?" I said, "Sure." He said, "Do other white people like yourself braid your hair?" (Laughter) But, you know, and when you say, "I'm black," they look at you like you've lost your mind, and then you explain it's a state of being. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the story I've heard, that kind of story before and, yeah, it's perspective where you come when you determine what you think somebody is or whether--you know. It is not easy to always understand. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 317696 Speaker 1: So, you were at The New York Times for about ten years. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And is there any one particular story you think that stands out? Speaker 2: Well, I figure early on, I got involved with reporting a story with Joe Lelyveld [Joseph Lelyveld] who later became the managing editor of the paper, but then he was, you know, young reporter, just like myself. Maybe with just a little more experience, and he was a gifted reporter and writer, and we were assigned to look into the death of a twelve-year-old boy in Harlem [New York, New York]. His name was Walter Vandermeer, and he had died of an overdose of heroin, and as it turns out, at that point, he was the youngest known victim of that kind of death in New York [New York], and so we were assigned by Arthur Gelb to go find out how this happened. And we worked for weeks and walked the streets of 116th [Street] and 8th [Avenue], and those environments which were not particularly hospitable to anybody that didn't belong there, let alone a white reporter and a black woman, but we did it and I remember it slopping over into the Christmas holidays. I bought my Christmas tree down on 8th Avenue, a scraggly little Christmas tree, 'cause I just had been--we've been so obsessed actually with getting the details of the story. I mean, Joe would go up there by himself sometimes. Sometimes we would go together, and we produced the front page story about this, and that was like a real breakthrough. I didn't get--I got a--I didn't get a by-line, co-byline, I got a, you know, I think I got a name at the end of the story--help with the story or something like that, and you know, that was one of my first big awards at the Times, and I've gotten several Publishers Awards, and written magazine articles I wrote for that, didn't do much book reviewing--not my thing--but I grew a lot at the Times. I learned more about reporting and about writing stories and watching those who--I used to work on the weekends, and there was a guy named Emanuel Perlmutter, and he worked on the weekends. It's Manny Perlmutter. I used to watch Manny. No matter what story he went out to cover, no matter how insignificant, he knew how to combine verbs and subjects to make it active enough to get it on the front page, and I learned a lot from him. And, you know, I learned about how to do good reporting, substantive reporting and those things that I talked to you about, you know, the things about--you know, your lead and then your second part--and sooner or later--even if you're reporting the same story every day for two weeks, you don't assume that everybody's reading your story every day, and you put in that universal paragraph that says this is what this story is about, this is the background, to be long. So, I learned a lot, and Arthur Gelb was a great editor. He had an idea every thirty seconds, and some of them great, and some of them were not, but it was infectious to work with somebody with that enthusiasm, and I learned a lot from him, and I had great colleagues. By that time, we had a good number of African Americans at the paper, Nancy Hicks [Maynard], [C.] Gerald Fraser, Rudy Johnson, Tom Johnson [Thomas A. Johnson]. And I enjoyed my time there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--when you were there, I think you were there during the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration, right? At the end of '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You left by-- Speaker 2: Let me see. Was I--yeah, I guess so, maybe. Seems to me I was already at the New York--at the--I left The New York Times, I forget what year. Maybe it was '79 [sic. 1978] and went to work for 'The NewsHour' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour']. Story_ID: 317697 Speaker 1: Well, how did you manage to get to 'The MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour' [sic. 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour']? Speaker 2: I heard about them auditioning people for it, and I don't know what prompted me to go and audition, but I did. I guess I thought hard enough about it. I sort of went in on lark. I think I was probably one of the last people they auditioned. I don't even remember how I found out about it, but I went and auditioned, and they liked it, and they offered me the job, and Abe Rosenthal [A.M. Rosenthal] had a fit. He--you know, people like Abe Rosenthal and Arthur Gelb grew up at The [New York] Times, and they couldn't imagined--they loved that paper, they ate it and slept it and breathed it and wore it out to parties. I mean, the Times was their life, and they in a sense owned it, you know what I mean? It was like their paper, and I had loyalty to it, but I didn't feel like I owned it, and so I made the decision to go to PBS and, of course, MacNeil--it was then 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report.' It was a half hour, one subject a night. And it was substantive, it was The New York Times of television, and it was a great opportunity, and when Abe found out, oh, he was so upset. He was so angry. He was actually angry with me, and, I mean, instead of saying what a great opportunity and this and that, "How could you even think about leaving The New York Times, we had so much plans for you," and this and that, and I just bit the bullet and said, "I'm sorry but I'm going." He didn't speak to me for years. He just really hated it that I had--he saw it as a betrayal. Of course, I didn't, but he did, and it wasn't. And it was years later he came to some program that I was doing at the--at Channel 13, and afterwards he--it was the first time I had seen him in all those years when he wasn't talking to me, and he had to be interviewed by me, so he was cordial and gracious and then afterwards he said--we were all leaving, and he said, "Do you have a ride home?" I said, "No." He said, "Well, I've got a car, I'll give you a lift." He said, "You know, if you had stayed--" and he hadn't said anything up to that point about the whole business, and it has been years, and he just couldn't resist. He said, "You know, if you'd stayed at the Times, you'd have your own chauffeur by now" (laughter). But he forgave me, sort of. I just--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, this just tells the story about their passion of that organization. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh, he was extremely passionate about--as was Arthur. I mean, the loyalty to the paper was deep. I mean, you know, the paper didn't have the kind of crises it subsequently had in recent years, so it was a great place to work. It set the standard. It was all the news that fit the print--this fit the print. Your, you know, New York Times people were respected the world over, you know, so--. Speaker 1: Did you have to relocate for 'MacNeil/Lehrer'? Speaker 2: No, no, it was right there in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Right in New York, okay? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 316374 Speaker 1: You know, I didn't consider myself an agitator or anything like that, but I always felt free to write memos to editors when I thought something was wrong at The [New York] Times, either in their coverage of African Americans, or whatever, and so I wrote a few memos in my day, in addition to the black one. And the other thing about the Times on the negative side was that there came a time when women at the paper brought a lawsuit, because they had discovered that they were paying--being paid less than the men. And then blacks subsequently followed with their own lawsuit, because they discovered that they (laughter) were being paid less than other people, and even given fewer opportunities. I mean, I think for the longest time Tom Johnson [Thomas A. Johnson] was the only black person who had ever been a foreign correspondent, and his work was in Africa. And, so there was discrimination, and the Times had to do something about that, because they lost those cases. So that, it was, you know, part of the way business was done, and they, of course, had to be forced to change that and then over the years--and there're other people who can talk more about, in depth, about those, because I left before the cases were finally settled. I think I was the beneficiary of some of them. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, you're about 1979 then? Speaker 1: I don't remember--somewhere like that. Yeah, before--the cases were before that, but at any rate the Times was, you know, had to make amends for that. Speaker 2: Now could you--I mean, when you--when you--at the time that you were working for The New York Times, did you--were you aware of that kind of thing? I mean, did you suspect that that's what was going on? Speaker 1: Well, eventually we all knew. I mean, I didn't think about it. Just, you know, but then when the women who were concerned about it organized, and we all started, everybody--I wasn't intimately involved in those suits. I guess you could say I was kind of on the periphery of them, but we all were part of them, you know, it was like class action suit, and I wasn't one of the ring leaders of it. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Just the idea though of that, when you're working with people every day and had this passion about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, people don't talk about what they make. They don't talk about what they earn. You don't know what the next person is making, but somehow people began to see, one way or another, that there were these inequalities and they, you know, the interesting thing is that those who did the challenging for the most part, when the suit was settled and there was an agreement to promote women and to advance women, it was the ones who weren't involved in the suit who got the choice positions. Speaker 2: That's, I think, some kind of universal rule-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 316375 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of my little battles was trying to get more black people who were getting engaged. You know, there once was a time when those pages--society pages--never had any black faces, and I think I got the first one in the newspaper [The New York Times]. And I won't go into detail about who it was, but it was someone who was prominent enough that--I waited 'til I had the right one, you know, because in those days--nowadays anybody can get in there, as long as they're interesting and this and that, but in those days you had to have some kind of connections and be a part of society and so forth. And so, I thought I had the right one with the right connections and so forth, so when the person asked me, I said, "Oh, yeah, this'll be great. I'll get it in the paper. Bring me all the details and bring me a picture," 'cause I didn't want just the write-up, I wanted to see a black face on that page. So the person brought me the thing, write up, and I said, "Where's the picture?" He was very reluctant to give me the picture, but eventually I talked him into doing it, and I looked at the picture (laughter), and it wasn't the most flattering picture you've ever seen, and I could sort of understand why he might have been at that point kind of reluctant, because all the women on the society pages in those days who had announcements were, generally, tended to be very attractive, thin, pretty white girls. So, I went into the society page and said, "I've got this thing, and this is who's relative it is," and this and that, so I mean, I had him. I mean, there was no way he could say no, 'cause this person had all of the pedigree and everything else, and so I said, "And I have a picture," and I handed him the picture, and I was really defiant about it. And he looked at the picture, and he looked at me, and he said, "Is this the bride or the groom?" (laughter) and I have to say that it was everything I could do to keep myself composed, because, as I said, the person was not the most attractive female I had ever seen, but I was just determined, and I said, "It's the bride" (laughter), and I turned on my heels and walked out. And sure enough the picture got printed, so that was another little breakthrough. We had small victories here and there. Story_ID: 316376 Speaker 1: Are we ready for '[The] MacNeil/Lehrer [Report]' ['PBS NewsHour']? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it's public television, broadcast nightly, I guess about five nights a week, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did you like that? Speaker 2: It was great. For a long time, I substituted for Robert [MacNeil] or Jim [Lehrer] and, you know, when Jim was off, I'd go to Washington [D.C.]. When Robert was off, I'd stay in New York [New York]. And it was challenging, and it was evolving, but it was the best thing on news, on television. And as I said, it was like The New York Times of television, and it took me and my own journalism, I think, to another level. I learned a lot. You know, Robert and Jim had set the boundaries of the program, so it had to be done a certain way. You know, I had my own little way that I did things which was a little bit different from theirs, sometimes. But it was another step for me, another opening up, another broadening of my journalistic horizons. And after a while, there was enough money for me to--mostly when it expanded to an hour, I was able to travel all over the world. I just came back the other day from the Dead Sea, and the first time I went to that region, and then--in Jordan, I was in Jordan. But the first time I went to the Middle East was to do a serious of conversations with leaders over there about whether or not the peace plan was going to work. This was probably back in the '80s [1980s] sometime. And one of those early on agreements that ultimately fell apart. But I had some amazing experiences. I interviewed Shimon Peres; I interviewed [President] Hosni Mubarak, and I was--you know, no one got to interview al-Assad, [President] Hafez al-Assad of Syria. He rarely ever gave interviews. So, we got to Cairo [Egypt] and expecting to interview Mubarak, and we were told that not to leave the airport to go, 'cause he was in Alexandria [Egypt], and we were to journey on to Alexandria. So, we went to Alexandria, and Bryant Gumbel was there, and he was just coming out of his interview with Mubarak, and we spoke, and then I went in and had a very good interview with Mubarak. I mean, one thing about 'MacNeil/Lehrer,' he taught you how to prepare. You really prepared, and you had a staff of people who helped you prepare well. So, I was always well prepared for interviews, and I went in and--you know, I did the interview, and you can see he enjoyed it. I mean, he could--he seemed to appreciate--you know, we never beat up on people, that was not our style, even if it was someone who was, you know, deserved to be beaten up on. We still asked the tough questions but mostly gently, and so he seemed to appreciate the way the interview had gone, so I took advantage of what I felt was a good opening, and when the interview was over, I said, "Could we have a word privately?" So, everybody went out, and I said, "You know, everybody's been interested in Hafez al-Assad's position on this, and he doesn't do many interviews." I said, "And I know he was just here, and you have a good relationship with him. How would you propose--do you have any advice for me about how I might reach him and get him to do this interview?" He just said, "Come with me," and we went out on the balcony of the palais [Montazah Palace, Alexandria, Egypt] and picked up the phone and then, "Hafez, Hafez, Hosni," and then he began to speak in Arabic, but I knew he was talking to Hafez al-Assad, and then I heard him say something--NBC, CBS or ABC. Well, by this, his staff had come in, 'cause they couldn't figure out what was going on. He just took me and disappeared. So now they were figuring it out, and so when it was over I said, "What was that he said about CBS, NBC and ABC?" He says, "Oh, you were much better than CBS, NBC or ABC," and that he should do it. So, then he got off the phone, and he said, "Go back to Cairo." Well, we were suppose to be going on to, to Amman [Jordan] to interview King Hussein [bin Talal] and, I said, "But," I said, "well." He said, "No, go back and wait; you will hear from the Syrians," and I said, "But we were suppose to go and interview King Hussein." He said, "You can interview him any time, go back to Jordan and wait--go back to Cairo and wait." So we went back to Cairo. I said, "How long will we have to wait?" He said, "Did you want this interview? Go back to Cairo and wait." So we go back to Cairo, I call my executive producer, Les Crystal [Lester Crystal], and told him the situation. I said, "Please call and see if you can't smooth this over with the King." Because I knew too, at that point, that the critical interview was not the King, it was Assad. Story_ID: 316377 Speaker 1: And within twelve hours or so, the Syrians had called and told us to come ahead, and [President Hafez] al-Assad was amazingly gracious. Oh, I drank so much tea before the interview, by the time we got around to the interview, everybody was waiting outside. He and I were inside having tea, and he was giving me the whole history of the region going back to biblical times. It was fascinating. A very classical, historical thing he was going through. Speaker 2: What year is this in? Do you remember? Speaker 1: I wish I could remember. It was after the--there was an Israeli-Arab peace accord [Camp David Accords, 1978]. Speaker 2: So that's been-- Speaker 1: Man, I would have to go-- Speaker 2: By nineteen--after 1980, then, because that was the one that [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. He did it I think the year he went out. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's it, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah. About 1980. Speaker 1: And so, I started out, but he didn't follow, and when the doors opened, everybody was sitting, and all the men were out there waiting, because they thought Assad and I were coming together. And, so everybody stood up, and it was--I had to go to the bathroom, and it was through them to the other side, and they looked and they sort of went (laughter), and I don't know what possessed me, I just went, "C'est fini!" and threw my hands up in the air (laughter). And they said, "How could it be finished?" And I just kept walking, and it was so funny, and then eventually everybody figured out, you know, what was happening, but it was a very good interview. It made news, and, it was--and then we did manage to recapture the interview with the King [of Jordan, Hussein bin Talal]. But it was stuff like that, I mean, I went all over the world for 'The NewsHour' ['PBS NewsHour'] doing all, all kinds of wonderful stories. I went to South Africa in 1985 at the height of the apartheid era, a state of emergency repression. Speaker 2: Let me just this--say this before you get there, but-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --it seem as though in late '70s [1970s], in '79 [1979] SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] went to--and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] I think, too, went in--it went into Palestine, you know-- Speaker 1: Maybe. I don't know. Speaker 2: And there was a lot of African Americans involvement over there, and [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young got in trouble for trying to talk to the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: And, you being a reporter for PBS over there talking to--you know, it just seemed like a time when a lot of African Americans were involved in that at some level. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Joseph Lowery met with [Yasser] Arafat, you know-- Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: --back in '78 [1978] or '79 [1979], you know, it was--. Well. Speaker 1: Well, you know. I don't know. Story_ID: 316378 Speaker 1: But then I went to South Africa in '85 [1985]; that was one of the biggest stories that I did for them ['The NewsHour'; 'PBS NewsHour']. We did a five-part series that ultimately became 'Apartheid's People,' and we got a Peabody Award for that, the highest award in broadcast journalism, and it recognized that this was the first time that, you know, any television had actually looked at the people of apartheid, as opposed to the caricatures of the good and the evil and, you know, the oppressed and the oppressor. We actually tried to understand why an Afrikaner might be the way he was and, you know, what he thought and all of that. And-- Speaker 2: What conclusion did you reach, I mean, what, what were some of the insights gained? Speaker 1: Well, you know, those who practiced apartheid or believed in apartheid could give you justification in the Bible for the supremacy of whites, and they--I think they actually believed it. That they had these God-given--this God-given right to rule. They actually could find in the Bible the justification for oppression. They believed it. And one of the people I interviewed told me that one of the Afrikaners said that, you know, "Well, we believe in giving black people their rights, but we have to first bring them up to the first world standards," that South Africa is first world and third world. Of course, it was a rationalization. He may have believed it. Because I went back and visited some of them after the end of apartheid and then said, "Okay, now how do you feel that blacks are about to take over?" "Well, you know, those who are taking over, they're first world, they, you know, they're different." And you know, without being racist, I mean, when I heard that I was so appalled. But, you know, now that I've been over there, it's--I would say the same thing, but for different reasons and for different motivations. I mean, it is first world and third world, I mean. Johannesburg [South Africa] is like Atlanta [Georgia] or New York [New York], or you know, city. Skyscrapers. High tech. Boutiques. Anything you wanna find. But five minutes from Johannesburg is third world. It's just when I analyze it that way, I'm not meaning it to say that black people will never be able to achieve rights 'til they're educated to the rights. I mean, that was the whole point of saying that, then. But Thabo Mbeki, the president of South Africa, talks about two economies now, and it's very much like the two societies that the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] talked about in 1968, you know, there's a white, prospering, economically stable white society and then there's the black one. And South Africa is doing things to change that equation, but it's gonna take a long time. So, you still have those two societies--one white and prospering, with few blacks joining it, and then one massively deprived, black, poor black community. So, anyway, those were--that was a critical intervention on our part in those days, '85 [1985]. And then I subsequently went many other places around the world to--I think I went Haiti, I think for [Jean-Bertrand] Aristide and, you know, some of the big stories of those times. I went abroad to cover, as well as, you know, big domestic stories, but we did analysis and in-depth reporting of these issues, and it was a great growing experience for me. Speaker 2: Did you think in the late '80s [1980s] when you were there, in '85 [1985] and on, that apartheid would be over as soon as it was over? Speaker 1: No, nobody did. Not even the African National Congress [ANC]. They were totally surprised when, when [Nelson] Mandela was released. I'd been planning to go back around about that time and had sent a producer down to kind of nose around and see what stories we might do, and she got back on a Friday, and I think it was Saturday that [F.W.] de Klerk said he was going to release Mandela. So we left on a Sunday. She was back for two days. Story_ID: 316379 Speaker 1: What is your analysis, as a reporter over there who covered that in-depth, as to why they decided at the moment they did to release [Nelson] Mandela? I mean, why did they decide to do it? Speaker 2: Well, I think that there a number or reasons, and we may not ever know them all, but I think the sanctions were biting, the country--it was the pole cat of the world which was having an impact on its ability to actually do business in the world. I think, perhaps, the business community, like the business community in the southern United States during Jim Crow were finding--the business community was finding their situation untenable. And, of course, when business starts to bark, you have to sit up and take notice. And then, you know, I don't know about [F.W.] de Klerk, whether he had some sort of epiphany or just read the handwriting on the wall and listened to those who were in positions of economic power. He took a step. He took a bold step that I don't think P.W. Botha ever could have taken, the previous president. He was just too mired in that whole thing that I talked about--this divine right of whites to rule. So, it was a combination of factors, I think, more than any one thing. Speaker 1: When did you first meet Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: In 1990, when he was released, in the backyard of his house. I knew several of the high ranking African National Congress [ANC] members in exile, and Thabo Mbeki was one of them. I had covered him in '85 [1985] when I was doing 'Apartheid's People.' I had done a profile of these five, and he was one of them, 'cause I wanted somebody who was in exile who was connected to somebody who was in prison, and that was him and his father, Govan Mbeki. So we'd stayed in contact, and so I flew--we flew to London [England], 'cause you couldn't go directly to South Africa in those days, because of the sanctions and touched base with him there and flew on down to Johannesburg [South Africa] where the world's press was assembling. But we had these contacts which we had made in '85 [1985], we knew Cyril Ramaphosa, who had then been the head of the National Union of Mines [sic. National Union of Mineworkers], we'd done a profile of him, and he was one of the principals next to Mandela, and Zwelakhe Sisulu, whose father had been in prison, was Walter Sisulu. So we used all those connections and went out. My producer went out every day while I worked the phones back at the hotel, Carlton Hotel in downtown Johannesburg, and they set up a day for the interviews which was like a Friday, I think, and there were two of us who managed to get half-hour interviews, myself and Ted, Ted Koppel and me. And everybody else got ten minutes. And that was my first face-to-face, and I sat down in front of him after all these ten minute, ten minute, ten minute interviews, and I wanted to sort of distinguish myself, you know, and set myself apart from them, and I'd said, "Please have a cup of tea before you start." And he had taken a break, and then I started telling him about my civil rights history and how my interest in South Africa was a natural outgrowth of that. And right in the middle of it, he said "Do you know [HistoryMaker] Miss Maya Angelou?" And I said, "I do." He said, "Well, we know we used to read her work in prison." And everybody was looking for some nugget from Mandela and, of course, this wasn't on tape, but it--you know, it was a great interview. Not a whole--you know, it was years before Mandela was comfortable enough to talk about those prison experiences, and he still hasn't talked in-depth about them. He's written about them, but he's a very private man in that sense, and you could see that the more relaxed he became as a free man, the more he told stories and little jokes. But right at the beginning he was very guarded, and in his book he talks about how, you know, when he first went to prison, there was no TV and reporters didn't jump up in your face and ask you questions of all kinds of a personal nature and stuff, so he was very guarded about journalists. Story_ID: 316380 Speaker 1: But we became close in that sense, I mean, you know, I'd see him [Nelson Mandela], and he'd wave, or I'd always have access, which really used to piss off his handlers. I mean, they hated it, 'cause I'd just bound up to him, you know, and they wanted to keep a little distance. Then I went back, and I interviewed him in '90 [1990], just before he was becoming president, and I had to leave before the inauguration, because my son was graduating from--my son, Chuma [Hunter-Gault], was graduating from Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I explained to him, and he said-- Speaker 2: Chuma, Chuma means iron in--or it doesn't (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it means God's gift in Ibo [Igbo]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God's gift? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. In what language? Speaker 1: Ibo. Speaker 2: Ibo. Okay. Speaker 1: And he understood, you know, I said, "I'd love to be here but--." And I was so torn, but had to be there for my son's graduation. So, I left there and then he came to America, and we did a big interview with him, hour long thing, Council on Foreign Relations. And that was a major thing. And, again, it would help that access that I had to him over the years. Speaker 2: Now, Bishop [Desmond] Tutu was quite active in those days before, I think Mandela was released-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --on television here-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --so was, you know, the other gentleman who was a colored--I can't think of his name now. Speaker 1: Oh, went to prison. Speaker 2: Boesak, [Reverend] Allan [Aubrey] Boesak (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alan Boesak, um-hm. Story_ID: 317698 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about the early days of 'The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour' ['PBS NewsHour'], I believe, and some of the interviews that you were able to--we talked about Hosni Mubarak, I think, last time and, and some other people that you interviewed. I can't think of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know, when I went to the 'NewsHour,' it was 'MacNeil/Lehrer Report' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour']. It was the half-hour, one subject tonight, and it was the most unique news program on television, where you just took one side and dissected it and had different points of view on it. And it was renowned for that. I mean later, Ted Koppel started doing 'Nightline,' but 'The MacNeil/Lehrer'--MacNeil and Lehrer, Robert MacNeil and James, Jim Lehrer pioneered this. And that's where I--that's where I started. And then eventually, it moved to an hour, and that was when I began to travel more and be able to travel more around the world. You know, we'd cover the Arab-Israeli peace talks. We--in two or three places, a couple of places, and, you know, and the, and the program just continued to evolve doing pioneering things that weren't done on television. I mean, they like to say they dared to be boring, but they also dared to make talk interesting. And we used to do series of conversations with people. I did conversations on race relations. I did conversations on peace. I did conversations on just a whole range of, of things where you just sat down with one person and talked about whatever they were, their specialty was. And you'd do a series of those, you know, the Rodney King question, "Can we all get along?" you know. We did, we did those. And that was, that was great. And as I said, that took me around the world. Story_ID: 317699 Speaker 1: First time I went to South Africa was for the 'NewsHour.' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour'] We did a five-part series called 'Apartheid's People.' This was in the really dark and violent days of mid-'80s [1980s]. There was a state-of-emergency in effect. The government was losing its grip on the apartheid system, as the call from the outside, from the African National Congress, was to make the country ungovernable. And this was slowly happening. And there were a confluence of forces that were coming together, iso--South Africa was isolated, and Mandela [Nelson Mandela] is often--once he got out of prison, referred to it as the poll--it was, in those days, it as the polecat of the world. I mean, there was surreptitious support from Western governments that was supposed to be isolating it. But essentially, it was isolated, and I think that--I may have made this point--but just like in the American South, when segregation became untenable for business, that's when the business people said, "You gotta change this thing." And that's what happened, in part, in South Africa. There was the agitation inside and outside. There was the pressure from the business community, because they were being isolated. And eventually, the thing ended, but in '85 [1985], it was in a death throes. But it was fighting--I hesitate to say the good fight. It was fighting its fight for survival. So, they were pulling out the stops. And our mission was to do something that gave people a deeper understanding of what the issues were about, because in those days, television essentially covered--as they continued to do--everything in black and white. I mean, it's good versus evil, and, of course, that was the paradigm for the Cold War too, which made television and media so--it made it easy for them because there were the bad guys, the communists, and the good guys, the democrats, and then, you know, there were the bad guys, the white apartheid regime, and the good guys, the black oppressed majority. But we wanted to go deeper than that, to peel away the layers of it. We wanted to get to know Afrikaner and, and we wanted to know why they felt the way they did and how they felt they could justify this kind of abuse. I'm doing an oral history of the Legal Resources Centre, which was a public interests law firm that was started in those days--and earlier than '85 [1985]. But the point that one of the founders of the Legal Resources Centre, who just left as the president of the Constitutional Court [Constitutional Court of South Africa], appointed by Mandela as the first, by the way. His name is Arthur Chaskalson. And he made the point that it, you know, it's interesting even in--and very similar to the American South, where people who made those oppressive--who were oppressive and discriminating against the people, nevertheless, did it within the context of the law. It was very important for them to be seen to be acting legally. So Jim Crow laws that oppressed black people were done within the confines of the law, and so was apartheid done within the confines of laws that prevented black people from coming into cities or had them--made them carry passes, and so on. And, and then underlying the law that the white oppressors put into place was a belief that they were--they had a divine right to rule. They could cite you passages in the Bible that proved that whites were superior to blacks, and that they should be ruling over these black masses. But we wanted, we, we didn't know that because what was being shown on television was white brutality, state security forces beating up black people, and black people being victimized and oppressed. And we wanted to know more about those. Story_ID: 317700 Speaker 1: We [at 'The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour'] wanted to know more about the broad--rather than the, the sort of broad brush strokes, and almost caricatures, after a point. We wanted to know who these people were. So we chose five [interviewees for 'Apartheid's People']. And one was an Afrikaner by the name of Yani Leroux [ph.], L-E-R-O-U-X. And he was part of winegrowers association [Cooperative Winegrowers' Association], winemakers called KWV [Kooperatieve Wijnbouwers Vereniging van Suid-Afrika], for Victor. And he was fairly well off, lived in a lovely Cape Dutch house down in the wine country in an area called Pete [ph.] Paarl [South Africa], P-A-A-R-L. And they opened up their house to us and we invited--had them invite--he invited friends over. And they had what they call a braai, B-R-A-A-I, which is a barbeque in South Africa and other Afrikaners. And it was very social. But we filmed all of it, because we wanted to get at their human-ness. And he obliged us. I mean, they told us that--Yani, I remember specifically said that, you know, "We don't believe--we think that ultimately, black people should have the vote, but right now South Africa is first-world and third-world. And those people in the third world aren't up to white standards just yet." That was the justification then. That was kind of the rationalization, because it was dawning on them that what they were doing was totally wrong. But they still rationalized the oppression in this way. And we got to know them, their children, their wife. They, they were fascinated by me as an American and as a black, because they always liked to say, "Well, you're not like our blacks." But they couldn't quite figure out where I was coming from and who I was and what this color meant, 'cause in South Africa, someone my color was regarded as above the darker blacks, but not quite white. But then I was an American, so that just threw 'em off completely. So they just talked openly and freely, and it was, it was good, because we got into the psyche of this Afrikaner person who also felt persecuted and had, in fact, been by the British. But here were the persecuted, now persecuting. So, you know, it's interesting. And so we did our, our Yani. We did a young guy by the name of Cyril Ramaphosa, R-A-M-A-P-H-O-S-A, who at that time was a young lawyer who had just been appointed head of the National Union of Mines [sic. National Union of Mineworkers], which was the most powerful of the black organizations in the country. They, they, you know, they were the backbone actually of the South African economy in a sense, because they were the ones who worked down in the mines. They got no--well, they got wages, probably better than the average South African, but still, nothing comparable to the resources that were coming out of the ground that they were digging in. And so, they became a formidable force against apartheid. And he was, at that point, heading the National Union of Mines, which is a coalition of all the mines. And we followed him around to the mines, and we followed him on his union organizing. We got to know some of the, kind of, forces that he was dealing with. And as it turns out, you know, subsequently, many years, fast-forward to '90 [1990], he was walk--he walked with Mandela [Nelson Mandela] as he walked out of prison. He had become--well, he was a leader in the anti-apartheid struggle. He helped to draft the Constitution [Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996]. He, he participated in all those negotiations that led to a negotiated settlement as opposed to violent conflict. And he's now one of the top business people in the country, often touted as a potential presidential candidate. But then he was just doing, you know, what they were all doing in a way, in his area. So we had a good profile of him and those kinds of aspirations. Story_ID: 317701 Speaker 1: Then we had a young--we, we almost--it was like a profile of a township, although we focused on this one woman in a black township [of South Africa]. You know, those townships were cordoned off so that you could have easy access to shut them down, if you needed to--that is, the regime, white regime. And we did this woman called Theresa, who had been savagely beaten by the security police [South African Police]. Those who were--who were black, by the way. Those ones were because the white regime had its black agents doing their bidding. And we told her story [in 'Apartheid's People'], which was the story of how people could just be arbitrarily beaten and tortured and singled out and the implications of that for the movement. So that was a powerful story. And then we did another one with a young guy who's a poet, Mtutuzeli Matshoba and he, he was a poet, but he also had a job downtown, working in a white advertising firm. And, and during the day, he and his white colleagues, you know, got along just like any people working together in a company. But the difference was that at night, the whites stayed in the city, Johannesburg [South Africa], and he got on the train and went back to his poor, black township. So that was a very good thing, because here you had a guy who's middle class, had all the values, the education and everything else, but he was still, by law, confined to live in that township. That was very rich. Speaker 2: How did he live in the township? Speaker 1: He lived in a little tiny house that, you know, like, like the little, tiny matchbox houses, all over the township, you know, eight or nine people living in one little crowded space. And-- Speaker 2: Did he earn as much as his white counterparts? Speaker 1: Probably not, no, I don't think he did. They respected him. They got along, they chit-chatted over coffee, you know, tea breaks and stuff. But there was this wall. And so we did those inside, and then I wanted to do a black person in exile. And everybody I had talked to said, oh, the one you wanna talk to is Thabo Mbeki whose father, Govan Mbeki, went to prison with the, with Mandela [Nelson Mandela]. He was in Robben Island [South Africa] as well. He had been a historian and a writer and conscious activist; communist. And I thought that would be perfect. So we finished inside the country. We had some amazing experiences during that period. But then we, we flew to Lusaka [Zambia] where the ANC [African National Congress] was in base, where all the Thabo-ists set up shop. Mbeki was then the, I think he was the international spokesman--he was in the international department of the African National Congress. And when we approached him--I mean, they were easy to approach. It was amazing, because, you know, the regime was always sending its agents into these places where they were exiled and blowing them up and otherwise doing terrible things to them. But we got to him, and he was very modest. You know, their offices were extremely modest. He was one of those who was broadcasting--they had a radio station, Radio Freedom, and he would broadcast back into the townships to make the townships on call--calling on the masses to make the townships ungovernable. And initially, he tried to dissuade me from interviewing him. He said, "Oh, no, interview this one, that one and the other." I said, "No, I want you." And it was tough, because even though he agreed, he then had to go off on some mission to Zimbabwe and something went wrong at the border. And he came back, and that delayed us a day. We were on a deadline. We had to get to London [England] to start editing, and, of course, this was '85 [1985]. There were no faxes, no mobile phones, none of that. Story_ID: 317702 Speaker 1: So, we waited for him [Thabo Mbeki] for two days. And then we start saying, "When is he coming back?" We had no idea. So we started meeting the planes from Zimbabwe, and there he came, I think it was the third day. And he looked at us on the tarmac. He says, "You people still here?" We said--and I said, "And furthermore, we're not leaving your side until we do this interview." He said, "But, no, you know, I have to go see my chief, Oliver Tambo, and you can't go." I say, "I'll go with you." He said, "No, no, you can't go to his house." And I said, "Well, we then have a problem, because I'm not leaving your side." So he said, "Okay, I'll tell you what to do." So he said, "Come with me." So he took us to this apartment. It was me, a white South African who was the camera producer and another young white guy, and I don't I had another producer with me at the time. We get to this apartment and we said, "Where are we?" And it was his apartment, modest, you know, apartment. And the white South African, a guy named Cliff Bestall, B-E-S-T-A-L-L, was petrified, because he was, his head was in the right place, his heart was in the right place, but he came out of that system. But he said, "Oh, my God, I don't wanna know where Thabo Mbeki lives, because if I go back, and they torture me, I'll tell 'em." And they had--as I said, they'd had agents coming in there, you know, doing nefarious deeds. Speaker 2: This is serious. Speaker 1: It was serious. But, and, you know, Mbeki just took us there and got a book out, a bottle of scotch and said, "Here, help yourself, and I'll be back." Well, I was exhausted, because we had been working flat out for over a month. And it was hot, and so some of the guys started drinking the scotch. I lay down in the middle of the floor and went to sleep, and two or three hours later, he came back. "You people still here?" "Yes, and furthermore, sit down." We had this amazing interview that gave us the, the nut of what we needed to tell the story of African National Congress and its crusade against apartheid. Story_ID: 317703 Speaker 1: So there were five parts [to 'Apartheid's People'], and then we flew to London [England] and edited there. First time I ever--first and last time I ever took the Concorde [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde]. We, we had a set schedule to get on the air. So we got on the Concorde, and I didn't even have a chance to enjoy it, because I had to write the whole way back to America. And, of course, the Concorde was three hours from London. It was amazing. We got back and got the pieces on the air, and a few months later, we heard we won the Peabody [George Foster Peabody Awards], 'cause it was really the first kind of in-depth look. I forget how long the pieces were, but they were consid--of considerable length. And that was the beauty of, and is, of PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and NPR [National Public Radio], public radio. You know, they, they give you the time to tell a story, and, of course, I got totally spoiled. I mean, later I went to CNN and various other places and you just don't get that kind of time to really tell the story. And I, and, and the whole time I was working for CNN, I felt--I got good stories and I got space. I did a story on, I did a documentary on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], an hour-long documentary. But for the most part, we were sort of confined--I mean, and I was always in trouble. They, I think they didn't like me for this, because I was always pushing the envelope to three-minute pieces. And they, they--I remember they sent me to Kosovo. And the first piece I did, I think, was three minutes long. And, oh, editors hit the ceiling. Ultimately, that's why I left. They didn't like what I was doing. I didn't like what they were doing. And we just didn't see eye-to-eye. But I think I really got spoiled because I'd worked for The New York Times. When I worked for NBC, it was a special investigative unit that probed--it was called 'News Four Probe.' So every place I had been, I had been in a situation where you could actually get your teeth into a story and tell it from different angles. So while I got along at CNN, and I think I did some nice things, excuse me, it wasn't the fit for me, given my background and so ultimately, we kind of parted ways, somewhat unhappily because, you know, I just felt that they didn't appreciate what I was doing. And I wasn't going to compromise anymore. And I even--I mean there were even times when the criticisms that they made of my work were, I thought, totally unjustified, you know, script problems. Well, script problems, yeah. My piece was three minutes long (laughter) as opposed to two and a half or two. And it was--the time was getting tighter and tighter, you know. They wanted shorter, snappier pieces. Well, that's fine, if that's what you wanna do, but it, it just, for me, betrayed my own sense of the kind of reporting that I wanted to do. So I was out of there. And, and now, working for NPR, I mean it's just a dream. I only do it part time, but the time that I put into it, I think is worth it, because you come back out of it with--like I just finished a twelve minute--a five-part piece series on poverty in Africa. And each one of 'em is twelve minutes long. That would never happen, or it wouldn't have happened when I was at CNN. It might be changing, but in a real sense, I got spoiled by quality, quality programs like the 'NewsHour' ['PBS NewsHour']. Story_ID: 317704 Speaker 1: Yeah, was that--would I be right in saying that I think you traveled more than anybody else on the 'NewsHour' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour']? I mean you, as a correspondent (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the-- Speaker 1: --you were out there. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I traveled a lot. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, there was a interesting story I was reading about your interview with Haile Mengistu Mariam [sic. Mengistu Haile Mariam] in Ethiopia (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That was a--that was a coup. That was as much of a coup as the interview with Assad [Bashar al-Assad] and that was a really chilling interview, the one with Haile Mengistu Mariam because he was a cold, calculating person. And, you know, even when I had to ask him, I mean, you know, he was known as the Butcher. I mean, he killed thousands of people, and tortured and just had this, what they called the Red Terror. Unapologetic he was about it, too. But his opponents were people who, really, were treated quite brutally. And so I mean they kept putting this off and putting this off, but--and we finally said, "Well, look, you know, we gotta go." We, we had a commitment, when we went, that he would consider it. I had gone through some channels of people, back channels, and then it seemed like--I don't know. It just wasn't gonna happen. So we said, "Well, look, we're really disappointed, but we're gonna leave on the twelve o'clock flight today." And a couple of hours before we were to leave, they said, "Okay, come on over to the palais." And we went. So I had to be very careful, because it was the room--I think we did the interview in the room that he is alleged to have mowed down half of his cabinet at one point. And so, when I got to the question about the being, being his being the, you know, the Butcher, I said, "Well," (laughter)--I wanted to get outta there alive. I mean, I probably was being overdramatic, but I was--everybody was on edge, 'cause the guy was brutal. I said, "You know, there are many people who call you a butcher. You know, they say you've done this, this and this and this. What's your response to that? Are they right?" And he looked me in the eye with that cold, hard stare that he had, and he said, "Who me? I wouldn't hurt a fly." And I think that that interview is probably one of the things that I'm most remembered for when I go around places. There's no Ethiopian in America alive who hasn't seen that interview. I think they all--they, they sent it around. They must have, you know, made copies of it. I can go to Washington, D.C. now, get in a cab and I say, take me to Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.]. The cab driver might not have been paying attention, and he's sort of, trying to put that voice together. And then I see--it, it--I mean, this is standard operating procedure. It happens all the time. Look in the mirror, look, then he says, "Ah," and they even say it the same way. "Ah, you are the one who interviewed Mengistu. You are the one he told he wouldn't hurt a fly." They all have that down. Even I was just in Ethiopia recently, interviewing--well, speaking with the prime minister [Meles Zenawi Asres] about their treatment of journal--ill treatment of journalists. And everybody went and said, "Oh, yes, you're the one." It was such an absurd response. It, it just sticks in the memory. But these Ethiopians--who were exile because of this horrendous regime, I mean they just--it just, they just couldn't believe it. And, you know, they--it, but it was, you--it was on the record. Story_ID: 317705 Speaker 1: And, of course, he's [Mengistu Haile Mariam] still--you know, they, they did with him, what they've--they're trying to do, tried to do with Charles Taylor from Liberia. They--he's in exile in Zimbabwe, still alive. And, you know, there's a big debate now about what do you do with these guys. If, if this is the best way to get rid of 'em, to give 'em exile somewhere, and let them live out their days away from the people. But then, there are others who want punishment. And that's been the continuing argument in South Africa, you know. Should they have had the Truth Commission [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] which allowed the perpetrators of horrendous human rights abuses to get away with it, so far. But it avoided serious violent conflict, or should you have had Nuremberg-style trials. I mean the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was, if you come and tell the truth, you have the option--you have a possibility of having amnesty if you can demonstrate that the horrendous things that you did to people were done in the name of politics. Very few of the whites came forward. None of those at the top came forward. So there's this big debate now. Should we have done it that way? But at the same time, I mean South African has become a model for so many countries to move from a potentially destabilizing situation to at least a fragile piece, because of that kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that's a tough, that's a tough (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tough call. Speaker 2: --subject. When African Americans here discuss what happened over there, we all--I think most of us tend to think that the people that perpetrated all that violence against those people should be punished and--but the other sense is that we wouldn't know what happened if it hadn't been for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, people speaking in their own--you know, telling the story of what--first-person accounts of what they did. And I don't know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I guess, I guess it's a question of justice, and in my book, the 'New News Out of Africa[: Uncovering Africa's Renaissance', Charlayne Hunter-Gault] one of the people I talked to is Frank Chikane, who is now the chief of staff for the president--and by the way, that Thabo Mbeki that I interviewed in Lusaka [Zambia] (laughter) ultimately became the president of the country [South Africa] and one of the leaders of the African renaissance on the continent. But Chikane tells the story of being poisoned. They didn't--he got, kept getting sick, and they didn't know why he was getting sick. He almost died, and, you know, they had this thing called Project Coast [Chemical and Biological Warfare program] which came up with all these horrendous ways of torturing and killing people and sometimes ways that were undetectable. And he was traveling out of the country, and they put--as--when his suitcase went through the conveyor belt to get on the plane, there were agents over there. And they opened it up and put poison powders in his underwear that were undetectable. And they were suppressing his respiratory system. And he, he fell ill twice violently, and the second time was in Wisconsin, I think, and there was a white woman doctor who, they had looked, they tried everything, every test, and finally, she sent for his suitcase and to bring everything that's in your suitcase that you had with you at all times. And they found this, this microscopically, almost microscopically undetectable poison. And he says he knows who did it, because that came out during the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. One of the guys out there, I forget his name, "Gert" [Nico Palm], sort of absurd. And they won't come forward. And you see now, those who didn't tell the truth in that process are now open to, to criminal prosecution, although those things haven't happened very often. And he had said that he's willing to recommend leniency or even absolution if they would--people just wanna know the truth, you know. Story_ID: 317706 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the--your recent trip to Zimbabwe. I think it was like a couple of years ago, right, when they had the world cup cricket championship [2003 ICC Cricket World Cup]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've been in and out of Zimbabwe a lot, and, and increasingly over the years, the government's become much more repressive of its own people and of journalists in general. And they're very selective about who they let in. They don't let the--the BBC is totally banned. And every now and then, they let me in, but the more it tightened its noose on information, the more difficult it was. And we couldn't get in just on general principles. So the world cricket cup was, was being played, and they had a game, had games there. And I got--I signed up--I didn't know a cricket from a wicket from thicket, but, you know, I read up a little bit on cricket (laughter) in case they asked--of course, they didn't. And I actually went and covered a cricket match, but it was the match in which one of their key black players, a guy named Henry Olonga-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and another white player whose name I can't recall right now. Speaker 1: Is it Andrew Flower [Andy Flower]-- Speaker 2: Andrew Flowers, yeah. Speaker 1: Yep, yeah. Speaker 2: And they, you know, wore black armbands in protests for the repression that was going on in the country. So it ended up that I didn't really lie. I did cover the cricket (laughter), and I did actually manage to get into some of the politics, and then, you know, spend a little time on the cricket field and then sort of went around seeing what else was going on in the country. And it's so sad, because I've tracked Zimbabwe from the time that--I mean, it was, it's a beautiful country. Harare [Zimbabwe], even now, though inflation in 2006 is over 1000 percent, the Harare itself is still clean and pretty, and, and it's a lovely city. In fact, over the years, I've been to a lot of post-colonial cities in the post-colonial era that, because of lack of resources, et cetera, et cetera, have just, you know, gone way down. Well, Harare always managed to keep itself looking beautiful. But those are just appearances, and what I have been able to document is how the cont--one of the continent's breadbaskets that used to feed itself, and everybody else around, has now become its bask--a basket case. It's just tragic to see it. Story_ID: 317707 Speaker 1: And it's difficult to explain what has happened to Robert Mugabe, the liberator of, of his people, or certainly a key liberation figure [in Zimbabwe]. What's happened to his mind and how he can justify the kind of vicious treatment that he has unleashed on his people, even those he supported, to go in and take over white farms, often violently. Speaker 2: Yeah, just to put this in perspective, when he took over, people, many people, black people around the world who, following this and supporting him thought that he would redistribute the land, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --and he didn't seem to do it. In fact, friends of mine that came back were upset that he was living in Ian Smith's palace and Ian Smith was out in the countryside in an estate enjoying himself-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: --instead of being put up on charges or, you know, in jail or something. Speaker 1: Well, you know, that could have been another one of those deals where (clearing throat) to, to keep the, keep violence, keep down violence. I don't know how they ended up with that compromise, but, you know, the country was doing fine, and he did do some good things. I mean, they invested in education and you--the Zimbabweans are some of the most literate, articulate South--Africans on the continent. In fact, they come to South Africa, and there's a lot of resentment, because they're so much more educationally prepared, I mean, than--and articulate than a lot of the poor South Africans who--for a variety of reasons. But he invested in education, to be sure. In fact, even Zimbabwe today, as bad as it is, in a report in 2000 by the United Nations, AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] thing, AIDS project, Zimbabwe was--had stabilized, was doing pretty well. And I asked a Zimbabwean about it, and he said it was because they started early and were very comprehensive. But, you know, there's this other side of Mugabe that is treacherous. He's brill--he's a brilliant tactician, but, you know, at the last election, I was there--and, you know, they see my stories on TV. So they know that when I come to cover cricket, I do other things. I, in fact, I took a eighteen hour train ride when a bunch of illegal immigrants from---to South Africa were being deported. And we spent the night talking to the people on the train. And, by the time we got to the Beitbridge, which is the Zimbabwe border with South Africa, several hundred had already jumped from the moving train. And the question was, you know, how could conditions be so bad in a country that people would jump from a moving train? But it wasn't even just the moving train that we learned about. I mean, women were in that train, young women, and, and they--and even to get into South Africa had to cross these crocodile-infested waters. They had to come up against soldiers who would rape them sometimes, or--and be otherwise brutal. And so that's real desperation, whether it's political, economic or a combination of the two. And I wrote that story. And, in fact, they took me to task in South--in Zimbabwe about that when I went to cover the elections, says, "Oh, you know, you ride and you're telling stories." And I said, "What did I tell that was wrong? And, and you had every opportunity to refute it, but you refused to be interviewed. You refuse to allow me into the country." Speaker 2: I heard a song by Thomas Mapfumo called 'Politics Has Been Engraved' [ph.] or something like that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know, it's just-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's really sad to see the--and, and it's becoming even more brutal and vicious. You know, the difficulty I think that a lot of Africans had in condemning some of Mugabe's practices was that he, you know, the land was the issue. Now, he didn't around to doing it 'til it got politically necessary to do. And, you know, he--so that made it difficult that he was addressing an issue, but what I started to say before, addressing an issue that needed addressing, albeit late, but even some of those people that he used to go in and violently take over these white farms--and I've been involved in some of that, when the guys come, and they're really scary. I went to a white farm, and these guys came, and they were gonna attack us. And the person who was with us told us, just get in the car as quietly and quickly as possible and drive like a bat outta hell, which we--and they followed us. But they were gonna beat us up. And there was nobody--I mean the police were there, but they were on the side of the government. But, but my point is that a lot of those people that they used as kind of shock troops to go in and take over those farms. They subsequently removed a lot of them too, relocated them to barren places and put in their own cronies, you know, their generals and people they wanted to politically reward and, and help to maintain the status quo. Story_ID: 317708 Speaker 1: So, there're a lot of people who think that Zimbabwe could come back relatively quickly if they had a change of leaders. But, and, and probably the people are very industrious, but, you know, I've been there where I've seen lines of eleven, twelve thousand people standing to get food, because they couldn't, you know, they just didn't have the means to farm. And then there was the drought on top of everything else. Old man took me and showed me what his family eats: grass they boil in water. So, you know, that's been a real eye-opener and a real challenge for me. I was detained for several hours at the last election in 2005 for some bogus reason. And that was a bit scary, because they're very schizophrenic. I mean, one minute they can be really nice, and then just in an instant turn vicious. But, you know--and the other thing I wanna say is how support I got and have always gotten from the local journalists, you know, who are still trying to tell their stories, even though the government has shut down most of their papers. But anyway, I mean, these are kind of rich experiences that I've had, you know, covering the continent. Story_ID: 317709 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were with 'MacNeil/Lehrer' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer Report'; 'PBS NewsHour'] until '97 [1997] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and then I went-- Speaker 1: --and went-- Speaker 2: --to NPR [National Public Radio]. Speaker 1: NPR. Speaker 2: --as the chief Africa correspondent. In the year that--I got all over the continent that year and covered the end of the Truth Commission [Truth and Reconciliation Commission], covered Nigeria's elections, covered just a whole range of things. And at the end of that we got a Peabody [George Foster Peabody Award] for Africa coverage, our second--my second (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have much interaction with African American groups that are interested in Africa and, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here in the states? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I get invited-- Speaker 1: Seems like you'd be a tremendous resource to people that are interested in that. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I get invited to speak, but a lot of it is at colleges and universities; predominantly white ones, at that. I finally started being invited to the black, to black schools [HBCUs], and I got--I had lots of honorary degrees, but most of 'em were from white schools. And finally I got a beautiful degree from, New Orleans [Louisiana], the one-- Speaker 1: Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Dillard, Dillard-- Speaker 1: Dillard, okay. Speaker 2: Michael Lomax was, in fact, it was Ray Charles and David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] who was surgeon general and myself. It was Ray's last, kind of hoorah. He died, I think the next year or so. So, I go to some black schools, and I think that, you know, it's there that I--I enjoy all of it because I enjoy--excuse me. I enjoy engaging with young people. And I think that, you know, to the extent that I can contribute to raising their awareness of the global universe, I think it's very important, because, for example, you can be in Zimbabwe or you can be in Malawi or some of these--excuse me, sorry, sorry--some of these places that Americans would consider backward. And they know more about our country than we know about it ourselves. Many of 'em speak more than one language. In South Africa, you have eleven official languages, and most of the black people who might not have formal education, but they still speak a variety of those languages-- Story_ID: 317710 Speaker 1: How influential is the African American experience in South Africa, I mean popular culture and such, and, I mean is it--do we really-- Speaker 2: Well, South Africa is undergoing a transition, and even a transformation. And so there is a lot of ex--American culture exported there, and it has an impact. I mean, some of what's exported is embarrassing to me, but at any rate, you know, some of the sitcoms that make black people look so silly. But there's a movement now, all over the continent, to reclaim what is theirs and not to be so identified or slavish to American culture. That's gonna be a hard one to challenge, but at the same time, you know, there's young Africans doing their own versions of rap and doing movies like 'Tsotsi' which won the Academy Award [Oscar] in 2006, locally produced movie with a black theme--I mean, an African theme. There's this young woman who--what is her first--her last name is Malefane [Pauline Malefane]. What is her first name? Anyway, she was chosen over a European when they came to--they produced the opera 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet] in South Africa, and they had gotten all these lusty South African voices. So when this European soprano they had to do the 'Carmen' role, tried to sing with them, it just didn't work. And so they plucked this Pauline Malefane; they plucked her out of the chorus. And she became Carmen for the opera. And then it was turned into a movie ['U-Carmen eKhayelitsha'] in which she starred, and it was done in isiZulu, the language, her language. It was beautiful, and, and so you have a move afoot to ex--for Africans, South Africans, in particular, to express themselves in their own idioms, in their own ways. And you also have a move afoot of African journalists, media people, to start their own networks so that they can tell their own stories from their own perspectives. A lot of this is like our struggle in the--after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, and the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] report that led eventually to the integration of American newsrooms. But you find many similar arguments, because the argument in Kerner was that this, how could this, these riots have erupted without us knowing that they were coming? Well, they had nobody in those communities to, to report--reporting on the simmering rage that was there, against the conditions under which people were living. And I think that to a certain extent, there's a similarity in Africa. It's not just the rage. It's portraying people in their totality that I think they wanna see more of, and think that they can do a better job, doing it themselves. There are limits. The resourced are limited, the training is still limited. There're some stellar journalists doing great work, but they'll be the first to say that they need access. Some of 'em don't even have computers, or the computers are so old they, falling apart. But there is this yearning to capture their own stories and tell them to the world, as opposed to having themselves portrayed from the point of view of Westerners with certain preconceived notions about who and what Africans are and what they do. Story_ID: 317711 Speaker 1: So you're still reporting part time now for NPR [National Public Radio]? You're--you went to CNN for a stint (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a bureau chief for CNN for a little over seven years, traveling all over the continent. And I left there, finished my book ['New News Out of Africa: Uncovering Africa's Renaissance,' Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and took on some freelance articles. I want to be in a position now to do consistent, quality, in-depth work and make choices based on what I think is important, or at least what the universe there yields. And I'm gonna be interview Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the president of Liberia for an Essence special, a special issue on the most powerful black women in the world. And that's very exciting, and it gives me time to--I mean, it'll be 2,500 words. That's dream time. I've done things for O [O, The Oprah Magazine]. I did a wonderful piece--wonderful, because of the young woman who is battling the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] scourge in her country in the most creative way. And she's, at the time, she was seventeen or eighteen and something like half of the girls in her age group were HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive. But everybody, whether you are infected or not, you, you--AIDS somehow is in everybody I--in Africa practically is, is affected by the AIDS epidemic. And so that was a story of real heroism on her part, of trying to get her young peers to be aware of the dangers and try to avoid them and also to be sympathetic to those young people who have lost parents, who are orphans. She did some amazing things. So I mean, I'm, I'm able to get my hands into some deep stuff in a deep way, and that's what I want to continue to do. Story_ID: 317712 Speaker 1: For so many of us who were, knew what was going on during the '60s [1960s], Africa presented such promise, you know, and new presidents emerging, new countries emerging, people like Lumumba [Patrice Lumumba] and, you know, heroic figures, and it just seemed like the whole, the future was just wide open in Africa. And nowadays, with the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] pandemic and sometimes incomprehensible violence, it seems to us, and we look across. There used to be Communists versus the West, or whatever, but now, we don't even know who's who, you know, and people are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know, but that, but you see, I think that's a--that perspective is, is, is hostage to the way in which the continent is reported. To be sure, the post-colonial era did not live up to the promise it made, and which had also its roots in the Cold War. The West can't be excluded from blame in the colonial, post-colonial project going south, as it were, because, you know, they propped up people as long as they were anti-Communists. It didn't matter how they behaved towards their people, how much money the siphoned off from the national coffers, people like Mobutu Sese Seko and others, you know, they helped kill Lumumba, the West. And the West even helped to incarcerate, you know, Nelson Mandela, who now is the darling of everybody in the world. But the West regarded him as a terrorist, and they provided intelligence to the apartheid regime that helped to put him in prison. So those seeds for the failure of colonialism were sown, you know, in this early days and continued. And in those days, just before, just as the colonial era was, was ending, Harold Macmillan, British prime minister, talked about, in South Africa, in fact, in Cape Town [South Africa], and before the white parliament, talked about the winds of change blowing across Africa, which heralded the end of colonialism. Well, you know, that, as I said, went--the project went sour, but now there's a second wind, and Africans are coming to the forefront in a new--what promises, holds out the promise--let's put it that way, of a new era of greater accountability. Story_ID: 317713 Speaker 1: You have mechanisms now in place, unlike anything that's ever existed before where, prior to now, borders were sacrosanct. You would do anything within your country and count on nobody outside, African, other Africans, coming in there and saying anything about it. Well, now, with the African Union and with new rules of the road, like peer review and, and where Africans actually will go into another country, and assess their governance, their economic management, et cetera, it holds out the promise of a new day. And we don't, we don't--you know, we don't know how that's going to go, but many of the conflicts on a country have now--on the continent have now been resolved by Africans themselves. The number of wars that were being fought in Africa has dramatically declined by virtue of the intervention of Africans themselves. I covered the talks that went on forever, it seemed, in a very fancy South African resort among the warring factions in the Democratic Republic of Congo. And South Africa took a strong lead and paid all the costs to keep them there for I don't know how many days, but it was a very long time until they came to an agreement. And Mbeki [Thabo Mbeki] and Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo] and Bouteflika [Abdelaziz Bouteflika] from Algeria, and Abdoulaye Wade from Senegal, have all been in the forefront of trying to change the dynamic now so that, in part, so Africans can, can re--can jump start this process that actually began when colonialism ended. Now, it needs a new, a second wind. And, and with a calculation that if they get their economic and political houses in order, the West will contribute its part, because they should, because they helped contribute to the conditions that exist today. And a lot of people wanna forget that. So everybody's got a role to play--the Africans themselves, the West--in trying to bring about a new day, a renaissance on the continent. I think it's possible. You know, I mean, I hope I'm not being too, looking at this through rose-colored glasses. I don't think I am, but I have been in these villages and places where you have a vibrant, emerging civil society; people who wanna see a change. They wanna see--you sometimes get in an argument. "Well, you know, is America-style democracy right for Africa?" Well, I say, "Hey, don't even call it that. Let's don't call it democracy if that's what you think is gonna be the problem. But let's have a system where there's a respect for human rights. There's a respect for life. There's a condemnation, ongoing, of corruption, and, and those kind of--I don't care what you call it. Just freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom to live." Call it what you want, but let's have those principles in these countries. I'm very supportive of the African journalists, and I think that they are making a way often out of no way. At the same time--so that's the good news, the new news. At the same time, you have governments from the Gambia, all across the continent that are still suppressing freedom of speech. They even--some of them, like in Zimbabwe, have laws against criticizing the president. So, if you say something that's critical, even if it's, if it's--you can defend it, and it's justifiable and everything, you stand to go to jail. But you have this generation of journalists who are willing to do that, who are willing to fight--and, and even, unfortunately, it's still the case that they may even be in a situation where they could be killed for trying to, to tell the truth. But you have this commitment, on the part of many of them, to do that. So, you know, for lack of a better term, its democratization. I've called it baby steps to democracy, and you, you find the fragility, a vulnerability and all of that, but there is a second wind of change blowing across the continent. And it's very exciting to be there. I mean, I just hope that, you know, ten years, twenty years from now, we won't look back and, as we had--now have to do on colonial--end of colonialism, and say, well, you know, they--but I don't think that's the case. I just think there's a new dynamic in the world, and a lot of it's gonna depend on leadership, both inside the continent and outside, and commitment and political will, and voices speaking out for the good things as well as the, what I call the four Ds of the African apocalypse: death, disease, disaster and despair (laughter). Story_ID: 317714 Speaker 1: Do you have a project in the future that you are working on that you want to--is there some special project that--ahead of you right now? Speaker 2: No, you know, I've finished this five-part series on poverty ['Portraits in Poverty'], and I think that it has sort of crystalized my thinking about some of the things I'd like to look at in the future. I mean, the face of poverty in Africa is a woman, or a girl child. And you have these millennium development goals that by 2015, they wanna cut poverty in half. They wanna have an equal number of girls in primary school at least, you know, things like that. But when you, when you go into this carefully, the poorest of the poor happen to be women. And so, I think I'm gonna use a lot of my resources to look at these issues that affect women and girls. I was just at a conference in Jordan sponsored by the Children's Defense Fund and Queen Rania [Rania al Abdullah] of Jordan and their family institution, their government institution that looks at the family. And they had a lot of experts, and, of course, it was consistent. What they were talking about was what I found. The rate of maternal mortality, mothers dying in childbirth, is unconscionable. In--I'm told in Uganda, it's a thousand per hundred thousand births. In the, in the Western world, it's like two or three, maybe eight at the most. And, and this is--they were looking for a motto or a slogan that they could put into this campaign. It's a global forum for women and children to decide a strategy for working on some of these things, and I said, "Save the mothers, save the nation." Mozambique, infant mortality, that's another one. And Mozambique actually has had a reduction in infant mortality, because they have trained midwives and traditional healers to do sanitary births, and so there's a lot to be learned from those experiences. But you've got to factor in AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] as a crucial variable in affecting everything that exist on the continent. Poverty is the overarching problem, as Thabo Mbeki said some years ago. But AIDS is sideswiping every gain that Africans are making and something has to be done. Story_ID: 317715 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today, and you can frame it anyway you want, the black community here and in Africa or South Africa or here and, you know, however way you want to frame it. Speaker 2: You know, at the end of the struggle against colonialism in Mozambique, I think they had this phrase that became one of the phrases of the struggle for equal justice and human rights all over the world, a luta continua. And the struggle does continue. I, I don't know if it's a matter of just human nature that, where people, some of group of people is always trying to oppress some other group. But I don't think that we can forget our history. We mustn't forget our history, because it's, it's almost a cliche. I mean, Frederick Douglass said it; there can be, you know, no progress without struggle. And we've come a long way, black people, in our struggle for equal justice and equal rights and human rights. But it is still in the nature of people who have oppressed, or come from oppressors, to wanna oppress. And I just think that we have to do everything within our power to ensure that each successive generation of, of black children understands where they came from, I mean, going way back, and what they have to do to keep moving forward. And I, I think it would be wrong of us if we didn't share these struggles and the things that we had to do to get to where we are and to get them to where they are, if we didn't share that with them, because, what was it Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] used to talk about how black people--this was in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you know--had one foot in the middle class and one foot on a banana peel. You know, it was more eloquent than that, but the banana peel was like, if you slipped on it, you'd be right back where you started from. And, and we've come beyond that. I think that we have a solid group of professional people. In Africa, they're developing professionals, although they're a bit behind, you know, the United States, but it's happening there, as well as here. I was in Zambia many years ago for a conference before apartheid ended, and Kenneth Kaunda was talking about how at the end of colonial--the colonialism, when the British left, they took everything. They took all the papers, all the records. And I think there was one college graduate in the entire country, or maybe one medical doctor, someone miniscule amount, which is the story all over Africa. Now, Americans have been in a better position than that, but--and, and today, you know, this is the progress we can look at because we have a solid middle class. We have a solid upper class. We have people in heads of corporations and heads of banks and heads of media institutions. But we're not everywhere we need to be, and we don't have complete, a complete grip on the levers of power that ensure that we will not continue, in one way or another, to be oppressed at some level or another. On AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], I did a story recently--I mean, I was at a conference on microbicides, the contraception they're trying to work on or the thing they're trying to work on that will help women be more empowered, because they can protect themselves from AIDS, or contracting HIV virus [human immunodeficiency virus]. And the statistics were astounding, that in some inner cities of America, the access to medical care for black women is as bad as it is in Africa. So we need to look at these things, and even though they might not affect us personally, it's like AIDS. You know, as I said earlier, you know, not everybody is infected, but everybody is affected, and we're all affected when the least of us doesn't have access to medical care, doesn't have access to education, doesn't have access to a decent life of dignity. And this is what we have to keep our children vigilant about and have them to know that while it might be nice for them to have a life without care, and just to pursue their own, their history and their heritage demands that they stay engaged, until every single person feels as free as the next. Story_ID: 317716 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? And I think it's funny because I think I've read that you asked Mengistu Mariam [Mengistu Haile Mariam] the same thing (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, no. I don't know. You know, I have been blessed that, you know, that, that I've had just--divine guidance, I suppose. Somebody asked me--actually, it was the chauffeur, the black chauffeur here in Atlanta [Georgia], taking me from one interview to another. And he said, do you feel you were chosen or called, or was it your own choice? Were you--"Did you choose or were you chosen?" I think that's how he put it, 'cause he was talking about University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and the desegregation and so forth. And I said, "That's an interesting question. I think it was a bit of both." You know, I sometimes marvel at the steps I take in the right direction, 'cause I don't know where the guidance came from, you know. And sometimes, it's beyond my own experience. And I don't wanna get too, you know, nee-nee, nah-nah, nu-nu about it, but I am a person of faith, and I think that, you know, that comes from the way I was brought up. My grandmother [Alberta Hunter], my father's mother, was very religious. I often say that he was the preacher, but she was the saint. And like my mother's mother [Frances Wilson Lacin Brown Jones] as well. I mean, they were church people, as most black people of that, you know, generation. Speaker 1: I--just to interject something--I think I read that you met an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister in Zambia that was--that knew your grandfather [Charles Hunter, Sr.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and your father [Charles Hunter, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather was legendary in the State of Florida. He was the presiding elder, but my grandmother is the one who took the time with me, and when I used to--my mother [Althea Hunter] would send me down to visit, stay with them in the summers in Florida. And she would teach me bible verses. And her favorite was the 23rd Psalm, "Ye, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil," and, you know, as a child, your imagination can just run wild about things like that. And I had visions of the shadow of death and the valley and what it was like, and all that. But it, it, it's deep inside of me. And so, you know, like the night I was--they were rioting outside my dormitory [at the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] and throwing bricks and things through the window and shouting, "Kill the nigger," and this, that and the other, you know, I, I think I got through that, having internalized, "Ye, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil," and I think that it's things like that, and some of 'em are almost intangible, that enable you to put one foot in front of the other and often, take the right turn in the road. Story_ID: 317717 Speaker 1: Now, we were, we were on our way--we were on, was it route 20, the other day, and we saw Hamilton Holmes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boulevard [sic. Hamilton E. Holmes Drive], um-hm. Speaker 1: --Boulevard, yeah, right. And so I--it prompts this question. I know there's a Holmes and a Hunter Hall [Holmes-Hunter Academic Building] over at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], but what do you think at this point is your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm too young to be thinking about my legacy. I, I--that would be a tough one, because I've just tried to pursue my passion and do it with dignity, and, and I think I've come out of a community and a family that, you know, they didn't have to tell you to reach back. They showed you, by example, and so, I would hope that, you know, I've had an impact on my children, whether they were biological children or just younger people, to inspire them to live a life of passion and dignity, and of--in some way, large or small, making some contribution that goes beyond yourself. I don't think that this was a conscious choice. And I think it was a part of my upbringing, so I can't say that I did it. We're all a part of a great family of people who passed on their values to their children, and I often say that when they couldn't--our black teachers and preachers and neighbors and family--when they couldn't give us first-class citizenship, they gave us a first-class sense of ourselves. And I would just like to think that somehow I continued that legacy of adding layers of armor to our young people so that they can meet the challenges that face and confront them in such a way that they make a contribution, but also in such a way that they are able to love life and embrace it for all that it has to offer. Story_ID: 317718 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. We haven't really talked that much about it. You have two children, right? Speaker 2: I have a son and a daughter. My son is an actor, Chuma [Chuma Gault]. His name is from the Igbo, and it means God's gift, and I think he's managed to internalize that. And my daughter [Suesan Stovall] is this wonderful, spiritual creature who just has the most magnificent heart. She's a singer. She's working on a CD. She's been working on it for a number of years now, but when it comes out, it's gonna be wonderful. She's writing the music. She's writing the lyrics, and they're beautiful expressions of spirituality and pain and love. And she's also a magnificent artist. Her work has often been compared to Betye Saar's. I think she's the next generation after Betye Saar. And, and they're just wonderful. I feel like when I left the country, they--I left without any real hesitation, because I felt that they were capable of making their own way, and, you know, like every--all young people, they have their ups and downs and, but we maintain good, good contact, and have--they're very supportive of me too. I mean, when I give a graduation speech now, I send it to them first to say, what do you think? And the beauty of them, is that they're totally honest, and I can accept their criticism because it's, it has no agenda other than to make mommy [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] look good, you know. So that's, that's good, and I do the same with them, and I have a wonderfully supportive husband [HistoryMaker Ronald T. Gault] who has always understood that I needed space, my space, to do my thing. I mean, I was a professional when we met, and he was a professional. And, and our paths converge often, I mean, even from the very beginning. He was working for the Justice Department [U.S. Department of Justice], doing community relations work after the '68 [1968] riots, trying to do mediation and conflict resolution. And, of course, I was a journalist involved and interested in all those things. So, so we've often, you know, worked in a way in tandem, complementing, our work complementing. And, and we have a great respect for each other's intellect, and, and, and that's always, that's always helpful. I often say I think we probably would have hated each other in college, 'cause he was everybody's everything, (laughter) and I was, I mean that's Hamp and I--Hamilton Holmes and I, we, you know, we had this healthy competition between us. But, you know, after thirty-some years--thirty-three, thirty-four years of marriage, you know, you work out your competitive--the, the part of your competitive edge that's, that's rancorous or, or potentially disruptive, and you learn how to rein the other one in (laughter), you know, when they've gone a little too far. You learn how to do it without upsetting, you know, most of the time, like maybe a little note here and a little note there. But the critical thing is that we like each other, and we enjoy each other, and, and complement each other, I think, in a, in a great way. And, and I think that, that we have so many young friends--we have friends of all ages in South Africa as well as here. And I think it's partly due to the fact that we just have the same approach to life. We like people. We enjoy life, and, and I think it's, I think it's about as good as it gets (laughter). Story_ID: 317719 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think we need to address before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: No, go ahead (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would think about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], saying just, just say you tried to love somebody (laughter). And, and that's a wonderful thing. I mean, I don't know. I, I just--I don't know. How would I like to be remembered? I don't know. That's a, that's a tough one. I think I'd like to be remembered kindly and as someone who loved people and loved life, and enjoyed doing what I do. I can't, I can't imagine a more fulfilling life, having decided at a very early age that this is what I wanted to do, and then was able to do it. And, of course, there were enablers along the way, people who contributed to my growth and development and nurturing. I'll never forget William Shawn, the editor of The New Yorker who was such a gentle editor, but a wonderful human being who, who left you feeling intact with your product--who, who had a way of, even when he might have taken your piece up one side and down the other, when he finished, it was yours. And so the good lessons that I've learned, that have been useful to me--and I just hope that I've left something behind that, that somebody can learn from and that, and that the people I've written about and reported on will remember me, and those who look at my work will regard it as work that tried to be honest and tried to portray people in ways that were recognizable to themselves. I'd like to think that I contributed something to enabling the world to see people as they are and as they wish to be. And, and when there were things in the way of that, that somehow, I was able to illuminate some of those barriers in a way that enabled people to climb over them..