 Story_ID: 65281 Speaker 1: Hello. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Jennifer Jones, J-E-N-N-I-F-E-R, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: All right, and can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: 9-25-60 [1960]. Speaker 1: And, can you give us your place of birth? Speaker 2: Wichita, Kansas. Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a judge. Speaker 1: A federal judge, state judge, or- Speaker 2: I, currently am a municipal court judge for the city of Wichita. Speaker 1: All right, thank you. What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is, August 29th, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present moment? Speaker 2: We are at the Kansas African American Museum, in Wichita, Kansas. Story_ID: 65282 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you. The first one is, they only require a brief answer. The first question is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh boy, my favorite food would probably be chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I enjoy the Caribbean, Jamaica. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of at this point in time. Story_ID: 65283 Speaker 1: Okay, well let's talk about your beginnings, can you give me the names of your parents, and spell them for us please? Speaker 2: That's okay, my father is Leamon Jones, L-E-A-M-O-N and my mother is Nan Jones, N-A-N J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and when was your father born and where? Speaker 2: My father was born in Rennesville, Oklahoma, in April of 1930. And my mother was born in Checotah, Oklahoma in August of 1929. Speaker 1: Can you spell the names of those towns for us? Speaker 2: Rennesville is, R-E-N-N-E-S-V-I-L-L-E, and Checotah is C-H-E-C-O-T-A-H. Speaker 1: Okay, and did your parents tell you about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes, they were attending school, at the same time, they, my mother lived in town, and Rennesville is a much more rural type of a community, and with the segregation then the kids that lived in town went out into the rural areas to attend school, and so they met while attending that rural school. Speaker 1: Okay, so they met in Rennesville or? Speaker 2: In, actually in Rennesville but she lived in Checotah, Rennesville is probably five miles away, at the most. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, now did, did, either one of them have stories, or did your grandparents have stories about your ancestors, going all the way back to slavery, or before, or during reconstruction, or any stories about the migration to the west or? Speaker 2: There were a few stories, no one has really conducted an interview in depth, history to be able to trace it all the way back. My maternal grandfather and his family are from Mississippi, and I do know that my mother and her parents would often times go back to Mississippi to pick cotton. As she was a child growing up, that's how they would get extra money in order to make ends meet in Oklahoma. I also, had an aunt who they were attempting to help put through college the first person in the family, to go to college and they would go back to Mississippi to pick cotton to help support her education. But specifically where in Mississippi I could not tell you, the exact location, in Mississippi, but I do know that that's where my maternal grandfather and his family came from. Speaker 1: Okay, what about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: My father's side, I really don't know a whole lot about, their history, I do know that they came up from Texas, my maternal, my paternal grandfather came up from Texas, and moved to Oklahoma. But as far as specifically any place else in Texas, I don't recall the name, and I don't know that there's a whole lot of history out there that's been made available to us. Story_ID: 65284 Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your father [Leamon Jones] do for a living, and what was he like? Speaker 2: My father, later in my life he was an aircraft worker at Boeing, which many people are here in Wichita [Kansas], it's the largest employer in town I believe. Prior to being placed at Boeing, or working at Boeing, he was a sanitation worker, as I recall growing up. We used to get teased by the other kids, that he works on a trash truck, yes he did. And during the time after he worked as a sanitation worker, before he, after then he went to Boeing, there were often times, several strikes in the early '60s [1960s], mid-60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], when we was working there. And then he would work wherever he could find a job, construction, doing whatever he could get while the plant was on strike. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your mother [Nan Jones]? Speaker 2: My mother, was a homemaker, her outside employment was being a domestic worker, for a Caucasian doctor here in town. So she cooked and cleaned house and helped raise their children, while he worked and, the wife I don't believe that she worked outside of the home, but my mom was the maid essentially, and she would then go back and work parties for them, things of that nature. And then she, later when she did begin working, in any other type of employment other than domestic work, she was a para-professional with the school system. And she would work as a teacher's aide at that time, was mainly what she did, until she retired. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what brought them to Wichita? What is Boeing, or what? Speaker 2: It was employment, yeah, they left Oklahoma after they got married relatively young, and moved to Wichita to find work, and then my dad was able to find work. He had actually prior to coming to Wichita, left Oklahoma and went to Kansas City [Missouri]. He started working, I believe he said at age thirteen, is when he left home, and went to Kansas City. And started working, and worked a while there wherever he could find a job mainly at that point and time it was washing dishes in restaurants and then he came back to Oklahoma and married my mom and then they moved to Wichita. Story_ID: 65285 Speaker 1: Okay, now I want you to think back and give us an idea of what some of the sights, and sounds, and smells, of growing up in the community that you grew up here in Wichita [Kansas], what was it like? Speaker 2: Okay, sights, I grew up in what would be considered the inner city, my mother [Nan Jones] still lives in the home to this day that they moved into ten days before I was born. So she's been in that home for almost forty-two years at this point and time, lower middle class area in some respects, and then other blocks you would consider it to be, pretty poverty-stricken. At the time that the home that my parents moved to, that was an area of town that was mainly a white community, near Wichita State University [Wichita, Kansas]. The area that you're in now, where the museum [Kansas African American Museum] sits was mainly the core of the African American community, real close, and moving out towards the university was moving out of the predominantly black area, when they first moved into that neighborhood they had several white neighbors. Speaker 1: Did the neighborhood have a name? Speaker 2: I believe it's called the Millaire, M-I-L-L-A-I-R-E division, of the city of Wichita. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: No, they didn't refer to it other than the northeast community which is what they continue to refer to it now, and that's where subsequently as in many situations, when a large population of African Americans move in, then most of the white people move out, so now it's all African American in that community at this point and time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, as far as the sight, sounds, kids playing on the street, you know, it was a residential neighborhood, but at that time you knew your neighbors, everybody talked, everybody knew each other. And, you know during the holidays of course, Fourth of July, everybody's out, you know, popping their firecrackers and having that type of socialization. Smell, we used to get some whiffs of the stockyards, that wasn't too far away, if the wind was blowing in the right direction. But other than that, those were my greatest memories then, of that neighborhood. Story_ID: 65286 Speaker 1: Um, now what kind of a little girl are you? What did you like to do in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, I was somewhat of a tom-boy, I had this green bicycle that was the fastest bicycle on the block, so I used to race with other people, on my bicycle, we played outside a lot, of course we didn't have television and all the gadgets that children have now a days with the electronic games. So we learned to entertain ourselves- Speaker 1: Well, you had television right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had television, yeah, oh yeah, but it certainly wasn't like it is for my children now they live for the TV it seems like, and spend a lot of time there. But we played a lot outside, rode our bicycles, made up games, you know, we would sit on the porch especially in the evenings, and claim which ever direction the cars were going down the street, those were our cars and so when someone got a big heap of junk coming down the street, that was really funny, and we would laugh, and talk about oh look at your car, or somebody got a nice car coming down, then you know you'd be happy, so little, little games like that. Just to keep us entertained. Speaker 1: Were you a shy little girl, or, or- Speaker 2: I don't think I was shy, growing up, I can recall just being kind of, I had friends, but I always kind of felt as though coming from a larger family, that I didn't have as much as my friends had, as far as material things were concerned, and you know my father being a sanitation worker a lot of things that we received were used things that he found while driving on the trash route. You know, my very first bed I can recall, was, an older couch that someone else was putting out for the trash, and he brought it home so that somebody else could have a separate bed. So, I kind of grew up having to share a lot more than some of my other friends did, and feeling as though they had more than I had, looking back on that now, you know, we were a very close-knit family, and a lot of those friends parents subsequently divorced, and had other issues that I never experienced. So, you kind of look at things a lot differently of course once you're, you're older. Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have, and where do you fall in the, in the group? Speaker 2: There are seven of us, and I am third from the youngest, there are five girls, and then there is a boy on each end, the oldest is a boy and the youngest is a boy. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a really large family? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So you had a lot of playmates when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Yes, right, we did. Story_ID: 65287 Speaker 1: Now tell me about school, where did you go to school, and can you remember the first day of school? Speaker 2: No, I can't remember the first day, there were some days that I can certainly remember, more of, the elementary school that I went to was one street over from where I grew up, so it was just right around the corner. Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: It was, at that time it was called Fairmont Elementary School. And, I would say probably 98 percent of the student body was African American, there were a few children that lived across Hillside street that came down, but it was predominantly an African American school, and an African American neighborhood. And, I went to school there, until the fifth grade, well through fifth grade, and then sixth grade was my first experience at busing. And, at that point and time they closed several of the schools in the African American community, and we were bused, to other schools in other parts of Wichita [Kansas]. And I vividly remember that first day, getting on the school bus, and being somewhat afraid going into a different neighborhood, a different part of town, not knowing exactly how we'd be perceived. There was a lot of controversy at that time around the issue of busing, but we survived and, that school was called Munger, and the ironic part of that was they took us from, in my neighborhood, that school, and African American school, and bused us to a school in the hilltop area of Wichita, which was a poverty-stricken portion of town, but it was mainly Caucasian, students there. So, we felt a little bit of bitterness that our school was being closed and then they were sending us out here to this other school that wasn't any better than the one we left, so why do we have to be here? Speaker 1: I think it's kind of like experiencing social slippery (unclear) or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: You went to a lower income situation. Speaker 2: Yeah, that school, subsequently closed also, I only went there one year and then I went to Curtis Middle School, and Southeast High School, that was my elementary education here in Wichita. You want to know about college from there, or you want to talk more about- Speaker 1: Let's go back, let's go back to grade school- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And just, I want to ask, I want to ask, were there some favorite subjects or teachers you want to talk about, in grade school, I mean what did you really like about grade school? Speaker 2: Wow, I really liked the early years in that school at Fairmount Elementary School, I do recall my kindergarten teacher, Mrs. Crawford, she was a special women to me, still is, she and I are now a member of an organization together but she's watched me grow up and it's always good to hear her say that, well you know, I could look at you way back in kindergarten and say you were going to make something out of yourself one day, so she was an extra special teacher, to me, a lady that I feared immensely, Mrs. Green, turned out to be one of the nicest teachers that I ever had. She was an African American woman, and had a reputation of being mean, and I did not want her class, but I ended up getting her class and it was one of the best classes that I had. So those ladies stand out tremendously for me. Speaker 1: Okay, that's wonderful to be able to still know your kindergarten teacher now, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yeah, and Mrs. Green is still around to see her occasionally also. Speaker 1: Okay, now what kind of activities were you involved in, in grade school, anything special? Speaker 2: No, not anything special, just the usual, trying to fit in, you know, and make friends, by this time in grade school I was kind of pudgy, and so you had to deal with, the weight issues, you know being a child, and having to deal with that. So, I wouldn't necessarily say that I was, the most popular person, but, I had my share of friends and that was really the focus there, you know, trying to make friends, there were certain people that you knew had a certain reputation of being mean, or being fighters, and you tried to stay away from them, as much as you could. Speaker 1: Okay, did you make good grades in grade school? Speaker 2: Yes, I have been a good student most of my life, so grades were really not a problem for me. Story_ID: 65288 Speaker 1: Did your parents push education? Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely. Not to the point that it was, burdensome, but they knew that we had potential to make good grades and they expected us to do our best. And if we applied ourselves and did our best then we would make good grades and that's what they wanted to see. They always of course wanted us to, make a better life for ourselves, than they had for themselves. Speaker 1: Now, what were your aspirations in grade school, did you have any thoughts about becoming a lawyer, or a judge? Speaker 2: No, not at all. In fact, it wasn't even you know, now a days young people are encouraged to dream big and think big and back in those days, being a school teacher, was really all that was really promoted, that I can recall. Or, maybe a social worker, but that was about it, and I, or a counselor, school counselor, it was all related around school. So I grew up thinking that I would be a school teacher or a counselor one day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, when you went to high school, I mean, what, where did you go to high school, was it, was this, were you still involved in a busing situation- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When you went to high school? Speaker 2: Yes, by then they had closed all of the schools in the African American community, high school as well as, well the East high school is still open, and that's where most of the African Americans went, and that's where my oldest siblings went to, East High School. I went to Southeast High School, and that was the district that we were bused to, and my experiences in high school were pretty pleasant. I really, it was by the time I was used to an integrated environment, and of course school was still important, grades were still a focus, and then I got involved in other activities, I started out in sports, quite a bit, playing softball and volleyball, and, did that for my, at that time freshmen year. And then I became interested in the pom-pom, and that kind of activity, and that's kind of where I spent the rest of my high school time, as my main extracurricular activity was being a pom-pom girl, and dancing at the games, and all that fun stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a chance to go to all the games, and participate in, in social life, of the school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From, from that stand point, okay, what were your favorite subjects in high school, and did you, did you think, I suppose if you were making good grades, you were thinking about college right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, college was always, it was understood that, I'd go to college, my favorite subject, probably was social studies, learning about people, different aspects about people's lives, that was probably my favorite subject. Speaker 1: All right, I'm trying to think, usually I associate social studies with grade school but, high school, did you take history and-- Speaker 2: History, yes, and you dealt with quite a bit of getting to know about other cultures, during social studies time, and, so that was interesting. Story_ID: 65289 Speaker 1: Who were some of your high school teachers that made, an impact on you? Speaker 2: (Laughs), high school, impact, you know-- Speaker 1: Or maybe there was some people in the community that made more of an impact than they did, or, even Speaker 2: Well, my high school years were really just really all about fun, you know, (laughs), for me, as far as any teachers were concerned, we had an African American counselor, Miss Billingsly (ph), that was always there, always available, you know, you could always go and talk to her about any and everything. So, I really felt comfortable with her, I do not recall any other African American teachers in high school. And so that's probably why that magnet was drawn towards her, having had other teachers in the past, I had a science teacher who was an African American woman, in gr--middle school, and a home economics teacher in middle school, who was African American. There weren't very many African American teachers, at all, in, in high school. Speaker 1: The white teachers there, none of them really served as a mentor or anything, or-- Speaker 2: If they did, I don't remember them at this point and time, you know there were certain teachers that you, that you remembered for certain reasons, you know my Spanish teacher, she was, a single woman, had been all of her life, and she was considered an old maid, you know, you remembered her, you know, for that reason, but I can't say that I can remember anyone who I would say really mentored me, or encouraged me, to do what I'm doing now, or go into college and pursue any one particular goal. Speaker 1: So, when, when your senior year came around, were you, what were you thinking about in terms of a career? Speaker 2: Still, it was at that time I was going to go to Emporia State University [Emporia, Kansas], and I was going to major in rehabilitation services, that was my goal when I left high school. Speaker 1: Is that what you did? Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Emporia State, and majored in rehabilitation services for two years, before leaving that major in that school and going elsewhere, but it was still in that education field, being a teacher, or a counselor, at that point and time, it was focusing on counseling. Story_ID: 65290 Speaker 1: Now, you, you're, tell me about graduation from [Southeast] High School [Wichita, Kansas], did you, did you graduate with honors or anything, or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't on the honor roll, at, well I may have been, I've always had a 3.0 or better G.P.A, so I don't know that it was 3.5 or above, at that time, but I never fell below a 3.0, ever. Speaker 1: So, you were a good student, but you weren't necessarily the top student in the class? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, but you had an expectation to go to school and people thought that that's probably what you were gonna do. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, so, you went on to college, you went to once again-- Speaker 2: Emporia State [University] is where I started, and that's in Emporia Kansas. Yep, I was following in an old sister's footsteps, she had gone to school there, and at that time it was Kansas State Teachers College, but by the time I went there it had changed to Emporia State University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mmhmm. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there, did you, enjoy it? Speaker 2: I enjoyed it, you know you were home away from home for the very first time, you know, there was a lot of other responsibilities, and growing up that you had to do. But it was a good experience for me, I enjoyed the campus, it was a small school at that time, probably about 5000 students, that, it's only an hour and a half from here, from Wichita, back then it took about an hour and half, but now with the speed limit it takes me about an hour to get there. So it was close enough that you could come home quite frequently, but I remember the first day that my parents took me there, and I was so anxious to go, and went probably a week before school started or, four to five days before school started. And after they left that evening, I was like why did I come so early, I felt pretty lonesome, but it didn't take long to get out and start walking around and you met other people, there were a lot of students there from Kansas City, Kansas. And so, met a lot of, a lot of people from different part of the state, had a real good time at Emporia. Speaker 1: Okay, what were your favorite courses at Emporia? Speaker 2: Psychology courses, I really got into those once I got there, of course the first year, was doing the basics, but, of the electives I was able to choose, I really enjoyed the psychology classes. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you take a lot, or any political science? Speaker 2: None, whatsoever, at this point and time I still have no idea of ever being a lawyer, or going to law school. And was still focused in that, counseling mode, or ambition, to become a counselor. And I was at Emporia for two years, and then they decided to change the requirements for the rehabilitation services degree. And, I found out that that wasn't really what I wanted to do, and I also, the older sister whose footsteps that I followed to Emporia, at that time she was working at the University of Missouri, in Columbia [Missouri], and I went to visit her one weekend. And I don't know how much you know about that campus, but you could put Emporia inside the University of Missouri, probably four or five times, it was a much larger, environment. And, really just kind of fell in love with that atmosphere, and was ready for a change, and so I decided to change my major to social work, since I wasn't really satisfied with the rehabilitation services, I would still be in a helping profession, which is what I wanted to do. And I visited there, and spoke with a lady there, that was in the social work department at that time, an African American professor. And, she encouraged me to look into it, and so I did, and ended up transferring, to the University of Missouri in Columbia, Columbia, Missouri. Story_ID: 65291 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in school were you involved in any kind of sororities, or black student organization, or student government, or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yes, at Emporia [State University, Emporia, Kansas] I, pledged AKA, so I was a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority, and I was involved in the black student union, when I was there. Then when I went to Mizzou, which is what we called it then, of course I was still with the sorority, and their black student union was called the Legion of Black Collegiates, and so I was involved in that as well. Speaker 1: The Legion of Black Collegiate-- Speaker 2: Mmhmm. Speaker 1: That, that's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so those were the major groups that I was involved in, I did a little more of that pom-pom stuff, in, while I was at Emporia, also. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't do that, at Missouri? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. At that point and time, no, you know it was a much larger school, and a lot of prettier girls than me there. So-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, of course, tall girls and they wore those real skimpy outfits, like bathing suits almost, and that wasn't for me, so. Speaker 1: That's cheating, they shouldn't do that. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Story_ID: 65292 Speaker 1: In terms of, the, atmosphere on campus, did you, did any notable African American speakers come to campus, that, that inspired you, or? Speaker 2: I don't recall any coming, while I was at Emporia [State University, Emporia, Kansas]. Speaker 1: You didn't have any kind of speakers (unclear), program, or-- Speaker 2: Not that I can recall, in college. In law school, I can remember a couple that, well, in fact three people that came to the law school. Speaker 1: Tell me then, when did you decide that you probably wanted to attend law school, how did that happen? Did you finish, University of Missouri with a degree in, what was it? Speaker 2: In social work? Yes, I did, and it was while doing that last semester of my senior year, I had a practicum, as a social work intern. And I was doing that at the Fulton State Hospital in Fulton, Missouri which wasn't far from Columbia [Missouri]. And I had the option of doing the practicum in two different areas, one was at the Biggs [Forensic] Snit where all the criminally insane from the State of Missouri were sent. And, the other portion of my time was spent with the youth that had been sent to the state hospital by the court system. I couldn't handle the Biggs Unit, most of those men in there were on such severe psychotropic medication, that they just walked, and walked all day. And to have any kind of counseling sessions with them was virtually impossible, and quite frankly, I was quite fearful when you read the file and saw what some of them had done, to be placed there. I was like I think I wanna spend all my time with the kids, so that's where I went, and it was. Speaker 1: I guess it was kind of difficult to counsel somebody who is not really in their right frame of mind, I mean-- Speaker 2: Not at all, it was, it was extremely difficult, and like I said, once you found out really why they were there, it was very uncomfortable, going into the little counseling rooms with them and, your source of security was a button, under the desk. And that was it, and you had to wait until somebody gets there, and, you know, some of these men that I was supposed to, talk to, and help them work through their problems, had butchered women, and cut them up, and raped them, killed them, you name it, they had done a little bit of everything, that's why they were there. So, I wasn't very comfortable, in that environment, so I requested to go do all of my time, full-time, with the children, and it was during that time, I was counseling with children who had been sent to the state hospital, and we would go to court with them, as a social work intern. And I became very disgruntled with the representation that the children were receiving, the attorney's had been appointed by the court, they would talk to the kids for five minutes, then go in, before the judge and act like they really knew something about this kid, when they knew absolutely nothing, other than that they read, in the file or the papers that we provided to them, and the little bit of small talk that they made with the child. So I really kind of felt like, well maybe I could do more for those children, as an attorney, rather than as a social worker. Because they wouldn't listen to us, the social workers, what did we know? So, and I was also taking a class called social work and the law, and we were reading cases about how, you know children, throughout the court system had been treated, not being appointed attorneys and you know, being denied their right to a trial, and all of the basic cases that, that initiated what we now have as children's rights, and children being entitled to the same thing as adults. And that was very interesting to me, and I just thought well, why don't I look into law school, so it was very late, in my senior year, the, the last set of LSAT [Law School Admission Test] exams were being offered and I was like well, I'll just try it. I knew I was going to go on to get my master's degree, and it was either get a masters in social work or look at something else. But I knew I was going right on to graduate school, so I took the LSAT, and scored high enough, made application to several schools, and got into three, so I figured at that point and time, I had prayed and asked the Lord if you open a door then that will indicate to me this is what you want me to do. And, when I got accepted into three schools, I figured it was pretty clear that, that's what I needed to do, so that's how I, I got interested in being a lawyer. Speaker 1: Basically, going to juvenile court? Speaker 2: Mmhmm. Speaker 1: And, observing what was going on. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 65293 Speaker 1: Now tell me this, I, I know people are often shocked when they attend juvenile court for the first time. Speaker 2: Mmhmm. Speaker 1: And you see the sheer volume-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Of youth, that are, are herded through juvenile courts. I mean what, did you feel, I mean what did you feel like when you first went to juvenile court, was it, what you expected it to be or? Speaker 2: As an attorney, or as a social worker? Speaker 1: As a social worker. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm just talking about anyone that goes to juvenile court for the first time, and checks it out, I mean-- Speaker 2: I was overwhelmed, to say the least. And as I stated before, I just felt like kids were just still getting the run around, and everything that I had read about while taking this class and all the rights that children were supposed to have, I didn't see that being enacted in the courtroom. And, yes there were a large number of young people there, from my experiences in Missouri, being the smaller community that I was in, and we would take the children back to their home community to go to court. I never experienced the larger metropolitan areas, most of the kids that we dealt with at that point in time came from smaller communities. So, it really wasn't a lot of kids there, but, what was happening there, is what really, caused me to be so overwhelmed, and, and thinking that, you know, this can't be, not in 1982, there's got to be more. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, juvenile court was created over a hundred years ago, celebrated its 100th anniversary, it was founded in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right, Cook County. Speaker 1: Yep, in 1901 I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But juvenile court was created, to create some sort of a legal system that youth could matriculate through, and not be subject to the laws created for adults. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'Cause children weren't adults. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And didn't have the same judgment, so forth. Is, are those, did you see, youth being treated as adults, in juvenile court, was that one of the problems? Speaker 2: Well, back in, at that time, when I was in Missouri, I can't say that, no, the kids that I dealt with were kids that had been abused, and neglected, or who had all type of mental health problems, and emotional problems. They weren't there for having committed a crime, they were there for harming themselves, self-mutilating, suicidal, things of that nature, so, those were the kids that I dealt with at that point and time. But I did see the other realm once I became a lawyer of course, and practiced law in juvenile court, and then, was a judge in juvenile court, for eight years. Story_ID: 65294 Speaker 1: Tell me about law school, was law school what you expected? Did you have a preconceived notion of that? Speaker 2: I had no idea, what I was getting myself into, when I went to law school [at the University of Oklahoma College of Law, Norman, Oklahoma]. I had visited the law school, at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], just looking around, but having attended a class, no. I didn't talk to any lawyers before I decided to go to law school, so it was a totally, a totally new environment for me, I was used to always making good grades, and I wasn't used to, I was used to being able to study the night before an exam and still get a "B". And, you know, that was fine, you know, not so in law school, you know, you had one exam, and that was at the end of the semester. So, everything you learned from day one, you had to retain, and everything built upon the next subject, so that at the end of the semester, you sat down to do four-hour essay exams. And you were writing, constantly, they weren't multiple choice questions, they were factual patterns, and you had to, to look at all the issues and try to pull them out, if this case came before you, how would you handle it. And nobody ever told you that's what law school was gonna be like, I didn't know how important class rankings were, you know, they rank you in law school. And I did not realize, that, once you get ranked the first set of grades, it really doesn't move from that point on, so that was a surprise. Speaker 1: What you're saying is that, once they have a notion of how to rank you, they're reluctant to un-rank you. Speaker 2: You don't move very much, if at all, and, you know of course all the grading is supposed to be anonymous. But I found out differently, once I was there as well that, I felt that the professors kind of knew who, the students were, and based upon how they, identification for the testing is done, they could tell if, a person with 254, got an "A" in this class, and 254 got a "B" in this class, they were dealing with the same person. And, had an experience where we even saw a professor one night copying down, another sections grades that had already been posted, so, that kind of broke my confidence in the so called, "confidential grading system" that was going on in law school. Speaker 1: Who was the professor actually copying down the grades of the last test, so you would get the same thing regardless of what you did? Speaker 2: It was another, when you're in law school, you're in sections, and another section with the same numbers, you have one I.D number for every test that you take. And, one group had already had their exam, or our group, we had already had our exam on one test, those grades had been posted. And so, the professor was there one night, when we were there late, practicing for some moot court activities, standing there at what we call the wailing wall, 'cause people would go there and see how your grades are posted and fall out or do whatever, and he was copying things down, and he didn't expect us to come around the corner. So, once I saw that, I was like, oh so much for the anonymity, no wonder you can work, you know extra hard, and you don't seem to move as far as your class rank is concerned. So, those were valuable lessons in life that you learn, you know? Speaker 1: So, how did you do early on, did you do well, was your ranking high or low, or-- Speaker 2: I wasn't ranked very high after the first semester, surprisingly, well surprising to me, but I was in a totally different world, and in fact, after that first semester I called home in the middle of the day, and told my dad [Leamon Jones] I don't think this is for me, I want to come home, and he's like nope, you can do it, just stay there. And, so I did, and I realized, and learned, and talked to other people and found out how things really worked. So, I was encouraged at that point in time where, you're going to have to some way or another, distinguish yourself, you know? You're not law review, you're not writing for the bar journal, or the law journal, so you gotta do something else. So, I got involved in moot court activities, and that's where I decided I would try to focus a lot of my time and attention, of course keeping the academics up, and passing all the classes, but, you know, when it's time to get jobs, there's gonna have to be something on my resume that's gonna stand out to an employer that says, you know, she has some potential, or some skills, that you ought to look into, and consider hiring her. And, of course, with law school it's often times when you're first coming out about class rank, and if you wrote for the law journal. So, I got involved in moot court competitions, and that kind of activity developing the oral speaking skills, and I soon discovered that I wanted to be a litigator, I wanted to be in the court room, I wasn't--I didn't want to be a corporate lawyer sitting behind a desk, you know, so I focused my time and effort in that regard. Trying to, do well in moot court competitions, and so I would have something on my resume, that would hopefully sell my, ideas, and my abilities to an employer, 'cause it was all about getting a job then, after you, got out of school and passed the bar. Story_ID: 65295 Speaker 1: Were there any professors in law school that took a particular interest in you, and tried to help you? Speaker 2: Mmhmm, there was, Professor David Hall, and he's now, last I knew, he was dean of the law school, or associate dean of the law school, at, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Is he black, tall-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Thin? Speaker 2: Yes, that's him, small world isn't it (laughs). Yes, he was a professor at OU [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] at the time, and no I wasn't there when Anita Hill was there (laughs), she came after me, but he was there, at that time, and I got to know him very well, he was very helpful as far as, guiding me in the right direction, and encouraging me to pursue the moot court activities, and he was a wonderful person, and really played a major role in how I navigated my way then, through the rest of my last two years of law school. Speaker 1: Well, that's good, it makes the world make sense (laughs). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, absolutely. Story_ID: 65296 Speaker 1: So, when you graduated from law school, did you get with a firm, or did you work for government, or, what happened? Speaker 2: I initially, worked for government, I was, I went to Muskogee, Oklahoma and worked in the District Attorney's office there, right after law school. And, I was a prosecutor down there, from 1985 until 1988, when I came back here, to Wichita [Kansas]. So, I, I enjoyed being a prosecutor, it was, I enjoyed the courtroom, trying cases; I was always able to establish a pretty good rapport with juries. And, I had one hung jury while I was there, but all the rest of them were convictions. Speaker 1: Are there any, are there any cases that stand out that were particularly challenging, or, or, or remarkable? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about remarkable. But while I was there in the District Attorney's office, I prosecuted a man; I somehow or another ended up developing a specialty in sex offenses. Usually the victims were kids, and, so I prosecuted a whole lot of, incest cases, and child abuse neglect, that were, had many aspects of sexual abuse involved with them. And the largest verdict at that time in that county, I received, in a case where a man received approximately 233 years in prison, as a result of the case, so I vividly remember that case. There were several others, but that one was by far, because the verdict was so big, that, one that stands out in my mind. Another one was a young man, who, couldn't seem to stay out of trouble, and I'd prosecuted him, he would go, and he would come back, and he'd get out, and revolving door, and finally he went to prison. I think the last time he got like twenty years, and then he went to prison and started writing me these love letters, about how how he really loved me, and that was why he was committing all these crimes, so he could come back and see me. Pretty strange, but, that one stands out too (laughs), yeah. Speaker 1: That's bizarre. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. He threw a tape recorder at a judge once, during a trial that, I had with him, and his letter to me was, well I was really wanting to throw it at you, but my mother taught me to always be nice to women, and, so. Speaker 1: Was this young man, black or white, or-- Speaker 2: He was African American. Story_ID: 65297 Speaker 1: So what did you do after the prosecutor's office in Muskogee [Oklahoma]? Speaker 2: After leaving there, well I got married, and that kind of precipitated the move, back to Wichita [Kansas], I never really thought I'd come back here, you know, home, most often times people want to get away from home, and stay away, you know, when I was growing up it was like, I'm gonna leave and I'll never come back and live here. But, I got married, and my husband, was working for Boeing, and for the first year of our marriage, he was in Greenville, Mississippi, working at a subsidiary of Boeing. And I was in Muskogee and we were six hours apart, and he then, subsequently received a transfer, to the plant here in Wichita, and that's how we ended up coming back here. After coming back, it was then trying to find a job, I went to the D.A.'s office here, in Wichita, and they told me, that I was making too much money in Oklahoma, and they couldn't come anywhere close to that, and thank you, goodbye. There was, I knew no attorneys here, didn't grow up knowing any attorneys. Chester Lewis, was a prominent African American attorney here in Wichita, he was still living at the time, and I went and talked to him, to get some advice as to what do I do, where do I go, where do I get a job in this town? And, he gave me some advice, and encouraged me to go, talk to some of the larger law firms, but I really, I still wanted to be in the courtroom. I knew that, and, I thought about a young man that I had gone to law school with, who I knew was marrying a woman who was from Wichita. And when we left law school, it was understood that he would be coming to Wichita, so I got the phone book out and looked him up, and surely, he was still here. In a small law firm, with his father-in-law, and several other people. Called him up, and told him I was here, he remembered my from law school, and said that he would talk to the other people in their firm, because they were looking for someone at the time. And, he arranged a lunch meeting for me, with the partners, and went to lunch, on a Tuesday, about 11:00. And they called me and offered me a job the same day, about 2:30, the same day, so, I took that job and went into private practice as an associate with the firm of Bruce and Davis, when I came back to Wichita. Story_ID: 65298 Speaker 1: You work-- you're in, you, you, got married, you moved to Wichita [Kansas], and you're with, you just joined a law firm [Bruce and Davis]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, what your experiences like with that firm? Speaker 2: They were good, good people, good people to work for, it was two separate families and, that had come together and joined a partnership, made a partnership, Bruces and the Davises. And for the most part, it was a good experience there, we were a small firm, there were nine attorneys there, most of our clients were credit unions, we did a lot of credit union work, bankruptcy, collections, and things of that nature. Loans that people had defaulted on, taking them to court for that, so it was kind of hard, you know. Collect-- trying to collect, trying to collect money from people that didn't have it, couldn't pay the bills, if they could pay, then we wouldn't have had to file the lawsuit so, in that respect it was difficult. But overall, the work was totally different from what I was used to as far as prosecuting, I didn't do very much criminal work at all, it was all civil, at that point and time. Story_ID: 65299 Speaker 1: And, then I ended up migrating my way back to juvenile court. Speaker 2: I was going to ask about that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: If I would have had to guess, that would be the case. Speaker 1: I did, I ended up, I practiced two years, before going, and getting on the list to be appointed cases out of juvenile court. By then, I had prosecuted those cases in Oklahoma, I went out there and represented children and represented parents, so I started doing quite a bit of juvenile work in addition to what the firm had to offer. Did that work for a couple of years, and then got a little disgruntled and concerned about an experience I had in juvenile court. And, I thought at that point in time- Speaker 2: What was that? Speaker 1: Well, I was representing a woman, who, was taking care of her elderly mother, she had a sixteen-year-old daughter, who was, essentially beyond her control, and the sixteen-year-old also had a baby, he was nine months old. And, it was while representing the grandmother, my client, she was the grandmother, of the, the little nine-month-old boy. The, she had had some previous mental health diagnosis, and she was taking her medication, she was functioning fine, functioning well enough to take care of her mother, and doing the best she could with her daughter. She was essentially the provider for the nine-month-old son, he was really the mother to him, she was really the mother to him. The state had decided that, or the D.A, they were going to file a petition on her teenage daughter, who was beyond her control, she was truant, she had had this baby and she was just essentially doing what she wanted to do. So, they decided to file a petition on the sixteen-year-old, and they were also going to file a petition on her baby, alleging that he was also a child in need of care. My client came to me, to hire me to represent her, to try to keep the baby in her home with her. She was, her job was essentially receiving SSI [Supplemental Security Income], and plus she was being paid to take care of her mother, to keep her out of a nursing home. So, she was making ends meet, she didn't drive, but she took the city bus everywhere she needed to go, and, she really didn't have the money to hire me, but she saved it up, and I took a small retainer and told her I would take her case. So, we filed a motion for interested party status, trying to keep the child in her home, the nine-month-old grandson. So we went to court, and the judge that day, denied our motion, and said that grandmothers ought to be grandmothers, and they shouldn't be raising their grandkids, was part of his ruling. And I took offense to that, because I felt that he was being culturally insensitive, because it's not uncommon for generations of African American women to live together. Which is what was happening here, the child was being provided for, appropriately, even though she had had some previous problems in the past with her mental health, she was taking her medication, and we presented the evidence, the doctor said she's fine. She can take care of this child, and, the judge ended up taking the child along with the teenager out of my client's household. And I thought that was just a big tragedy, even the social welfare department was not advocating that that child be removed from my client, they were advocating moving the teenager, but to leave the child, the nine-month-old where he was. And once the judge decided that, I was, a little upset, to say the least, my client was very upset, in that they took the child out of her arms kicking and screaming out in the hallway, it was just a very emotionally, upsetting, time. Story_ID: 65300 Speaker 1: And I was also experiencing some difficulties, as an attorney in juvenile court here in Wichita [Kansas], because juvenile court is the bottom of the rung, or it was, at that time. And I'm sure not a whole lot has changed here in Wichita since then. But it was on a rotation basis, the judges would come to juvenile court, rotate out there, for a year, and then rotate out and go back downtown to the court house and do other civil or criminal work. So it was a very unpopular court, it was a very difficult court, you know you dealt with those emotional issues of families and child abuse, and neglect, and things of that nature, termination of parental rights. So, it wasn't an easy court to be in, and I really felt like you needed judges who wanted to be in that kind of environment, and so I was tired of the flip flop with the judges, because, at that time the focus was work with family until you can put them back together. And it may take three or four years, to undo generations of dysfunction, or substance abuse, or whatever the issue was. So, we would have one judge on a case for a year, and that judge would make all the rulings and the case would move in this direction, and then at the end of that year, that judge would leave, we'd get a new judge, and we would start cases all over again. And families were not going anywhere, and the system was really, bogged down in my opinion. And we had five positions opening up in 1992, for judges, we elect judges here in Wichita, there were five who were forced into retirement, because they had reached the age of 70 while in office, and they could not run again. So, I was like well, why don't I, talking to some other lawyers, sitting in the law library, at juvenile court, why don't I run for judge. And, be assigned here or ask to stay here in juvenile court, and that would kind of stop this flip flop and everybody was like, "Well yeah that's a good idea, why don't you do it?" And I was like, "Oh well I was really just kidding," but you know, they encouraged me and said, "Well you can do this." So, a few of us got together and tried to figure out how do you run a campaign. I was a very grassroots type of, campaign, we ran very little money. The man that also filed on the Republican ticket, was another Caucasian male, who had stated he was looking for a way to retire. And I, I just kind of felt like we didn't need more of what we already had: a bunch of elderly Caucasian men looking to retire. We needed someone on the bench, particularly in juvenile court who was concerned about children, concerned about families, and trying to fix a system that was broken. So I ran, and I won, so that's how I became a judge the first time here in Wichita. Story_ID: 65301 Speaker 1: So you made a, you basically made an issue out of being a, I mean a judge in the sense that you, I mean it was something that was taken for granted as place as a, as a, maybe a weigh station between retirement or something-- Speaker 2: Well yeah. Speaker 1: And a place to lay off until you do something else. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You made, you made a, you decided that it was something in need of attention. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and it needed it, and you know once I was elected, and we were able to choose, it was based on seniority, but who was 'gonna fight me over it because like I said it was the bottom of the rung, it wasn't a popular court to go to, and everybody wanted to do their year and get out. So, I even ran on that, that premise, that if I'm elected this is where I want to be, and I was there for eight years. Speaker 1: Now, are you still in juvenile court? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, no? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: But when you were there did you get a chance to choose the other judges that came through, or encourage the people that were concerned about youth to-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Come to juvenile court? Speaker 2: It just so happened that when I was elected, in '92 [1992], I took office in '93 [1993], another, female was elected at that time as well. Prior to that, we had had two women judges and that was it, in Wichita [Kansas], we had no African American female judges in the history of the state of Kansas at the time I decided to run, that was another motivator, for me, I felt like it was time for, women like me to be in those positions, of making those decisions, and, we can talk about it all we want to, but unless you're willing to do the work to get there, then you can't complain about it. So, even though it was a long shot, or felt like it was a long shot, having, not had another African American female in that position before, that wasn't really no reason for me not to, make that attempt. So, I did that, and there was another woman that came in and she too agreed to stay in juvenile court, once she got there. I was always committed to staying there, but she subsequently once she got there, ended up staying the full time that she was there as well. So that, it became a career and I was there for two terms, I was elected the first time, the second time I ran unopposed, and then it was the third term, when I was defeated in the general election. In a very, controversial election here in town, but, so after that, losing that election in 2000, then I was hired by the city council, to be a judge in the municipal court here in Wichita. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, thank you for that portion of your story, and I hope we'll be able to follow up and get more, later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome, thank you, it was nice meeting you..