 Story_ID: 116863 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, King, K-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your, I guess that's the name you want your information filed under, but what's your married name? Speaker 2: My married name is C. Tasmiya King-Miller, initial C, T-A-S-M-I-Y-A, K-I-N-G, hyphenated, Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name Tasmiya? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. After I left Birmingham [Alabama], and I was still embarrassed by the integration and the trauma that I had gone through, in my opinion, I went to New York [New York]. And at that time there was Carol King, and all of a sudden, I started getting a lot of mail and flowers for a singer. They mistook my name as a singer, Carol King, and in New York [New York] she was popular during the middle sixties [19060s]. And it was fine, I didn't know who I was getting it from until it became threatening. So, I went to--during that time it was also black power time, and I was involved in the community and trying to better the lives of people. One of the things we had an opportunity to do was to change our name to an African name. And this professor named Oba, his name was Oba, meaning "King", changed my name to Tasmiya, which he observed, and it means tranquility. Was this here in the Bay area? Speaker 1: No, this was in Brooklyn, New York--in Brooklyn, New York. And I became Tasmiya, had it changed, and started using that. However, I had a naming ceremony where my mother said, "Don't ever give up your first name, because of history's sake just use the initial." I just wanted to become somebody else. Speaker 2: Okay, now what year was that? Speaker 1: That was about '67 [1967], 1967 in Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I changed my name to Tasmiya King. Speaker 2: Alright, okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: My date of birth is July 7, 1947, Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 2: And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I am a researcher and also an American with disabilities. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, before we go into depth--oh, what is today's date, I'm sorry--what is today? Speaker 1: Today's date is March 8, 2011, San Francisco, California. Story_ID: 116864 Speaker 1: And before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My favorite food is salmon croquettes, homemade. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow is my favorite color. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summertime, July. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama is my favorite vacation destination. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My favorite phrase is saying, "People so seldom say I love you, but when they do, it doesn't mean I don't want you to go, I wish you wouldn't have to." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 116865 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her full name is Eugenia King-Miller [sic Eugenia Miller-King], and it's E-U-G-E-N-I-A, Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R hyphenated King, K-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her maiden name? Speaker 2: It is Miller, not one the same as mine. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is November 19, 1927. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: Greene County, Alabama, Boligee. Speaker 1: How do you spell Boligee? Speaker 2: B-O-L-I-G-E-E. Speaker 1: Well, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side of the family? Speaker 2: I've traced my mother's side of the family back to, physically, back to Greene County, Alabama. My grandfather was born in Greene County. His mother was born in slavery and came over from Virginia. How they got to Alabama, I'm not sure. But by DNA, I've traced my ancestral roots, maternal ancestry roots, back to Cameroon. During that time it was called, lower or southern Nigeria. My grandfather, we grew up believing that my grandfather was a Blackfoot Indian because of his features. He had-- my mother had five sisters and one brother. Speaker 1: I have a question. What do you mean by Blackfoot Indian? Speaker 2: Alabama is what they call the Black Belt area where everything grew. And when I say Blackfoot Indian, it means that he had the characteristics where his hands were as black as the color of his skin and his feet were the same and he had what they called good hair, or what he said was a part of the Blackfoot Indian traits, Indian hair, they would say. I was not born with that. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. But does... Speaker 2: To find documentation, we could not find documentation. Speaker 1: But that's the oral tradition from the family? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, so just to make sure I understand. So, your grandmother was from Green County, and your father, too, right? Speaker 2: My grandmother--my mother's mother? Speaker 1: Yeah, your mother's... Speaker 2: My mother, her parents [Dave Miller, Sr. and Betty Munn-Ravises-Miller] were from Greene County, Alabama. Story_ID: 116866 Speaker 1: My grandfather [Dave Miller, Sr.] was a World War I [WWI] vet[eran] who served in France. After returning from World War I, he got a job in the rock quarry, and then moved into Tuscaloosa, Alabama. In about 1910, there was a big explosion in the coal mine in Alabama, where everybody was killed. And that person who owned that coal mine brought the people, black people, from Tuscaloosa who had worked for him, to Birmingham [Alabama] to work in the coal mines, called TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron And Railroad Company] it came to be known as. And by the time he retired, I believe it was about 1965, 1967 or something like that, he was a supervisor in that mine, and that was something unusual. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's how the family got to Birmingham. Are there any stories about life in Greene County [Alabama] before the Civil War or any stories like that to your recollection that were passed down through the family? Speaker 1: No. They didn't talk about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what did your mother [Eugenia Miller-King] say about growing up? Did she basically grow up--I guess she grew up partially in Tuscaloosa and in Birmingham, too? Speaker 1: She grew up in Tuscaloosa maybe about 1920. I want to say between 1927 and 1930, they moved from Tuscaloosa to what they called a mining town, Old Jones Valley [Alabama], or Miner's Village [Alabama] during that time. They were the first ones in the country--and in that mining village, she used to say that they all, everybody was black. They lived in the community where there was a school, a church, and everybody worked at the same place and they grew up with families. During those times, the family still ate together and they played together--and, really--this was before TV's, they prayed together. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did your mother talk about what racial issues were like in those days? Speaker 1: All she knew was black. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, they had black schools, black churches, everything was black? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did she, how far did she go in school? Speaker 1: She originally went through the eighth grade, but after her children were grown, she went back and graduated with a GED and then took some college courses, and it was maybe about 1980 when she graduated, when she got her GED and took some college classes in Brooklyn, New York. Story_ID: 116867 Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Reverend Floyd King, Sr. And you spell that Floyd, F-L-O-Y-D, K-I-N-G, S-R. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm a little confused. Now your mother's maiden name is Miller? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, but she's now [Eugenia] King-Miller instead of Miller-King? Speaker 2: No, she's Miller-King, sorry. Speaker 1: She's Miller-King, okay, alright. Speaker 2: I guess the point I want to make is, I'm also--my married name is Miller, but it's no relation. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. I was kind of confused. So, your father is Reverend Floyd King, Sr. And what was his date of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is November 10--was November 10, 1913 in Wilcox County, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Where is Wilcox County in relationship to Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: It's about, I'll say 60 miles south of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what do you know about your father's side of the family, the King side? Speaker 2: In genealogy, I found out that my father's father's father's name was Somerset King. And his great grandmother's name was Amelia King. And they were brought to Alabama from North Carolina, a place called Somerset Plantation in about 1839. They were all born in slavery, and my grandfather's name is Lee King. He was born in 1853 in Alabama. He was the first one born in Alabama. And his wife was named Lucinda. They were, they stayed in Wilcox County [Alabama] until about 1910 when Lee King died. After Lee King died, the whole family moved to Mobile--Creighton, Mobile, Alabama, where he started his own business as a person--during that time they had like wagons where he would go around and sell ice. Speaker 1: Now this is Lee King? Speaker 2: No, this is his descendants. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After Lee King died, the whole family moved to Mobile, his children, his thirteen children and my grandmother. Speaker 1: So, this would be your grandfather we're talking about now? Speaker 2: It would be my great grandfather. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So, Lee King would be your great, great grandfather? Speaker 2: Lee King is my great great grandfather, right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: He had a daughter named Lorena, which is my father's mother. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Lee King, I assume that he was born in slavery, right? Speaker 2: Yes, 1853. Speaker 1: 1853, okay. Alright, continue. Speaker 2: Okay. So, shortly after, I'm saying about, actually between 1915 and 1920 the family moved from Wilcox County to Mobile County, Alabama where he was educated. And once again, the family lived together. Speaker 1: Now Mobile County, is that near Mobile, Alabama? Speaker 2: It is, Mobile County, down from Mobile City. Speaker 1: Is that down on the Gulf? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had one sister who died at a young age. Her name was Dannie Lee King Stallwursth [ph.]. Story_ID: 116868 Speaker 1: And when my father [Floyd King, Sr.] was maybe about twenty, he moved from Mobile [Alabama] to Birmingham, Alabama for work. And he is also a World War II [WWII] veteran. Speaker 2: Did he go overseas in the war? Speaker 1: No, he did not. Speaker 2: Okay. Did he have any stories about the war? Did he share with you? Speaker 1: He did not share. Speaker 2: Okay. He served state side? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Can you maybe talk a little bit about the attraction of Birmingham [Alabama], you know, for black people in those days? Speaker 1: The way I understand it from my father is that if a black person would go to the army or would serve in the war, they were guaranteed jobs when they came out, and that was one of the reasons he did go in. Not only that, when he first came back, he trained as an insurance agent for A.G. Gaston and then he later worked for TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron And Railroad Company], working down in the mines where his job was to sweep the coal at the bottom of the mines. Speaker 2: Okay. And, Birmingham was like an industrial center in Alabama? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: People often think of Alabama as an agricultural state, but Birmingham is a big industrial... Speaker 1: Birmingham is usually called in the history books as the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] of the South, known as the steel mill--the same people that own the steel mills in Pittsburgh, own the steel mills, the TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron, and Railroad Company] mills in Alabama, the coal. And coal was very prevalent in Alabama. Speaker 2: So, there were a lot of jobs in Birmingham? Speaker 1: Exactly. And it's dangerous, dangerous, work. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, how did your parents meet? How did they get together? Speaker 1: My parents met when my father moved to Birmingham. He lived with an uncle, his favorite uncle, as he would say. My mother [Eugenia Miller-King] had her first child out of wedlock, and she was sent to live with an aunt in that same neighborhood. And maybe when my oldest brother was about three, they met by going to church you know, and in the community. And they married the next year. I think my brother was about three, he was born in 1942. Speaker 2: Okay. She already had a child when she met your father? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So they were married around 1942? Speaker 1: No, about 1946 I believe. Speaker 2: 1946, okay. After the war [World War II, WWII]? Speaker 1: Mhm. Story_ID: 116869 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, when you think about their [King-Miller's parents, Eugenia Miller-King and Floyd King, Sr.] personalities and their talents and their dispositions and habits, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I'm told I look like my mother. We're--if I don't see people for years, and I go and visit them, they will cry because they say I look so much like my mother, who is now deceased. I believe a lot of my traits are--I feel like my gentle nature is from my mother, who was the nurturing one. In terms of the strength, I would say I got that from my father. Story_ID: 116870 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, your father [Floyd King, Sr.], was he home a lot? Was he at work? How did it go with him? Speaker 2: He always worked for TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron And Railroad Company]. I think my earliest memory was seeing him coming from work with a lamp on his head and all these clothes that were black from the soot, from the coal, that he would have to take off outside and that we had to wash every night before he could come in the house. So, he always did work. He worked at that job every since I've known until 1965. Speaker 1: Okay, so he used to come home with soot, loaded with... Speaker 2: In fact, all of the men in the community came home looking that way. We didn't think it was any different. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he work long hours? Speaker 2: Ah, I don't know. I don't know, in remembering back, what was long. I mean, we went to school--he left for work early, let's say before day, and he came home around, a little before dinner time, about five or six o'clock. He came home every night to have dinner with the whole family. During that time they did have dinners together, the families. Story_ID: 116871 Speaker 1: Well, tell me--how many brothers and sisters you have and can you give us their names in order of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. I have seven brothers and sisters, and one stepbrother. The oldest one is from my father's first marriage. His name is Floyd King, Jr. The next one is my sister, Akeioeke she's named Gwendolyn King- Singho. The next one is B.J., which is Betty King Love, and then there's me. The next sister is Anita Lavern King. The next one is Monifa Edna King Willekes, and the last one is Ella Dunayo. I should call her Queen Mother, she was stooled as a Queen Mother in Ghana in 2007--so Queen Mother Dunayo, Dr. King-Aqbenno. I believe that's how you pronounce her married name. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I had one sister, her name is Doris Elaine King, who died at birth. Speaker 1: Okay, including you, that's what? Speaker 2: That's nine. Speaker 1: That's nine children. So, it's a big family. Speaker 2: A big family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have, and you are the... Speaker 2: I'm in the middle. I think I'm about the fifth or the sixth child. Story_ID: 116872 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I remember I was what they would call a bookworm. I was always somewhere reading, or people would always get me to come over, and maybe as early as six, to sit with elderly people in the community that were probably bedridden. But, you couldn't ask any questions, and I always remember that it was when TV was young, that was when I would go and sit with them, and we would always look at 'Perry Mason.' We did not have a TV until 1957, so a couple of years before that, that's what I would do. Okay, so you would read to... Speaker 1: We would look at 'Perry Mason,' we would read the books. My father [Floyd King, Sr.] was a minister. I also remember going to church as early as three, and loving Sunday school. Everything was like routine, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, now did your father, was he the pastor of a church, or the assistant pastor, or? Speaker 1: No. He was a member of the church and he never was. I think during that time, if you sat up on the pulpit they would call you an associate. I'm not sure if that was true. And I was a member of--I was born and raised at St. John Missionary Baptist Church in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, church, I guess was a big part of growing up? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Did you have a lot of, did you have offices, you know, in the church as a youth, or things or responsibilities that you had to fulfill? Speaker 1: Well, I grew up in--I feel like my whole youth was isolated in that black community where we went--everybody you know, were neighbors. We played with each other. The girls would play with girls and boys would play with boys, and my brothers knew--as I child I just remember we didn't associate with boys, we would play with girls. We would help out in the church. We were part of the Baptist Training Union, what they called BTU. We went to different events, conventions, but we went collectively as a church, or as the youth group. We were pretty strong in that. We went to church picnics, and everyone in this community went to the same elementary school. We went to the same high school. Speaker 2: Now, what was the name of the community that you lived in in Birmingham? Speaker 1: It was called Powderly. It's on the southwest side which Birmingham calls Old Jones Valley. And the history of that is, that's the area that Davy Crockett ruled at one time, and it was ruled by bears before Birmingham [Alabama] was ever invented. Speaker 2: Okay, so... Speaker 1: And it's known for its ore and iron. Speaker 2: And Davy Crockett, the king of the pioneers? Speaker 1: King of the old frontier. Speaker 2: The old frontier, the old frontier. He represented that district at one point. Speaker 1: Not represented the district. During the early 1800's, Davy Crockett hunted deer and helped build that area and he went up and down--I believe he was from Tennessee. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was a representative from Tennessee. At some point he actually was in Congress, from Tennessee, right. But he would hunt bears there and...? Speaker 1: According to the history books. Speaker 2: And fight in the wild frontier, I guess? Speaker 1: All that, plus woods and Birmingham, and Jones Valley [Alabama], which was known as historic because it was known as the woods, the mining town where they would go through just like in the old west, when I let my imagination go wild. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, Davy Crockett was a big deal when you were coming along. Speaker 1: A big deal. Speaker 2: Walt Disney made a movie about Davy Crockett, starring Fess Parker and... Speaker 1: I grew up on that. Speaker 2: And the little kids were wearing the coonskin hats. Did you have any of that kind of stuff? Speaker 1: Absolutely not, we were poor. And when television was young, parents controlled television. When we finally got one, we could look at it only--this was about 1957, we could only look at it one time a day during the summer, and that was at 12:00 noon to see Shirley Temple. And what we would look at on the weekends--we would look at Milton Berle--and the first time we saw Nat King Cole on TV, you know--for those hours or some of those things like that on television, or Bob Hope, you know. Speaker 2: So you were like, in '57 [1957] you were-- Speaker 1: About ten. Speaker 2: --about ten? Story_ID: 116873 Speaker 1: And everything was in hierarchy. The oldest sibling that was at home gave the rules when our parents were at work. My mother [Eugenia Miller-King] would work--after the baby child went to elementary school, my mother took on a job cleaning white people's homes, as they would say 'over the mountain' in Mountain Brook [Alabama]. And it was up to my brother and my oldest sisters to care for the rest of us. So, they would have control of the television, and what we saw. And I think in growing up around, a little later, maybe about '58 [1958] or '59 [1959], my brother would after church, turn on football, and he used to love the Pittsburgh Steelers. And I thought that was the only team, you know. We saw teams out of New York or out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and I learned to understand the game very early because I loved sharing it with my brother. Speaker 2: Okay. Pittsburgh had an affinity with Birmingham [Alabama] because of the company ties, I guess, with the city of Pittsburgh? Speaker 1: I didn't connect it that way, I just saw it as it was. It looked like that was the only thing that was on the TV. They didn't show any other teams that I remember. I think they showed some New York teams, but I know he was for Pittsburgh. Speaker 2: Was it the same for baseball? Did they show the Pittsburgh Pirates for baseball? Speaker 1: No, it was the same. I remember looking at New York teams, maybe the Dodgers. I know my mother was a Dodger fan. That's how I learned about baseball, especially after Jackie Robinson integrated baseball. We grew up in the same town as Willie Mays. In fact, we were all born in the same hospital, which is the company hospital, TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron And Railroad Company] Hospital, called Lloyd Noland in Birmingham. And we used to go and see the baseball team, a local baseball team called the Birmingham, I believe they were called the Black Barons [sic Birmingham Barons], the Birmingham Barons. So, we'd actually go and physically look at them. Speaker 2: Did Willie Mays ever come back to town, and did you ever get a chance to see him, or meet him? Speaker 1: Not out there, but out here, and I met, you know, I think the biggest person I saw at the baseball game was when Reggie Jackson was drafted, he came to Birmingham to play and we all went. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And during that time, that was big-time, because we were poor, and we all went as a family. Speaker 2: Okay. So, Birmingham had a minor league team that played? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116874 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells when growing up? Speaker 2: Like I say, the earliest memory I have is maybe about three years old, and I used--I remember playing with my sisters. I used to love playing with the people on my street. We grew up on this street called Snavely, and all the homes we ever lived in were rented, and it was either at the top of the hill on Snavely Avenue or the bottom of the hill of Snavely Avenue. I remember during the summer times--they didn't have summer school during that time--of playing with other young ladies that were born around the same time. I remember the red dirt where-- Birmingham [Alabama] is known for the red dirt, the red clay dirt, and I think Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has talked about that a lot. And one of the things we used to do is go and get red dirt to fix-- put vinegar in it--if you had a sprained ankle, that was the thing for anything, the red clay dirt of Alabama. Speaker 1: Let me interject this. Now this is, well, I grew up in Dayton, Ohio. And you know, people in the neighborhood would go back to Alabama and bring red dirt back and women would eat it when they were pregnant. They would eat this red dirt. Speaker 2: I don't why they would eat it, but at some point I have brought red dirt. I have it around here somewhere, the red dirt from Alabama. Speaker 1: But you never heard that growing up, people would eat this red dirt? Speaker 2: I knew people that ate it, but you know, I didn't think anything of it. Okay. Speaker 1: We didn't even question that when we were kids, you know, why you did anything like that. You said okay. But it was the healer of everything. Speaker 2: Okay. So, there's iron, I think, in red dirt? Speaker 1: Yes. It was a big problem in cleaning your clothes. You know, we didn't have a lot of grass, so you had that red dirt that you had to deal with, you know. I remember also growing up that my mother would teach us to be self-sufficient, that's what she said. She said, "Everybody's going to be self-sufficient." So, there were six girls, so every week on a rotating basis, for long as I can remember, she would teach two to cook, and they'd cook for the whole family. She'd teach two to clean, and they would clean for the whole house. Two to sew, two to wash, for the whole family. And that would rotate, and then once a week, she would teach two to sew. And she would say, "Everybody's going to be self-sufficient." This was a time when women did, girls did, inside work and guys did outside work. And in fact, when she used to say, you know, "Everybody's going to college and you're going to be self-sufficient", I thought that was some course in college, you know, self-sufficient, you know. (laughter). And that was accomplished. And they pushed education because she said that she didn't have any. She'd say education was the key. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 1: I also remember we were very religious. We went to church. We would go to church early just to dust off the seats, you know. And we'd go to Sunday school. At some point, all of us were Sunday school teachers through our youth. Story_ID: 116875 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the name of your school, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I went to Powderly Elementary School [Birmingham, Alabama]. In fact, everyone in the family followed that same pattern, Powderly Elementary School, which is all-black, and then to Wenonah High School [Birmingham, Alabama], which is all-black. Speaker 1: Now, at Powderly, did you have kindergarten there, or did it start at first grade? Speaker 2: No, it started at first grade. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: And what I remember about Powderly, we used to have May Days, where everybody would dress in white and dance around the May Day pole. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school, loved school. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject or activity at school? Speaker 2: I'm not sure in elementary school if there was a favorite. I just loved being at school and networking or learning. I always loved learning. Okay. Well, what about the teachers? Were there any special teachers in terms of, you know? Speaker 1: It was usually the principal who was the disciplinarian, that you would see, but all the teachers lived in the same community, and went to our same church. And, you know, during that time you were called Mr. and Mrs. and you didn't go and instigate a conversation with an adult unless you were asked. Speaker 2: Okay. So there was a high level of respect for adults? Speaker 1: Absolutely, yes. Speaker 2: Alright. Now, so you would see, if you messed up in school you'd see the teacher in church, right? Speaker 1: No, you'd see them next door at night when they'd come to your door telling your mother what you did. I didn't get in trouble. My brothers and maybe one of my sisters did, but by seeing the type of trouble they got in, and the discipline that was in play, I didn't get in trouble. I was the middle person, so anybody from me down, just didn't, because we saw what would happen. Speaker 2: Now was there a high standard of discipline in school? Speaker 1: Absolutely. It looked like, if I remember correctly, when my brothers used to always fight, or get in fights--and I learned later it was probably over a girl, they would have to talk to them, you'd talk to them. Okay, alright. Was there like corporal punishment in school? Speaker 2: Not in school. I didn't get any. I'm quite sure during that time they had, if I'm not mistaken, they used to rap you over your knuckles with a ruler. Speaker 1: But you never got--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. But that was going on in class? Speaker 2: In elementary school, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 116876 Speaker 1: Now, as you started getting older, the Civil Rights Movement--well, when you were about nine years old, I guess, the Montgomery bus boycott was going on. I'm just curious. Now you didn't have television until 1957, but were people talking about the bus boycott when you were little? Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, my mother [Eugenia Miller-King] about that time was working over the mountain cleaning white people's homes, and she worked for the same family all of her working life that she was doing that job. And during that time-- What was the name of the family, can you give us their name? Speaker 1: I think their name was the Peaks. I don't remember their first name. Everybody was Mr. and Mrs. Speaker 2: P-E-T-E-S? Speaker 1: P-E-A-K-S, I believe. Speaker 2: Peaks? Speaker 1: Right. And they would come and pick her up and bring her home. And I remember this big beautiful black car they would bring. And one of the things they would also do was send food over, and once they would get there, somebody in the car would open the trunk and we'd go out and get the food they'd sent over from them. She was very beloved by them. In other words, raised their kids, help raise their kids, and they respected her, and they called her 'Ms. G.' Speaker 2: What was she, was she--? Speaker 1: She was a maid. Speaker 2: Yes, but did she live there most of the time, or did she--? Speaker 1: No, she came home every night. Speaker 2: So she came home every night? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. I know there was a time when maids would live in places. Speaker 1: She didn't. Like I say, she--when my sister was old enough to go to school, that's when she started working. And I would say that was about, I want to say about '55 [1955], 1955. And that's just thinking back on that year. And like all the black women during that time, they would get on the bus early before day, take the long trip, use their transfer, over the mountain, where the rich people and the mansions were in Birmingham, and they still are. And they would leave maybe about 3:00 to be home about 4:00 or 5:00. Story_ID: 116877 Speaker 1: And when the boycott came, I remember there was talk of that. Now, my father [Floyd King, Sr.] as far as I know, had always been a part of the movement, and I didn't realize until much later, but 1954 was when they passed--the Supreme Court passed the school integration [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], and they used to meet and talk about it. But, once again, children were seen and not heard. And they talked about the boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] and everything and how to get to work and things like that. My dad at that time started riding a bicycle. He later became known for it, you know, going to work on it. Speaker 2: Did he ride one as a result of the boycott in Montgomery? I mean, was that the reason for it? Speaker 1: I didn't see it as a direct, but it was a way to getting to work and back. They didn't care, as long as you got to work. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he rode that until his eighties, to his death, really. Do you think he was just trying to establish an alternative way to--? Speaker 2: He wasn't the only one riding a bike. A lot of them were riding the bike. I just remember him riding that bike with that light on the front. Okay, alright. So, people discussed the boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott]. And did they think that the people of Montgomery were heroic, or did they think they were foolish, or was it somewhere in the middle? Speaker 1: Okay, I grew up in the all black community that was really isolated. I could not ask any questions, I did not ask any questions. We were raised not to ask any questions. Children were seen and not heard. So, you heard things. And what I learned later was that everybody was scared, you know. And some of the same things that had happened to Mrs. [Rosa] Parks had happened to my mother [Eugenia Miller-King] and other little ladies that had gone to work after a tired day, you know. I heard a story where they, the ladies, had gotten on the bus and they had to give up their seats, but they made them get off the front and go around the back. Speaker 2: You mean, go out the front door and then walk around to the back door? Speaker 1: Right. And where the bus driver would just leave them, you know. So, it was things like that, and they would talk about, the ladies would talk about--it's just cruel things like that in terms of the bus. And I think it was around that time that Ms. Peaks started taking my mother. They wouldn't take all the ladies in the community, I just remember them coming to pick her up and dropping her off. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, the procedure for this doing this, and I've read about it, but just tell us, what's the procedure for getting on a bus in those day? What would you have to do? Speaker 1: I have no idea. From history, I know that they paid them money and went out the back door and got on--went out the front door and got on the back door. Speaker 2: So, you pay your money to the driver in the front, then you got to get off and walk around to the back? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. And then sit in the back of the bus. Now, if the bus was full of white people, and this is what happened with Mrs. Parks, they had to give up their seat. Even if a man--you know, they worked and stayed on their feet all day, from working in those white people's homes, and move to the back of the bus. Speaker 2: So even if a white man got on a bus, black women would have to get up? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay. So, did you ride the bus when you were a youth? Speaker 1: I was, I did not leave my community. I did not leave my community on my own until about 1960, I was about thirteen. Speaker 2: So what you mean, what you're saying is that you stayed in a very small area until then? Speaker 1: Exactly. And you know, we used to talk about how we'd walk to school like Abraham Lincoln because the school was far away and up the hill. We'd walk home, you know, winter, summer, winter, fall. Story_ID: 116878 Speaker 1: So, did you ever go to downtown Birmingham [Alabama] for any reason? Speaker 2: Not until I was thirteen. You did not leave that community until thirteen. I didn't realize that, but you know, that was our community, that's all we knew. I would remember hearing that when my brothers were older, they would go, they had to go work and they worked at the golf course. I used to hear my parents [Floyd King, Sr. and Eugenia Miller-King] telling them don't look in a white person's eye. Say, yes sir, yes ma'am. Don't look at girls, don't whistle at white girls, that will get you killed. That sort of thing. Speaker 1: Do you know, did you hear any stories when you were growing up of someone that actually got in trouble for doing that? Speaker 2: My brother got in trouble, my oldest brother. His name was, we called him Sonny. When he graduated from high school he would go with my mother during the summertime and cut the grass at the white family's house he worked for. And one of the young ladies there, a white girl, maybe a teenager, would bring all her friends over because he was very buff, and he would evidently cut the grass in just his pants, with no shirt on. And, all of a sudden, this particular summer, they would bring him lemonade and grin in his face, as my mother would say. And when she finally realized what they were doing--and stopping him from doing his work, which is cutting the grass--she says she dropped everything and told him, "Come on, we're leaving." He didn't want to go, and she dragged him home and told him how dangerous that was, that he could not do that anymore. And that's when he started working at the Birmingham golf course. And we heard about how dangerous it was. He didn't think he was doing anything wrong, he was thirsty, he was still cutting the grass, and you know, that was the indication. Story_ID: 116879 Speaker 1: So, now, when you were grow--well during that same period, I guess, when you were becoming middle school age. That's when [HM] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth and the Birmingham [Alabama]--what do they call it, Improvement Association [sic, Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights], or was it the Birmingham--? Speaker 2: I can't remember the exact name of Dr. Shuttleworth's organization. We saw Reverend Shuttlesworth and just saw him as another minister coming to the house. I mean, even the president of the college, Miles College, Dr. [Lucius H.] Pitts, came to the house. Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had come to the house. Most of the civil rights leaders had come to the house or come through Birmingham. And one of the things that my father [Floyd King, Sr.] would---- Speaker 1: Was this because of your father's activities? Speaker 2: Well, mainly because they wanted to come to Birmingham and he was actively involved. And I even wonder to this day how did he survive with Jim Crow and his involvement? If he went for a job, he will be harassed, and I don't know this to this day, and I didn't ask. But, you know---- Speaker 1: Do you think his employers knew what he was doing? Speaker 2: It was in the news, it was in the news. Speaker 1: What your father was doing in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: No, what I was doing. Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't want to get that far yet. I'm talking about, you said---- Speaker 2: I'm not certain-- Speaker 1: Okay, but these leaders came to the house after you started, you were going-- Speaker 2: No, they came before. I remember them coming before. My father was, he was a part of a singing group. He was always known for being a traveling singer. He was a part of the McMillan Gospel Singers. And they would go all over Birmingham. He sung with the best, like Dorothy Love Coates, some of the best around Birmingham, so he was known all over Birmingham for his baritone voice, and the songs he wrote. Speaker 1: Okay, so he wrote songs, too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of his famous ones is called, "I Done Done What you Told Me to Do." 'I've prayed, I've sung, I've done what you told me to do.' Speaker 1: The implication is now-- Speaker 2: Now I can die. I've done what you told me to do, I've done everything, now I can die. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember how that goes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you hum a little bit for us? Speaker 2: "I done done what you told me to do, what you told me, what you told me to do. I sing, I sing, I pray, I pray", and then it goes on like that, and repeat the chorus. Speaker 1: Okay. I was just thinking. It might have another implication, you know, of during the Civil Rights Movement rather than-- Speaker 2: This was right around, this was probably after 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was after 1964, which means--1964 that's when the Civil Rights Bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was signed. Speaker 1: Okay. Still a struggle going on though in Alabama? Speaker 2: Still a struggle. Still a struggle, as far as I'm concerned still today. Speaker 1: So, I thought it might mean, I've done what you told me to do so now help me, you know, rather than now I'm going to die, but I--maybe that's his thought. You say that's what he intended? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That now--? Speaker 2: I believe what he was saying during that time was it came to a point in his life that all his best friends were dying and he was questioning why me, why am I still here? Why are you taking my favorite cousin, my favorite friend, you know, and I'm still here? And I didn't understand it at the time--well, wait a minute, you should be happy for that, you know. And I guess now, feeling things like that when people I know are dying and you feel your mortality, who are we to question? Speaker 1: Okay, so your father was singing with the McMillan [Gospel] Singers? Speaker 2: Gospel Singers. Speaker 1: Gospel Singers. And, you know, he would tour, you say? Speaker 2: I think he had done that even in Mobile [Alabama] back in the twenties. As they would say--the baritone voice, he would train people to sing. Story_ID: 116880 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So he [King-Miller's father, Floyd King, Sr.] was pretty busy, working in the mine and then coming home. He was an associate pastor and then singing? Speaker 2: He had gone to the Birmingham [Baptist] Bible College [Birmingham, Alabama] to get to be certified as a minister. So, he really was-- things like that. I just remember he would come home every night and we would have dinner and he would go and train a group, and sometime they would come over and train. And on the weekend I remember we used to sell barbecue dinners where he would cook barbecue. He was known for that. We would make the mash potatoes and greens and cornbread, and sell them and deliver them to people for money. And I believe also, when I was young, we were the first people on our block to get a television. And it was this little old box that on a Saturday night, we would put out on the porch and whoever wanted to come see it, could see this little old television. Television was young. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1957 you're saying, right? Speaker 2: Around '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, that made us popular. Speaker 1: You know, I've heard similar stories about radio back in the days-radio--the Joe Louis fights--people who had a radio would set it out so everybody could hear it. Speaker 2: We did that also. You know, some of my brothers did. You'd hear all the fights and they would talk about the pride we should feel in Joe Louis, even Muhammad Ali. And at one point, one Christmas, all of us got these little transistor radios that Mr. Peaks had given us, with batteries. And when the batteries ran out, you didn't have it anymore, because we couldn't afford batteries. We were poor and we didn't know we were poor, because they say we had each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, the transistor radio era. I remember, yeah, '59 [1959], '60 [1960], they came out. Speaker 2: And the black radio station would stay on from sunup to sundown. And I always used to hear music out of Tennessee, out of Memphis, or out of Nashville. At that time I think I knew every country song there was, although we weren't supposed to listen to music like that. Speaker 1: Why not? Speaker 2: My father was a minister, you know. That was blasphemy. You know, we would sit outside under the stars in our front yard, and listen to music from other places. Like I say, I remember country and western. And music like, I used to hear Johnny Mathis, and I just thought he had the most beautiful voice on the radio. And I also thought he was singing to me. Speaker 1: Okay. There are a lot of black sports figures and entertainers that have roots in Alabama in those days. And Joe Louis, even, you know, had Alabama roots. Speaker 2: I did not know that at the time. But I did remember Sam Cooke, you know, especially when he came to town and they would play his music. I think he was probably one of the earliest ones that I knew that came through Birmingham. And, now the example they use of self-sufficient because sometime during that time he opened up his own studio. He was doing it himself. And you know, he would come to little juke joints way in the back part of Powderly, and they would just talk about it and go to it. I've never gone to one, but I hear them going to it, you know. And when my father was around we'd listen to his music and knew every song. Story_ID: 116881 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well when you were, I guess, when you finished grade school--now were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: I was a very good student. Speaker 1: So, did you attend Wenonah High School [Birmingham, Alabama]? Did you start there? Speaker 2: I started there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, about what year is this, Wenonah High School [Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: About 1961. Speaker 1: Okay. 1961. Now, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do when you grew up, you know, in those days? Speaker 2: I didn't think I did, but I ordered my transcript from Wenonah and they said that--my father grew up telling us you can be anything you want to be, as long as know what you want to be. And I knew, I used to say, I want to be self-sufficient. I didn't know what that meant, I just wanted to be self-sufficient. But, on those records, they said that I wanted to be an airline stewardess. I always thought I wanted to be a writer, okay. So, that was it. I liked writing stories, but I think I was a loner, even with a lot of siblings around. Speaker 1: Okay. You spent a lot of time by yourself, reading or--? Speaker 2: What they would do in the summertime, I always had my sisters to play with. And we would--and usually summertime's the most memorable--because the year the hula hoop came out, the year the yo-yo came out, somebody, and I believe it was an aunt that was well off in Chicago, would bring down those toys, and they would bring one, and we would all play with them. But I remember one summer we got a new refrigerator, and we took that box and put it in the backyard and had a house, you know, put curtains in it and cut it out and everything. And we put our little radio in it, and put our little balls in it that we made ourselves out of socks, with buttons--and think of what she taught us in being self-sufficient. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all really were self-sufficient. You made a lot of your own toys, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I remember around Christmas someone would give us the same--like the same aunt would give us the little stoves, only one, and we all had to share it, and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you did have some manufactured toys, but they came from your aunt for the most part? Okay, did you ever go up north to visit? Speaker 2: Not until, I did not leave Birmingham until I was sixteen and had graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did you like Wenonah High School [Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Loved it. It's the same school all my siblings before--my two brothers and my two sisters before me had gone to. The principal lived in the community, you know, and the teachers lived in the community, and every now and then I would babysit for some of the teachers. We, I just loved learning. And at that time they had what they called classes where you learned how to cook. You learned how to sew, and you learned how to do hair. But my favorite class was biology. And even during the time that you might have free before school or after school, I just tried to stay around the biology teacher and in the labs there. Speaker 1: Who was your biology teacher? Speaker 2: Her name was Mrs. Singleton. Speaker 1: Okay, you had a woman teaching biology? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I think another one was Ms. Eva Moon [ph.], who was like our neighbor on the left side of us. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you think about a career in science, sort of? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a biologist. I wanted to be a biologist that worked with animals. Story_ID: 116882 Speaker 1: When did they start talking about integrating the white high school? Speaker 2: Like I say, I didn't leave Powderly [Birmingham, Alabama] until I was about thirteen, and that's when I was allowed to go to the movement [Civil Rights Movement]. At that time, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was coming through, and my dad was going to the mass meetings every Monday night. There were a couple that had been at the church in my old community where we could go. Speaker 1: Now were these meetings initiated by [HM] Reverend [Fred] Shuttlesworth? Speaker 2: I'm not sure who they were initiated by, but by history, they were mass meetings for changes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's only recently that I found out that the actual name of who was doing things, let's say as early as 1954, to make a difference for equality in Birmingham [Alabama]. I know when I did start leaving Powderly and taking a bus, I had to travel with another sibling, and when we would go downtown and pay the bills, and get back on the bus and we were told what to do. We had a cousin, an older cousin, that came over and taught us how to take the bus downtown, how much to pay, where to get off, and how to get back. And I remember going to the back door to pay. Or, if we needed shoes, going to the back door and say, well we need this size shoe, and just bringing it back and whoever it fit, it fit. And I remember my mother used to say, you can't try on your shoes before you buy them. She would also use that later in life and terms of boys, don't try on your shoes before you buy them. In other words, don't have sex before you get married, that sort of thing, you know. I always remembered. I didn't know what that meant, but at that time you said yes ma'am, yes sir and you said it with a smile. And you did it. Story_ID: 116883 Speaker 1: Okay. Now was your father [Floyd King, Sr.] a member of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he joined-- Speaker 2: He was also with, I'm very sorry I don't remember the name of [HM] Reverend [Fred] Shuttleworth's group [Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights], but he joined all of them. In fact, it was ministers who lead the civil rights movement that we saw, that came through our home. Well, in a community where, as you said before, all of the people were afraid and scared, and there wasn't a lot of information about what was going on in the outside world, why do you think your father got involved and took a risk and get involved? Speaker 1: I think he was one of the early pioneers, because he used to say, it took a lot of courage for him to leave Mobile [Alabama]. You know, you hear people, even today, say you can't wait for New York [New York]. Now, I know people right here in San Francisco that never left the City or county of San Francisco [California]. So, to take a chance like that, for a better life, he always said he wanted a better life for his children, a better life. What's a better life? Speaker 2: Okay, so but was there anything--did he read a lot, or did he, did your father--? Speaker 1: I don't remember him reading a lot. The only thing I remember him reading was the Bible, where he'd have this little light and sit and read the Bible. Like, we'd go to bed and he's reading the Bible. Story_ID: 116884 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your father's [Floyd King, Sr.] association with Dr. King and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and with [HM] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth's movement in Birmingham [Alabama]. So, as a child did you notice, you know, when he actually got involved in the civil rights movement, or did it seem like he was always involved? Speaker 2: It seemed like always. We knew Reverend Shuttlesworth first. Speaker 1: Alright, we were talking about your father's involvement with Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] and with Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth. And you said your father knew Reverend Shuttlesworth for a long time? Speaker 2: Yes, he'd known him a long time. In fact, it was Reverend Shuttlesworth who told me that him and his wife were the maid of honor and the best man at my parents' wedding. And that when they moved from Birmingham back to Wilcox County [Alabama] where Reverend Shuttlesworth had a church assignment, he rented their home from--my parents rented their home. This maybe was about 1946 somewhere like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when he came back with the movement, he needed ministers. That was one of the ones that he called--good friends, I should say. Speaker 1: Okay. They didn't go to the same church? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His church was different. Speaker 1: And Reverend Shuttlesworth's church, was it Bethel Baptist [sic, Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: That was, you're talking about in Cincinnati [sic, Greater New Light Baptist Church, Cincinnati, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're talking about in Birmingham, and we're talking about in Wilcox County, and I'm not sure of the name of it. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. I did know it at one time. Speaker 2: And then when Reverend Shuttlesworth asked Dr. King to come to Birmingham, then that's when a lot of the news reports--we would see where they were talking about it. Even back then, we could not ask any questions. We just saw what was going on, what they were doing there. Speaker 1: Now, this is '63 [1963] when Dr. King last came to Birmingham? Speaker 2: Actually, it was a little before that. Speaker 1: A little before that? Speaker 2: But that's when it was recorded. I think it was about 1963 at Easter time, in April, when he went to the Birmingham jail, and he wrote his famous letters from the Birmingham jail, but he'd been there way before that time. Speaker 1: Okay. What, in fall of 1962, or something? Speaker 2: I don't want to give a date like that, but somewhere in '62 [1962]. Story_ID: 116885 Speaker 1: Okay, now, meanwhile, you're at Wenonah High School [Birmingham, Alabama], so when did the idea come up that you would be selected to integrate uh--? Speaker 2: Jones Valley [High School, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 1: Yeah, Jones Valley. Speaker 2: Well, actually it started way before that. It wasn't like, well you go integrate Jones Valley. For me to get to Wenonah, we would walk past the white school and see the white kids on the bus--and that's a pretty school, it's nice, it's clean, it's neat. We had to walk past that school to go up the hill to Wenonah. But my life with the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] started maybe the summer before that when we would go out and demonstrate. It was a man by the name of Reverend Bevel [HM Reverend James Bevel]-- Speaker 1: James Bevel? Speaker 2: James Bevel. And there is the local guy that we knew named, they called him Meatball, his name was James Orange [sic, William Douthard]. You know, they talked about the movement, they ran the youth movement in Birmingham [Alabama]. We would go to the meetings where we were trained in non-violence and what to expect if we wanted to march, because we wanted to make a difference also. And especially during that time when there was President [John F.] Kennedy, who was saying how he wanted to change in terms of civil rights, and we wanted that change also. So, we would go to the mass meetings. We would go to the demonstrations and we would march. And that year that the youth movement broke out was, I believe in 1962 [sic 1963], that the youth movement happened and where the schools just--James Orange and Reverend Bevel emptied the schools, went in with a school bus and told them to come on out. We were told not to go, but we went anyway, to march. And we were arrested, I was arrested. Speaker 1: Was there a situation where the adults were arrested in the movement? Speaker 2: Children, we were children. Speaker 1: Well, before then, Bevel was able to get the--? Speaker 2: The children were not involved in the demonstrations. Everything was adults, most of them were ministers, okay. And most of the ministers that were involved had their own church, so they didn't go to work 9 to 5. But then when the movement started, I think when they put the water, after they put the water on the kids-- so they had started to bring out the youth. And they trained us to be non-violent, but to do--you know, in other words, if someone hit you on one side of the face, you turn the other cheek, that sort of thing. If you're marching for your freedom, and the police stop you, you're supposed to go on your knees. So, the day I was arrested-- Wait a minute. Now, I don't want to get there yet. I want to go back a little bit. Now, the meetings were held at the churches? Speaker 1: 16th Street Baptist Church. Speaker 2: 16th Street Baptist Church. So, Reverend James Bevel and Reverend James Orange, who you all called Meatball [William Douthard], the local person, conducted the meetings? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And these were all youth meetings? Speaker 1: And, also a guy named James Orange. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I said, James Orange. Speaker 1: James Orange--James Douthard, I'm sorry, William Douthard, the one they called Meatball. Speaker 2: Okay, he's William Douthard. Speaker 1: James Orange, I think James Orange was out of Atlanta, he might have been out of someplace in upper Alabama, but-- Speaker 2: How do you spell Douthard? Speaker 1: D-O-U-T-H-A-R-D. Speaker 2: D-O-U-T-H-A-R-D. Alright. Speaker 1: And Reverend Bevel. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, the youth, these were all youth meetings? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I would say from about age seventeen and under. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, how old were you when you were attending these meetings? Speaker 1: I guess I was about thirteen or fourteen. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So, now, did your parents have any--? Speaker 1: Actually, I was about fourteen, because I was already in high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And before that time, I could not go, I could not participate. My siblings that were under me could not participate and I had to go with my older two siblings, two sisters. Speaker 2: Okay, now wait a minute. Now, you were not allowed to participate in demonstrations? Speaker 1: Until I was fourteen. Speaker 2: Until you were fourteen? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. So you-- Speaker 1: So, that was about '61 [1961] or '62 [1962] somewhere around there. Speaker 2: Okay, so your parents, you had your parents' approval to be at the meetings? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. And so Bevel and James Orange and Reverend Douthard taught non-violent resistance? Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 116886 Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you think about that [non-violent resistance]? Had you ever considered the idea that when somebody hits you, you would just ball up or something, or, I mean, what would you do before--? Speaker 2: I was a Christian and we were already taught that. I think that-- Could you do that in the neighborhood? If somebody hit you in the neighborhood, what would you do? Speaker 1: We didn't do nothing like that in our neighborhood. Speaker 2: I mean, what would you do? If somebody hit you in the face, what would you do? Speaker 1: I'm not sure (laughter). I don't believe I was a fighter. We had older brothers, and during those times if anybody ever talked ugly to your sisters, it was the older brother that would appear and just give the impression that, you know, you don't mess with my sisters. They were very protective during that time. All the brothers, as far as I could tell was that. Or, if someone talked ugly, I'm going to tell my brother. It wasn't like I'm going to tell my parents, it was, I'm going to tell my brother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And as they would say, he used to go for bad. His name was Sonny, he used to go for bad. But, they just did not mess with the King girls and we were also called P.C. kids, so you know, our image in the community was high because of--I didn't understand that at the time because we were expected to do that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You never told us twice to do something. Speaker 2: Okay. You mean, P.K. kids, preacher's kids? Speaker 1: Yes. They called them P.K., preacher's kids. Speaker 2: Okay, that's what I thought. But, you all were not known for being meek and non-violent, you know. Speaker 1: Just the norm. In fact, everybody else in the community looked norm, you know, did the same sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, but what I'm asking is, were you all, you all weren't meek in the beginning, you had to be taught non-violence, right? Speaker 1: I think it was the classes they had. Uh, we were always taught that, we were taught that in church, you know. And they used to say, they used to say things like if you're not, you won't go to heaven, that sort of thing. And you wanted to be obedient. Speaker 2: Okay, to your parents and adults? Speaker 1: To your parents and adults, all. Speaker 2: To authority figures? Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Okay, well, at the time, did you think you could do that? I mean, if somebody was to attack you, I mean, if you were attacked by a police officer, that you could be--? Speaker 1: We did not see police officers in our community, I think maybe till about '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]. I really didn't think about it. Speaker 2: Okay, but you knew they were training you to face--? Speaker 1: We were training to face Bull Connor and the police when we were on marches. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's what we knew. We didn't expect to be arrested because we were children, and they said the possibility of you being arrested is very slim, until they decided they were going to arrest everybody. Story_ID: 116887 Speaker 1: And it was scary. Speaker 2: Alright. So, did you have a good idea of what you were going to face beforehand? Speaker 1: Absolutely not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was nice getting out of my community, going with other community people. Let's say maybe about 10 or 15 young people from my community would go to these Saturday meetings. We would learn the civil rights songs, you know, "I'm Not Going to Let Nobody Turn Me Around" and understanding what they mean. They would feed us, so we were happy. And being away from home for a couple hours on a Saturday. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was exciting. Speaker 2: Okay. But, you didn't have a sense of down the road this might happen or that might happen? Speaker 1: No, I did not. I was slow, country, protected, when I look back. Speaker 2: Okay, tell us what happened. Speaker 1: Well, we would go to the church and we would sit in the sanctuary and they would teach us these songs and they would tell us what to expect, and we would listen to the songs and they would explain what non-violence meant. Don't let nobody turn you around, and if the cops stop you on your march, you're to go for one block, and if they stop you, you go on your knees. If they say you know, you're resisting arrest--it's always an adult, usually a minister that's leading it, then you would turn back and return to the church. You don't fight, you don't talk back, you're quiet. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: And on the 7th of May in 1963, when they decided, I believe that was the day [Theophilus Eugene] Bull Connor decided to--oh, they showed us pictures of the police chief at that time. His name was Bull Connor. He drove around Birmingham on a big white tank truck and our goal was to go march from the 16th Street Baptist Church to Kelly Ingram Park, where we would have a rally. In any of my marches we never got there. We were always stopped and had to return to the church. Speaker 2: Now what was the rally for? Speaker 1: For freedom, for eating at, what's the name of that store, eating at-- Woolworth's. Speaker 2: Woolworth's, right. For going to the movies. And even in some cases, going to the library. We could go, but it was only in certain parts. If we went to the movies at that time, we had to enter the movie at the top, you know, go to the top. We could not go there. Speaker 1: To the balcony. Speaker 2: To the balcony. If we went to wrestling matches, we had to go to the top. You know, we paid everything, but you know, I think one time I went and just saw little dots, I didn't even understand it. So, that sort of thing. One of the things we did on Saturday before that time, was to go to movies if we went anywhere at all. And this was when our cousin started coming to teach us how to get around the city and that's what we would do. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was for basic civil rights. Was there a list of demands that--? Speaker 2: There probably were. We didn't know. We were just going along with crowd, that's all I remember. Story_ID: 116888 Speaker 1: So, you think that's the, was that the general attitude of the youth? Speaker 2: The attitude was, I think what I heard was, you were no longer--we were fighting so that you would no longer have to walk past a school to go to another school, walk past a white school to go to a black school. We were told that the books were second-hand books that the white students didn't need anymore. And we wanted that. I mean, this was a school that if you walk out of my door, maybe four city blocks, there's the school. But we had to go up a hill, maybe about eight more blocks, to the black school, on the same street. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you notice when you were in school, did you kind of notice there was a difference between the schools? I know you were told that there was, but did you think that you were getting, you know, I guess, the short end of it at Wenonah [High School, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: No, I thought I got a better education--I mean, I thought I got a good education. It was the only education system I know. And like I say, most of the teachers lived in the community, so even when they weren't at the school, they were always in a teaching mode, even at Sunday school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the adults that were saying, you know, that the books aren't quality, the money they got was--we wouldn't have known that. I knew that it was a prettier school and it was clean, you know, in terms of the black high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well tell us what happened with Bull Connor. Were you in the march where they turned the fire hoses on the youth? Speaker 2: No, I was too young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But after that, I think was arrested on May 9 where he was arresting everybody. By the time James Orange and William Douthard and [HM] Reverend [James] Bevel were going around to the school, the word was out from the last monthly meeting--I don't know what day that was on, that we're going to turn the schools out, that we're going to march downtown. And they came around with like a school bus, and stood out on the sidewalk and told--had a horn that said, "Come on out." Now, we were told not to go by our parents, and we went anyway. Everybody was just running out. The teachers tried to stop us, you know, and they threatened us, "If you go, you're going to be expelled." We went anyway. And they took us downtown. We went to the 16th Street Baptist Church. We marched, they stopped us, they arrested us. By the time they arrested our group, I think it was like maybe the third day of it. They had no more room in the Birmingham city jail, so they took us to the fair grounds, the Birmingham Fair Grounds, where they had cots they put us up on. We had to go through lines with food out of trays that looked like, it looked like mush to me. And we had to wait there. Now, we didn't know what was going on, but like I say, we were poor, and our parents didn't have the fifty dollars to get us out. And it was me and two of my other sisters. But we hung with whoever we were in school with, our school friends. And I think I stayed there for about four days before they negotiated with the [Southern Christian Leadership Council] to let us out with no penalties, okay. And it was quite a lot--it was very scary, you know. It was comforting because we had our classmates with us. Speaker 1: Did anybody get hurt in any of the arrests, or was it all peaceful? Speaker 2: Well, we were away from news, so I don't remember anybody getting hurt. I just know that they were arresting-- Speaker 1: You didn't see anybody get hurt? Speaker 2: No. They were arresting six-year olds and they were arresting--well, we were about fifteen then, or sixteen years old. Speaker 1: So, the age ranged from six to--? Speaker 2: Yes. And in my research, I've gone back and I've pulled those articles of what exactly happened during that time, you know. How did they do that? But that's how they did it. They negotiated so that people wouldn't have--I believe in the last four years ago, the Birmingham mayor made a proclamation that anybody that was arrested during that time, they would get that off their record. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you see any change as a result of what you did? Speaker 2: No. I didn't see any change until--okay, now this is May of 1963. We continued demonstrating and in--I think, I mean, hearing the bombings in Birmingham, knowing that they're now calling Birmingham, "Bombingham"--and it was my father [Floyd King, Jr.] who would come at the dinner table where the whole family would sit together. He would report what was going on in the movement as much as I can remember. Speaker 1: I want to try to stay on a chronology here, and I don't want to interrupt the flow, but in that spring, Medgar Evers is shot in Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: I didn't know that. Speaker 1: You didn't know it? Okay, alright. Story_ID: 116889 Speaker 1: In August [of 1963] is the March on Washington. Speaker 2: I went to the March on Washington through the church. And our local church, St. John Missionary Baptist Church--a bus came, I'm quite sure it was arranged by the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council]. All like people from our church, and all I remember is the one bus I was on. We went to Washington, D.C. That was my first time ever out of Birmingham, Alabama. I was just fascinated with the world, you know, the land and what I saw. And when we got off the buses in Washington, D.C., they gave us box lunches. We were told to stay in two's and we were told when to meet back, and we got there early enough so we were up front. And my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] was on that bus also and two of my sisters, and our friends. I always remember getting off the bus in Washington, D.C. and thought I was in another world, because it was so clean, and the buildings were so white, and it was so bright. And the excitement of the crowd and the signs, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now had you ever even been to the capital of Alabama? Speaker 2: Never been out of Powderly [Alabama]. I was in a cocoon. I mean, we'd gone, ventured to Birmingham [Alabama], but once again, downtown Birmingham, but once again, those were under controlled situations. We took the bus and we got off in front of the 16th Street Baptist Church when we finished our meeting. Or, at the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] office, we got on the bus and came back to our community before dark. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were at the march, did you have a sense that it was a worldwide event? Speaker 2: Absolutely no. We knew there was a lot of people there, but we knew that there would be a lot of people there before we got there, because they were saying you could easily get lost, stay in your group on the bus that you were on and with the group. Okay. So-- Speaker 1: And they gave us clear instructions. I remember them saying when we got off the bus everybody had to go to these bathrooms, go to the bathroom, and they gave us a box lunch, like I say. And when it was over and we came back on the bus everybody had to, you know they told everybody to go to the bathroom. And I used to say, well why are they going to make us go to the bathroom? I didn't know. But, we were obedient, and we did that and they gave us a box lunch and we got back on the bus and came back to Birmingham. Okay. Now, the day itself. Now what do you remember about the day? Speaker 2: I remember all those people. I remember the songs, you know, the civil rights song. I remember while we were waiting for people to come there I remember the river or wherever that is, the lake that's between the monument, and the monuments, you know, putting our feet in the water. In the moat [sic, reflecting pool] there? Speaker 1: Yes, and I remember that as more people came, whoever the adult was in charge told us we had to move closer. And I remember being close to this big old speaker, the biggest speaker I'd ever seen, and the noise and how as they talked how it vibrated--we thought it was fun that it was vibrating through your body. And we were so close we couldn't see who was actually there. I remember the singing, you know. Speaker 2: Now had you met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] prior to going to--? Speaker 1: I'd seen him, he'd been to our home, but we didn't, children couldn't talk to him. We didn't talk to any adult. Speaker 2: Okay. So, when we was the keynote speaker, did you feel like, hey I know him? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We looked up more to [HM] Reverend [Fred] Shuttlesworth for the work he was doing because he had been doing it consistently. He had been to the house more than anything, and saying what we have to do, and they talked about change, you know, we have to have it better. This needed to be got rid of and things and like that. We didn't know how. Story_ID: 116890 Speaker 1: Of the speakers, who did you--who impressed you the most of the speakers that day [August 28, 1963, the March on Washington]? Speaker 2: I think it was the singing more, and I can't say it was one person or the other. I don't have a memory of that time. I didn't know that it would be historic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I just knew we were all there. And the most thing that impressed me was that it was a rainbow of people, you know. With the movement of Birmingham [Alabama], it was black and white there together, but it was more so in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Now were you aware of the movie stars and entertainers who were there? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Charlton Heston, Lena Horne, and people like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you all mostly talked amongst each other and just enjoyed the moment of being out there? Speaker 2: Exactly. The most person we knew was Al Hibbler, and Al Hibbler and his family lived a block over from us and his--we grew up with their siblings. He was probably the person that would come to town that we would know and see in the community, per se. But we didn't say, "Oh he's a movie star" and that sort of thing. But, it was later that we knew he was even famous (laughter). He was just Al, my brother's friend. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a famous singer, Al Hibbler, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A beautiful voice. Speaker 2: And to this date, we're still family friends with the Hibbler family. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech, did you take any special note of that then? Speaker 2: Well, I remember my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] for months after that saying, "We're going to get to this, we're going to get to where everybody can go to the same schools." That's what I remember, you know. Everybody's going to be this Utopia. I didn't think it was Utopia at the time, but that's the word I want to say, that we're going to all have the same rights and people would not treat you differently. We wouldn't have to get on at the back of the bus and stuff like that, which they were still doing at that time, even after, you know, in 1964. Or, white people talking ugly to you, you know, you can't eat here, or calling you derogatory names and even then, once I started leaving my cocoon of my community, we were told that if this happened to you, don't talk back. So, it was that sort of thing. My oldest sister did not heed to that, you know. Speaker 1: What happened to her, I mean? Speaker 2: Nothing happened to her physically. We were just put out of Woolworth's, you know. We were put off the bus, that sort of thing. We just had to get the next bus, but once again you had to pay over. They didn't have transfers, you had to pay the fare over. Story_ID: 116891 Speaker 1: So when you came back to Birmingham [Alabama], then did you all continue to demonstrate? Speaker 2: Ah, not as much. We went to the mass meetings and then shortly after that was--we were in church that Sunday when they blew up the 16th Street Baptist Church, it was right at 11:00 when they announced that. We were clueless. Speaker 1: Now that was in September, right? Speaker 2: Of 1963. And we ran out, they told us to go across the street. We ran out, and what I remember was all the family members got together and we were shaking, but once again we believed so much in the ministers and the leaders of the church that after they had checked the church, we were told to come back in, because that church had also been a place where they had mass meetings. And I remember how scared I was, you know. I was really scared. We didn't know that children had been killed at that time. We knew that they had blown up the church. And when we did realize children were killed, it was of course devastating. And we wound up going to one of the funerals. In fact, I have a picture of me at the funeral. Because they had so many dignitaries inside, we were outside, outside the church. Speaker 1: Now, did you know any of the girls that were hurt? Speaker 2: No, they were from, you know, they were from a different community. We were like across town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had heard of Mr. McNair [Chris McNair] because he was a photographer for the movement, and no more than that's Mr. [Chris] McNair, he has a camera, and he takes the pictures. Speaker 1: Okay, now were the youth afraid that they might end up the same way, you know, that their church might be bombed too, or, how did you deal with that? Speaker 2: Well, I figured that we might be bombed, you know, our church might be bombed. I didn't see it as our home might be bombed at that time, that was much later. But, yeah, we were afraid to go to church. You couldn't sleep, and at that time, before that time, they were bombing [HM] Reverend [Fred] Shuttlesworth's home, they were bombing Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Abernathy's [Ralph D. Abernathy] home, all these people. They were bombing all on the other side of town. Sure, we were afraid. We had white guys who rode around in cars in our community on the main street. They didn't come on the side street, and they would taunt us, you know. Yeah, we were scared. We were told to always travel in two, be in before dark, that sort of thing. So the evening choir practice was cut out, things like that, that would put us in danger. Speaker 1: Okay. This was a tense time. Speaker 2: I didn't realize it because we had our father [Floyd King, Sr.] saying everything would be alright. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I believed that. Speaker 1: Okay, so now in 1964, what happens? Speaker 2: Let's go back to 1963. Because that September, excuse me, that November, was when they killed Kennedy, the president [President John F. Kennedy]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we just knew everything--I mean, we just heard from preaching from up and down what Kennedy was going to do, what the president was going to do. And we had a voter registration drive and that's when they made them take tests to deter them, but we just knew Kennedy was going to come in--what he was saying, he was going to save us. We'd all crowd around the TV when he gave his speech at the convention, you know, he gave his speech and he was saying all these things. And I remember we were sitting all around outside the house and the people that was out there, all the adults was cheering for what he was saying. We didn't really know what it meant, but the changes that he wanted, in terms of civil rights, the bill that he wanted to enact--and we knew that the president could make those changes and that he was looking out for black people, and that the movement, people were working with him for that, and that Jim Crow was getting old. That's when I learned about Jim Crow. I grew up in the area where I drank out of the black fountain, water fountain, and saw the white fountain over there. The difference where, you know, they're back there together where the fountain was nice and clean, and you peep in the bathroom it was nice and clean. You look in the black, it was just nasty. And that fountain was nasty, you know, I seen all of that that. We've even drank out of the white fountain just to see if the water tasted any different, and it didn't. But we were cognizant of the fact that if we would have gotten caught, something might have happened. I'm not sure what might have happened. And this was in Woolworth's. Speaker 1: So, you all would do it anyway, even if you might get caught? Speaker 2: Yeah. Woolworth's, you could go in, but it's like you go in and get what you want and leave. You couldn't sit at the counter. You can go and use the bathroom, it was filthy. But we were taught to use the bathroom before you leave home. Story_ID: 116892 Speaker 1: Alright, okay. So, the assassination of John F. Kennedy [1963] depressed the black community. It made a big impact on people, right? Speaker 2: I know I was in the last class of high school of the day, the last class, on the day when we got the news over the intercom. And it was as if--the whole school was crying like we had lost a dear relative. I look back at it now, and no wonder I was crying. I got home and my mother and father was crying, we were all crying. They were talking about it and everything, and it was like, you know, it was as if all hope had died. We had lost a good friend. My father [Floyd King, Sr.] was in denial that he was killed. He believed that--a conspiracy theory, you know. He didn't think about who did it, but he didn't believe he was actually dead. He didn't believe that this guy actually had done it, and we were real confused during that time. But we knew that everybody was crying like we had lost a member of the family. And even as growing up, we were in a cocoon when people died. They just died, they were gone, you don't talk about them. He was the first real person I remember dying and crying about it. Speaker 1: Not even the people in your family? Speaker 2: We didn't go to funerals. Even when I had a young sister that died, and maybe I was about ten then, it was like they went to the hospital because she was sick and she didn't come home, and she had died, and that was it. And she was an infant. Story_ID: 116893 Speaker 1: Now, 1964, you're seventeen. Now you're still (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, I'm sixteen. In the early part of 1964, we're still marching and we knew then after President [John F.] Kennedy had died that President [Lyndon B.] Johnson was going to sign the Civil Rights Bill. We knew that they were working on it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can't define what working on it was. And that bill was signed in June of 1964. And it was summer, and Alabama school was over in May. And I'd graduated from the eleventh grade, being promoted to the 12th grade. Also, that was the same year I was inducted into the National Honor Society, so a lot of good things were going on. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is really significant, the National Honor Society. Speaker 2: Yeah. And that played into why I was selected. I was also the queen of my class, in my eleventh grade. So, a lot--I was popular. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had a boyfriend at that time, and that was something that you didn't have, but it was no more than a boyfriend, no more than dating versus being intimate, things like that. Going to movies, or going bowling, that sort of thing. You know, it was a happy time, so we worked--we volunteered to work in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] office because we knew that pretty soon President Johnson would be signing the Civil Rights Bill of 1964, and we were taught what that meant. We went to, once again, the 16th Street Baptist Church, where still the people that were over the youth, James Orange, William Douthard--and who else, one more, [HM] Reverend [James] Bevel, you know, were the ones that did that. Anyway, so went there. So after we were told that once he signed it, we were given assignments of what we were going to do, and we did it in either sets of two or sets of four. There were people sent to Woolworth to sit at the counter. There were people sent to other restaurants that they could not go to previously. There were people sent even to the cemetery to inquire about people being buried. Me and my little group went to the movies, and for the first time, I walked into a Birmingham [Alabama] movie theater and sat right in the front on the first floor and saw 'The Sound of Music' in all of its color and glory. And I was just amazed. Speaker 1: So the actual signing of the Civil Rights Act-- just, okay, so, a lot of barriers just fell down because of that Act? Speaker 2: Exactly. In fact, by that next week they had taken down that black water fountain and that white water fountain, and put up one. Speaker 1: And so, that's a miraculous change to see. Speaker 2: Miraculous. I mean, when we went back and they said we're going to go and take a picture of a water fountain, it wasn't there. I didn't know it was historic at the time, but that's--I went with people that knew that. Speaker 1: So, were any federal marshals present or anything? Speaker 2: Not with us. Speaker 1: Did it seem as though the white community just capitulated with the law because it was the law? Speaker 2: That's exactly what they did. So, we did all of that, and we went back and reported as if--we went to the movies and we saw the Sound of Music, and that sort of thing, you know. Others who--my sister went to the restaurant and sat and they actually gave them money to have a hot dog or a hamburger at the Woolworth's counter. Some people went into the clothing stores, you know, the high end clothing stores. And I just remember me and my friends going to the movies. Story_ID: 116894 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that had to be, you know, really encouraging to people. So, it was in that atmosphere that--and since your father [Floyd King, Sr.] basically petitioned the school board for you and your sisters to attend? Speaker 2: After, when we knew that President [Lyndon B.] Johnson was going to sign the Civil Rights Bill, we knew that it meant school integration and we were going to these classes at the 16th Street Baptist Church. So, I would say it was about twenty of us from my community that was going down on the bus going to these meetings, you know, it was summertime. And we all signed up to go to this white school because we were all walking past this white school to go to the black school. When the Civil Rights plan came down, they only wanted the cream of the crop, so everybody wasn't selected. But in my house it was me and my sister that was eligible, because that year they decided they were going to integrate, they were going to integrate the high schools first. Well, it came down to maybe a week before I knew that I was selected. I was highly upset that my sister wasn't selected. But they basically said that she didn't have the grades. I was equally highly upset when none of the twenty or so others, or nineteen or eighteen others were not going. Speaker 1: You were the only person? Speaker 2: The only person. And the night before, the parents decided that they didn't want them to go. My father [Floyd King, Sr.] and my sister went around to all the people in the community, you know, who had kids in the high school, knocking on their door, begging them to let their children go. I'm not sure if they were accepted or not, and they all said no. And when I found out my sister couldn't go and nobody else was going, and why I had to be the only one, he said, "You're the chosen one, you're the chosen one." And I said, well, I want to go back to Wenonah [High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. He took me down to the office of an attorney for the civil rights. I think his name was Attorney Billingsley, and I remember him telling my father, "Well, she can't do that." I was the only black going to that school, that all white school. He said because it would desegregate the school and that was against the plan. I wasn't happy, but I was obedient and you say yes sir, and go on. Speaker 1: So, wait a minute. I'm trying to understand what happened. So, who said it was against the plan to--? Speaker 2: The attorney told my father. I was sitting there also. Speaker 1: Now this is the attorney for the--? Speaker 2: The Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement. Now do you remember his name? Speaker 2: His name was Attorney Billingsley. Speaker 1: Billingsley, okay. Speaker 2: And they told him that I could not go back to the black school because I was the only black person in that all white school and something about funding, but I didn't know what they were talking about then. But it would desegregate the school. Now, let's say if it was two blacks. The way I understood it was if it was two blacks going to that school, I could have gone back. And plus, I was the chosen one. Speaker 1: So you were the only--well, okay. Speaker 2: The only one in that school. Now on September 4, 1964 there were a total of seven students to integrate Birmingham [Alabama] public high schools. It was two in all the other schools, and I was the only one in one single school. Speaker 1: So, how many other schools were integrated? Speaker 2: It was three others. Speaker 1: Three others, okay. So, alright, you and--there were at least two at the other high schools? Speaker 2: Two each. Speaker 1: Two each, okay. Alright. So, six of them, and you're the seventh one. But you're by yourself? Speaker 2: By myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Now let me put something I read in perspective here. I read that Jones Valley had recently burnt up, right? And they built a brand new--so the one you were going to was a brand new Jones Valley High School [Birmingham, Alabama] that had just been reconstructed with all new everything. Speaker 2: Brand new. That was the first time they were going in there. I didn't know that at that time. I remember when the fire happened. I remember being--them talking about it. But in terms of it being brand new at that particular time, I did not know that. Story_ID: 116895 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well did they [Jones Valley High School, Birmingham, Alabama] provide, was any security provided for you? Speaker 2: Absolutely not. The night before, when they knew I was going, I remember my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] getting a lot of phone calls and telling all of us--there were six girls still in the house then, to go in the back of the house. And I found out later that the deacons and the cousins would come and sit in front of our house with their rifles. At that time they didn't have guns, they had rifles to protect the house. There was a lot of threats of physical violence. Now, the morning I went to school, my father had to go to work early that morning. So, my mother [Eugenia Miller-King] and one of the other neighbors who drove, was going to drive us to school, with my oldest sister who had graduated from high school. So, it was all planned that we were going to go in the school, and they had told us that we would be registered. At least they had talked to my parents--I'm going the first day just to be registered, and I could come on back home. So, the lady was going to drive us to the school. We were going to go in the school, register and she was going to wait for us to come back out. Well, when we got to the school, it was just tons of people outside, adults and young people. To me, they all looked like adults, but we found that out. And at that time the [wife of the] governor of Alabama was a woman named Lurleen Wallace, George Wallace's wife. And I remember when we got out the car, they like put up a bra up on a flagpole, where the flag should be. It was a lot of confederate flags. It was this guy with this big car named J.B. Stoner, I didn't know who he was at the time, with a confederate flag, yelling all kinds of ugly things. But my father had just told me before he had gone to work, "Remember it's not you, it's them. You're the chosen one. You have every right." So, then, my mother, my sister--we went up into the school, we met with the principal who met us at the stairs, and went in and registered and they told us what to expect, what time to be in, that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Was the principal friendly or hostile, or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were friendly? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I was told later that if they did not do this, they wouldn't get funding. But he was always friendly to me. He was the one that, I was told that if I ever get into trouble, that's who I go to. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think he was faking it? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I liked him, I did. And they, everybody was outside the school. They were yelling, they were taunting and everything. When we walked out the school, and I think it was one policeman there on a motorcycle--when we came out of the school, maybe about forty-five minutes or an hour later, our ride was gone. They had scared her off. So, we had to walk home. We walked in the middle of the street, me and my sister and my mother. Speaker 1: So, how was it to walk through that crowd? Was the crowd still out there? Speaker 2: They were on each side of the street. There was a motorcycle cop. Oh, that escorted you down the street? Speaker 1: Right, they rode down the street. Speaker 2: As you walked? Speaker 1: Yes. He rode behind us. They were yelling. They didn't throw anything at that time, but they were yelling. In fact, I have a picture of that where they took a silhouette of us, the three of us walking down the street. And we walked to the beginning of the black community, because we were in a white community, and maybe about two blocks. Remember I told you we had to walk past this school to go to the black school. So, it was two blocks. And once we crossed over into the black community, they did not cross over. The policeman stopped and they didn't come over. They seldom came over into the black community unless they were going through the main freeway through the community. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we just walked on home. Story_ID: 116896 Speaker 1: In those days did white people walk through the black community frequently? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. I said they came to the edge of the black community. Speaker 1: I just want to make it clear that this wasn't a regular, they didn't regularly walk through. Speaker 2: No, I did not see white people in my community, period. I didn't even see policemen growing up in my community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think the only white person--I'll take that back. The only white person I really would see was the mailman on a regular basis. I knew he was white, but didn't think nothing of it because I was in school most of the time. Speaker 1: Did you have other black deliverymen? Those were the days of milk deliveries, you know, dry cleaning delivery--insurance man knocking on your door? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: They were all black? Speaker 2: Yes. Booker T. Washington owned an insurance company, black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then during that time you had either, in Alabama, either black people or white people. And it was no Chinese, it was no Mexicans or anything like that. Just black or white. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you got to the edge of the black community, the crowd melted back? Speaker 2: Yes. So, we walked on down to the two blocks, and other adults were home that maybe came out on their porch, and as we walked past their house--we were still walking the middle of the street, clapping. We didn't stop, we got home and you know, and my mom talked to the lady and she told them that they had ran her off, she got scared. And I remember her saying, "It's okay, it's okay." Speaker 1: Okay. So it was you and your mother [Eugenia Miller-King]. But, you'd have to go back the next day? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 116897 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Eugenia Miller-King] go back with you the next day? Speaker 2: No, no, no. With the violence they had just from walking home, our church, St. John Missionary Baptist Church, assigned an adult to pick me up and drop me off at school. I no longer walked to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as far as I was concerned, that defeated the objective because we'd be able to walk to school. So, for a whole year, somebody picked me up, they dropped me off. Somebody came and picked me up. I was let out maybe five minutes before school ended. They had to be there, and they took me home. Speaker 1: Okay, so they let you out five minutes before school was out to make sure that you would get in your car and get back home? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you arrive at school early, or--? Speaker 2: I had to arrive five minutes after school started. I got there right when we were saying the pledge of allegiance to the flag. Everybody was in school and in their seats. And they would say the school prayer. They had that there. And I would walk in the class right there. And each day, the principal would greet me and escort me to my first class. Speaker 1: Now, what was your first day like in the classroom when you walked in? Now, here you come in and they're already saying the pledge, what was your first day like? Speaker 2: I was told that there were, I won't say Secret Service there, I didn't see them to recognize them, I knew there was a lot of, I should say a lot--there were photographers in the window. I remember they booed me. I remember that the chair that they wanted me to sit in was the only one that was empty, and it was right when I walked in the door. But when I sat in it, everybody pulled their chair away from me or to the side. So, I was on the front row, and nobody was on this side, and they'd pull it--I sat in the same seat in the same classroom. So, nobody was sitting next to me and nobody was sitting on the side of me. I knew that they started throwing spitballs in my hair. I remember, you know, just brushing them out. And I was told not to react, and that it was them. And I remember getting up those days, and this happened almost everyday, I'll say 99.9 percent of the time, and seeing all these spitballs around on the floor. The teachers did nothing. And, you know--how they taught, I don't know, but they did. Speaker 1: Now do you know, in retrospect, that the teachers were instructed to do nothing, or was it their prerogative to do nothing? Speaker 2: I don't know. However, it was one teacher, I had a speech teacher, that when we went in her classroom that first week, she said, "All of that you guys are doing is not going to come in my classroom. Carolyn is going to get an education in my class." And that did not happen in that class. And I remember the students saying, "Oh, she's from up north, that's why she's that way", meaning that her views were different. And it did not happen in that class. When it came time, let's say to take the class picture, I took a picture with the class, the speech class. We had plays and everything that she allowed me to participate in. And although they did not stand right next to me, you know, it was a little space in between, I was allowed to take that. And that's in the yearbook like that, and the yearbook is on-line. Speaker 1: Okay, now you were telling me--what would happen when you had to go to the washroom? Speaker 2: When I had to go, that very first day that the principal with my mother and my sister, they had gave us rules that I was to arrive exactly five minutes after and be picked up five minutes before schools closed. And he would be out there with me. The principal would be out there with me, Mr. Diggers. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: I believe you spell it D-I-G-G-E-R-S. Speaker 1: D-I- Speaker 2: 'D' as in dog, I-G-G-E-R-S. And his wife, Mrs. Diggers was the school secretary. And I was told that if I had--I was told not to drink anything at school because if I had to go to the bathroom--and if I did I had to go to the office and the secretary would take me to the principal or to the bathroom within the office space. Story_ID: 116898 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now what about-- Speaker 2: I was told that at lunchtime I could not go outside. I had to stay within the cafeteria. I think I was told not to go in the bathrooms, but I don't remember that. I just remember that I was told where I could go. Now, all the people in the cafeteria who served the food, except for one supervisor, were black. And I remember going through the line for my food, and I remember they used to pile all this food on, like fried chicken, mashed potatoes, vegetables. I mean, nothing like any school I'd gone to. Even at Wenonah, we took our own lunch. But they had that, and I would go through there and--chocolate milk, I didn't get chocolate milk on a regular basis. I mean, that's when I had my first chocolate milk, and I enjoyed it. And I used to have to, my father [Floyd King, Sr.] said always try to sit closest to where adults were, because you would be more safe, you'd be safe and more secure around other adults. Even in the classroom, he said you'll be secure in the classroom because the teacher's there. They cannot let anything happen to you. I didn't realize later when he kept on saying nothing would happen to me, is that the most that could happen, I could have been killed. I didn't think about them being concerned with that. I felt like I had a right. I was exercising the right, and I know he used to teach us the 14th Amendment and the 15th Amendment and used to read it to us and help us understand it, me and my siblings. And I used to remember him saying, "This is our right that's guaranteed to us. And the civil rights bill that Kennedy thought of and Johnson signed, this is your right. You're doing this for the black community." And I did begin to feel like I had the whole black community on my shoulder. I had to make sure I dressed right, I spoke right--and I was naturally a smart person, so, you know, that wasn't a problem, and I had nothing else to do. But, I would go in the cafeteria almost everyday, and they had fixed this beautiful food and I would sit at this tray and I'd sit there and I'd look at all those black women that my father said that I could not talk to, or I would get them fired. And the white kids would come by and spit, hark and spit in my food. So, I seldom ate lunch at school. And I went through a pattern of this, and I would just drink my chocolate milk and go on to class. And they would see it, I'd see tears were coming down their eyes, you know, and things like that. But it was nothing they could do. And he basically said that they would get fired, and that I was doing the right thing. And I could not react. Speaker 1: Even with a principal that seemed like he was sympathetic? Speaker 2: The principal wasn't there. Speaker 1: Okay. He thought-- Speaker 2: But he knew what was happening, because I told my father, and my father told him. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have a locker? Speaker 2: No. I didn't have a locker. However, from going from class to class, passing classes, they would let me leave the classroom first. But if other classes were changing classes also, I didn't walk down the hall by myself. As I walked by, they would jump against the lockers, you know, and call me names. They would--it was never any physical violence, I should say that. But one of the things they did do, especially during--I guess it was some type of gun crap in school, they would have water guns, where they would run behind me and they would spray me with this water gun. And I remember one time a guy just came, a man, a boy, came right up in front of me and I had glasses on, and just sprayed that water gun right in my face and my glasses. And I remember one time that I used to have wear the type of clothes that dry fast, you know, to school. And they'd shoot it in my hair and my hair would curl up and stuff like that. And I'd get to the class and I'd have to dry off or go back to the office to the principal's wife and she would take me in the bathroom where I had to dry myself off. And I just didn't talk, you know. Story_ID: 116899 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever see one of the white students get in trouble for doing something to you? Speaker 2: No, but later I learned that they were afraid. Nobody did nothing. If I got water on me, the principal's wife would take me in the bathroom, I'd get some towels, and I'd dry off and go back to class. Polyester, that was the type of fabric that--I had a lot of support from the community. One of the things they wanted me to do to look good, people in the community would give my mother fabric and they would make me clothes. It was a woman in the community named Mrs. Black that would do my hair every week. Every week I had to go before the church and tell them what happened. The very first time I told them what happened, I was being honest about the cruel things they were doing to me, I heard the church mumbling, uhmmmmm, I didn't know what it meant. And then after I did it the second time, and people were getting mad with my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] he said, "Don't tell them the bad things, just tell them the good things, and thank them for helping you." They would bring food to the house and stuff like that. They volunteered who would take me to school the next week and who would pick me up. And they would assign people to do things like that. I wasn't a part of that, but I knew who would be picking me up and bringing me back. If I needed tutoring, some of the other teachers from the black school would tutor me. We'd make arrangements for that. Now, I didn't have anybody to talk to about the emotions I was going through, because I didn't know about them. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your parents [Eugenia Miller-King and Floyd King, Sr.] just basically told you that you were doing it for the 'cause? Speaker 2: I was the chosen one. Every night, you know, during the sixties, even before that, black families sat down and ate together in the evening. That's when we would have these conversations. My father would ask what happened, and I would tell him the truth about everything bad and good what happened, with all my other siblings there with me. And he would tell me, "It's not you, it's them, and you have to forgive them. If you don't forgive them, you're not going to heaven." I was pretty religious and I wanted to go to heaven. So, I was obedient. And then I later found out that from the desegregation plan for Birmingham [Alabama], Jefferson County, one of the things they wanted to do was pull the cream of the crop. And that's why it was limited. And then the other thing I found out later was that a lot of parents were afraid that their children would get, there would be physical violence. And they said if that happened, then they probably would have hurt somebody and went to jail, and they didn't want to chance it. I found out also--remember I told you that on that first day when we walked back to the black community and the group, the mob, I would call them, that was following us and sending jeers at us, we went to the beginning of the black community, and as we walked, families would clap. Well when we finally got home, we found out that night that all the families around us had moved out except one, because they thought the Ku Klux Klan was going to come and bomb us that night. And that's when--I didn't know it at the time, when the ministers and the cousins--that even recently, one of my cousins say, wanted to apologize to me, because she used to get so upset with her husband, our cousin, because at night he would get off work and come and guard our house, yet their last name was King, and nobody was guarding them. I had nothing to do with that. But she wanted to say she was so sorry that, you know, that she treated us differently because of that. Speaker 1: There was a lot of drama going on. Speaker 2: A lot. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 116900 Speaker 1: So, did you, were you, did the teachers treat you fairly in class in terms of assignments? Speaker 2: Absolutely not. They would say, and I had a history teacher, and I remember going back to the lawyer with it, because that bugged me. She would get up in class and she would read history and when she'd get to the slavery part, she would say, the niggers this and the niggers that, and everybody was laughing in class. And when I did report it to my dad and he reported it to the lawyer, they had a meeting at the school with her. And she said because of her southern accent, that's the only thing she could say, that's the only way she knew how to say it. And I was supposed to accept that, you know. I told them I had a problem with that, because it just irked me when she would say that, and it was in such a demeaning way. I think one of the ways my dad got me around to doing is that we studied a lot of the history during that time, where I would do my reports on it. And during those times, we were either called colored or Negro. So, that was highly unacceptable, even back then. Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned, I think when we came in before we started shooting, that the first time they called you a nappy-headed--. Speaker 2: Okay. The very first day I got to the class, one of the names they called me was a nappy-headed nigger. Now that was the first time anybody ever spoke to me directly in terms like that. I personally thought it was very funny, and the way they said it. So, I went back home and I told them that, "Do you know what they called me?" And I told him, and they made up a song, you, "You know they call her a nappy-headed nigger." Speaker 1: You mean, your relatives did it? Speaker 2: Yeah, my siblings. I mean, we just thought it was hilarious (laughter). I think it was hilarious, even now, you know. I grew up in an area where names, you know, they can call you names, that don't bother you. It's when it's physical, that's different. Story_ID: 116901 Speaker 1: So, what kind of grades did the teachers give you as a result? Did they give you the grades you earned, or did they, how did they grade you? Speaker 2: Well, the teachers did not give me any grades. I got the grades I earned, and I worked at it. Like I said, I had all kinds of tutors, nothing but 'A's and 'B's. I graduated--I'd say I was one of the first in Birmingham [Alabama] history not only to attend a former all white school, but also graduated. And I was in the first ten percent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I knew that. Speaker 1: So, you were there for your sophomore year? Speaker 2: For my senior year. Speaker 1: Just your senior year? Speaker 2: Just my senior year. Okay. Speaker 1: I stopped talking. I lost all of my friends, because even after I attended school, they could no longer play with me or associate with me. Speaker 2: There's a evolution of that, right? You didn't start off like that, but what happened where you lost your, your friends in the black community, you mean? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: How? Speaker 1: It was abrupt. It was abrupt--as the day--the night before, I knew the night before I went to school, went to the all white school, I would, I could no longer, I was no longer welcome at the black young people's homes I used to attend. I could no longer be their friends. Speaker 2: Well, was it because of fear? Speaker 1: It was a fear. Their parents--and I found this out later when they told me, that it was a fear that I was going to get bombed or the Kings were going to get bombed--that's my maiden name--the Kings were going to get bombed and they didn't want their children to die. And in fact, recently as last year, someone contacted me, a black person in my community of Powderly [Alabama], contacted me and said, "Listen we're telling this story for Black History Month. We want to tell your story." And I said "Oh, sure." And she apologized. She says, "I'm so sorry, you know, during that time I saw you at the store, I saw you at the laundromat with your siblings, and I wanted to come over and just hug you, but I was scared, and I regret this to this day." I didn't know. Speaker 2: So, other than your family, you really didn't have any close associates? Speaker 1: No. And as the bombing continued, I think the biggest day I remember is when they had that Sunday march on the Pettis Bridge down in Selma [Selma to Montgomery March]. And on the way back, there was this woman named Ms. Luizzo, that was killed. Speaker 2: Viola Luizzo? Speaker 1: Viola Luizzo. And the phone, we didn't know what had happened, but that night the phone, our telephone, just blew up. I mean, it was just ringing and ringing. We were not allowed to answer the phone at this point. My father [Floyd King, Sr.] answered the phone. And that night, they swished me off to a neighbor's house for me to stay. And it was like my mother [Eugenia Miller-King] and father's friends, they were elderly people with no children. And from that march until I graduated, every weekend, I had to go to a different elder person's house over the weekend, because they were so afraid I was going to be killed. Now, I was told I was going to help them. And when I got there I cleaned, I washed, I cooked, I did everything. I still didn't talk. And for that reason, you know. I had a boyfriend, but I could not see him. That boyfriend was ran off by the Ku Klux Klan when they found out that he was going to come to my graduation--who it was, because you had to put out a list on who was invited, and I was inviting three people, my parents and him. And that night he had to leave town, because they had threatened him, and his family said you couldn't, you know, you couldn't associate with her. Story_ID: 116902 Speaker 1: Did your, did your family attend your graduation? Speaker 2: My mother [Eugenia Miller-King] and my father [Floyd King, Sr.]. And just on that graduation day was the worst day of all, because as I stood in line for me to walk in, looked like the whole class--I had on a black cap and gown, looked like the whole class threw these yellow erasers all over me. And all I remember is just turning around just screaming and crying. All this yellow was on me, right before we walked in. And I remember it was the secretary and the principal who took me into the bathroom in the office and cleaned me up, and I was screaming for my mama. And they said, "No, no, no, this is your graduation. We're going to clean you up and then you can go." And the graduation was delayed for that time. And I remember walking across the stage, and we didn't own a camera at that time, but I remember all the flashes, and I haven't seen not one of those pictures. Speaker 1: So, was the press there? Speaker 2: Not that I knew of. It was other parents. Speaker 1: Okay, but you never were cognizant of the press being around and shooting your picture for any reason? Speaker 2: I know when we took our class graduation picture--and one of the pictures I took was, I stood in the middle, we were on like benches, like you go to a football game. We were on the football field, we were on these benches. Speaker 1: On the risers at the bleachers? Speaker 2: Yes. And I stood right in the middle, equally in front and back on each side. Nobody stood inside, and I was in the middle. And my family and the people at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] called that the fly in the buttermilk. And we had, after those years, we had a, it was a hurricane came through the southwest side of Birmingham [Alabama]. And we were affected by that, where everything just floated away. And that picture was in there, and I've been trying to get a copy of that picture for years, our class picture. That's all I said. Speaker 1: It's probably in the library, I would think. Speaker 2: No, it's not. Speaker 1: It's not? Speaker 2: No, it's not. And the school is now an elementary school. And I tried to follow up on those rules, but they only told me where I could find the yearbook, because the yearbook was destroyed also. Story_ID: 116903 Speaker 1: Okay. Now there's a story you haven't told us, but I read about it. It's about your prom, your senior prom [at Jones Valley High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Let me just give you a little preface on this. With the four siblings before me going to high school, we knew what comes next, because it became a family affair that when you graduated, especially during senior weeks, you do things, you know. You get out early, you have parties, and you go to different places, usually other colleges to see what's going on, and you have a prom. And usually the week before that, it seems like everybody would get engaged, okay. For my prom, my dad had gone to the principal, and I went in the office with him and asked him what happens for the prom and graduation, he wanted to talk to him. So, he had taken off that day and he came down, and we went to school together. And they told him that "Oh, yeah, it's going to be a prom, it's going to be here at the school, and she's to be here at this time, and she doesn't have to come to school two days before, just come to the prom which is in the evening like 6:30 or 7:00, right at dark, at the school. And yeah, she can bring her date, it's no problem, everything's fine." So, my mother [Eugenia Miller-King] made me the most beautiful dress, I mean beautiful dress. I felt like a goddess in that dress. The church at that time set up a date for me to take me to the prom, and once again, all the whole family got involved with it, and prepared for the prom. The woman who did my hair all year did my hair, and the church bought me new shoes to wear and stockings and stuff like that, and I was ready. And the guy's parents decided that they were going to drive us in his car, me and my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] and his dad, we were in the back seat, to the prom. I don't remember, I know I didn't call, but I don't know if they said they were still going, but we got to the school and other people in the community, like my sister, got in somebody else's car and they followed us to the school to the prom. Story_ID: 116904 Speaker 1: It [the prom] was just like two blocks away, right? Speaker 2: Right. But it was night, and the school was dark. Usually school has a light on the outside that reflects up to the name, Jones Valley High School, but it was dark. We went all around the school and it was dark, the gate to it was dark. And as we stepped out to see, I heard somebody in one of the other cars say, "They tricked her, they tricked her." And that thing just broke my heart, and still breaks my heart to this day, that all those years I've seen proms, when people go to proms how beautiful they look, and I was denied mine. A lot of people don't like to go to their prom. I'm not talking about a lot of people, I'm talking about me. And we got back home that night. I didn't say anything, I mean nothing at all. I got out the car and left my dad [Floyd King, Sr.] with the guy, the guy's father, the guy in the car. I didn't even tell him goodbye. And I went in the house and I saw my mother. I was the first one in and I saw my mother [Eugenia Miller-King]. She said, "What happened?" I didn't say nothing. So, she sat down, and I just started crying. She sat down--and one of the traditions of black women was to lay your head on their breast, and we sat on that sofa--I'm still dressed, and just crying on her breast. And they came and they told what happened, but then they went in the back, some other family--my siblings and all them went in the back, and my mother stayed there with me. And I think I went to sleep that night in that dress, in that same position, crying. So, my father told me the next day, a couple days later, Sunday, "When you go to the school, do not ask anything about anything. Do not tell them you didn't go, do not talk about it." And that's what I did. However, they talked about it and they teased me. And I cried a lot, you know, that that happened. When my father got back in touch with the principal, the way I heard it--I wasn't there for that--he said "Oh, we mixed up the dates. Instead of being that Friday night, it was actually that Saturday night." But that wasn't true, because when the yearbook came out and I finally saw it years ago, they had it that same night and they had it at a downtown hotel. I was also denied, and I didn't know this at the time, Senior Week, where all the seniors went downtown and had lunch with the mayor. That was like a common thing that they did during those days. So, all of that was stolen from me. And I think it's a shame. Speaker 1: Okay. So, graduation was that same week, the end of the week? Speaker 2: It was, I think it was the next week, the next weekend. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the principal, who I guess in hearing you tell the story, seems like someone who's just trying to stay out of trouble himself. He's not really necessarily on your side, he's just trying to make sure that nothing, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, years later, I was invited back to the 35th Year Class Reunion, where I actually had an opportunity--it was some more things happened before that time--but when I went back, I asked them point blank about that prom. And in the book it showed who planned the prom and what parent planned it. And I asked them point blank. "Oh, well, we weren't prejudiced, we weren't racist or anything, but that's the way we did things back then." But, why did you do that? And they didn't have an answer, they just wanted to say they were sorry. And in fact during that same time--this was around I think in 1996 when I broke my silence and started talking about what happened inside the school--I mean, I was taunted every day, all day. Speaker 1: You didn't-- Story_ID: 116905 Speaker 1: [You didn't] talk about this until 1996? Speaker 2: It was very painful. I mean, I wanted to run away from it. Even the community forgot about it. You don't hear--when you hear about civil rights, you don't hear people talk about school integration. They're getting ready to build a brand new library in Washington, D.C. on the mall. They don't have nothing there about school integration. They're getting ready to--in the civil rights museum in 2000 when I went there, they had nothing on school integration. And I told them, you need to have something on school integration because there's this period--then it jumped to voter registration. And I told them that was unacceptable, you need to have something, and here's some information that you need. And that's when I started telling them. And I'm much better, because I used to not--could not tell it without crying, where it became stories of what happened when they asked. But, and I often wonder what happened, and after, it was a storm and after our family's property was destroyed, we wound up going to New York, and I didn't look back. Speaker 1: So, was this 1965, right after? Speaker 2: It was about, I think--I left Birmingham [Alabama] in 1967. I was going to Miles [College] for two years, Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], a historic black college. Speaker 1: Now that's in Birmingham? Speaker 2: In Birmingham. In fact, and I know this for a fact, but now they're trying to tell me differently. It's that one of the civil rights leaders was Dr. [Lucius H.] Pitts. He was the president of Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]. He and his wife had come to my house. Now, Jones Valley did set me up to have a four year scholarship to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles in Los Angeles, California]. But my father said, "You ain't going to California. California is going to drop off into the ocean. You're going to go over there to Miles and be a teacher or a nurse like everybody else." And it was Dr. Pitts who came over to the house and talked to me about, you know, coming to Miles, and that I would be on a scholarship with Miles, and that I would get priority registration each year. And that's what happened, to the best of my knowledge. And I went to Miles. At some point, the scholarship didn't come in on time or whatever, or I believe by the time it came in, I think I was pregnant and I didn't want to go back. I was an unwed mother, so I left, I moved to New York. Speaker 1: What was your, did you ever get a chance to talk to the other six students who integrated? Speaker 2: Never. I've never spoken to anybody else that had integrated a school. Now Birmingham [Alabama] integrated in 19-Birmingham integrated for the whole year in 1964. In 1963 and 1962 there were attempts, and I think that the most that a student lasted was two years--I'm sorry, two weeks, but they never completed. Just like in the Little Rock Nine, a lot of them attended, but all of them didn't graduate. They could not hold up. We all believed that they all attended and they all graduated, and that did not happen, in my research. Now, I did meet one time where I was on a panel of 'Those Who Dared to Integrate.' Now Birmingham integrated in 1964. In Alabama, there were 101 students to integrate. Now one of my research I'm working on is to find out where are they, I want to hear from them. Speaker 1: I'm surprised that no one gathered those students together while you were going through the process, at least to commiserate with each other about what was going on. Speaker 2: It's as if people don't want to hear about it. Even when I did go back in 2000, I'm hearing that parents didn't tell their kids. Even my relatives' children's children saying, "Why somebody didn't tell me that she did this." Also, in going back and looking, it's--I was ashamed, I was embarrassed. I was embarrassed. I didn't know what to tell the black students, you know. I feel like I don't have a home. Story_ID: 116906 Speaker 1: This is before they invited me back. And everybody wanted to take a picture with me at the reunion. I have a picture with all of us, the class there. I even had people come up to me and say "Carolyn, I took the tacks out of your chair before you got there, and I told them not to do that." "Carolyn, I swept up the spitballs around your desk when you left. The teachers did nothing." Or, say how sorry they were, they didn't do anything. But everybody would say, "We weren't prejudiced, but at the same time, if we would have helped you, then we would have been teased." And next to the high school was an elementary school. And of the most memorable people who came to the civil rights museum when I spoke there in 2000 was a young man that said he was in the elementary school which was next door. He said for years they had teased him--I think he said he was about in the sixth grade, they had teased him because he had a cleft lip. He said, "But the day you came, we would wait outside to see you come or leave, because elementary school let out early, and we would tease you, I would even tease you, and I'm so sorry." I said "Why?" He said, "Because I know how it felt when they teased me and I had a cleft lip." He said, "I always thought about it, and I came down here to tell you how sorry I was." Speaker 2: People are more likely to follow the, follow the fashion, I suppose than to do-- Speaker 1: I didn't know that, you know. And I didn't expect much. Like I say, I was the chosen one, I deserved to be there, and I felt like I knew that I had at least the weight of my community on my shoulder. Story_ID: 116907 Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel after you graduated and started going to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]? I mean, did you feel, did they make you feel like you were still the chosen one, someone special? Speaker 2: No. I didn't tell nobody, I didn't talk about it. I knew that Dr. [Lucius H.] Pitts and his wife knew. I probably knew that the people in registration knew, because once again I was given like the very first time to be-- let's say if we had a registration card, my number always used to be the first five people, you know. And registering for college, you go and that's it. But I was always the first one to register each year. I loved Miles because I got away, I was still living at home. I was in the band, I was in the choir. It was a religious institution. I was religious and loved their library. And then one day it burnt down. The school was discredited after that, but I loved looking at the beautiful lawn, you know, the campus. I loved being in the cafeteria. They called it the student union, where other kids my same age and my same color--it was segregated as far as I'm concerned--was there, and to hear them talk about things. I wrote for the school newspaper that at once--I think I wrote a Dear Abby column. People would say "You can't be writing stuff like this, you're still a virgin, you can't write stuff like this." And I'm writing what I thought, or had seen on some soap opera. And it wasn't necessarily right. And I attempted to pledge a sorority but we didn't have the money to pay the extra stuff, and it then became disillusioned. Speaker 1: About getting in the sorority? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 116908 Speaker 1: So, you say you were pregnant at the beginning of I guess would be your junior year? Speaker 2: I believe it's the end of my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Sophomore year? Okay. Speaker 2: Sophomore year. And then it was still at that time when a woman got pregnant, when a girl got pregnant, she was put out the house. Speaker 1: Did your father [Floyd King, Sr.] put you out? Speaker 2: Uh-uhm. I refused to have a shotgun wedding with the father, and I knew that. And his mother said that if the baby [Habib King] is born, we're going to take the baby. I didn't know. And I ran away to New York [Brooklyn, New York]. I called my sister in New York [Brooklyn, New York] and moved in with her, and had the baby in New York [Brooklyn, New York]. Five months later they found me. And I called them when the baby was born. But five months later--their son, who was going to Columbia University [New York, New York], went on to be a federal sitting judge for many years--found me over in Brooklyn [New York] and came over and met the baby and everything. And I told him, "No, I'm not giving up my baby and that sort of thing. You know, if you guys want to be part of his life, then that's fine." Unfortunately, when that child turned five, he was hit by a car and killed. So, but, he's still in my heart. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a very sad thing to happen. Speaker 2: And that's the same child that you know--I became very political. I did not talk about me integrating high school until 2000, I'd say about 1996. I was very popular in New York, I was running for public office before he got killed. The person who was training us was Shirley Chisholm and she welcomed young kids in there and was telling them, "You're going to be a president, you know", and knew that those kids are going to be that. Speaker 1: Now she was a congressman from Brooklyn, black congresswoman? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And she ran for president, was it 1974 [sic 1972]? Speaker 2: President, she sure did. The very first one. Speaker 1: I think was 197-- [sic 1972] well, I know she ran for president. Speaker 2: She ran for president. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And most people believe that [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson was the first black person to run for president. She was. She taught many people how to get around the political system in Brooklyn, New York, you know. And our whole thing was fighting drugs, the fight against drugs. I was involved with what they call, an organization called Rap with the Stars, where I would invite people like Earl the Pearl Monroe or John Burnett, to come to the kids. We had what they called rappers, to come and talk to the students, and tell them how bad-- We used to sponsor essay contests and things like that, before all that happened. And it just stopped that night. And once again I found myself running away. I got married and moved to California and even now when I go back, people say, we thought you were just going to go to California and die. Well, what made you think something like that? And why didn't you come around when the child was killed? "Well, I didn't know how to act that night. I never known anybody who had a child that died." And they said, "Now, I never had a child to die." So, I felt deserted again. Speaker 1: Okay, is that why you moved to California? Speaker 2: I moved as a direct result of my late husband had to have a kidney transplant. And because of his blood type, it kept coming up on the register here. He was at the top of the list. So, he came on out here. And as they would say, the operation was a success, but the patient died. I think I was about twenty-six years old, and he was thirty-one. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you do for a living here? Speaker 2: Well, for years I taught at Lefferts Junior School when I was in Brooklyn [New York]. And after he died-- Speaker 1: Now you graduated from school in New York? Speaker 2: Brooklyn. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn. When you left Miles [College, Fairfield, Alabama] you had two years and you finished them-- Speaker 2: I went back. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate and where did you graduate from? Speaker 2: Oh, when was that? It must have been, I graduated like, 1970, 1971, I believe, somewhere like that. But, after I had the baby in '67 [1967], I took some time out and went back, and for that time I worked for like a young mother's program in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you, you say you graduated from college in '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: From where? Speaker 2: Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York]. Speaker 1: Brooklyn College, okay. Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, New York. Okay. Speaker 1: And I love history, so that's the thing I wanted to aim at. But during that time, you just taught whatever. And I started running the rap room at Junior High, Lefferts Junior High [Brooklyn, New York]. I worked for School District 17, and other non--what do they call those--anti-poverty programs, or working with children. Story_ID: 116909 Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in, you changed your name in? Speaker 2: I changed my name in, must have been around '70 [1970], or '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, that's the time that Carol King came out, and that was really big, you know, and like I say, it was fun at first receiving flowers in the mail at my address in Brooklyn--didn't know where they came from. The letters, you know, were addressed to me. It wasn't Carolyn, it was just Carol King. And then, but when it became violent, when people started sending violent letters in the mail, how they wanted to kill me for my son--I didn't have a son, you know. And I went to the police. The police told me that it was someone by the name of Carol King that lived in the city, and just came out. And I gave it to them. Speaker 1: Now that's strange. I wonder why they wanted to kill Carol King? I guess it tells you--? Speaker 2: How they were going to come and "I saw you and you didn't speak back to me." And I mean, they probably still have some of those, I don't know, but I was scared. Speaker 1: Does it give you some insight on what the life of a celebrity might be like? Speaker 2: I didn't think about that. I didn't have any idea. I mean, I wanted to meet her. I wanted to send her some flowers. At that time, my idols were Gladys Knight and Aretha and Nancy [Wilson], and I wanted to go to the Apollo every year to see them and go backstage. Now, I didn't do nothing like that, but I wanted to be Gladys Knight's handmaiden, you know. Naw, I didn't think they were getting fears like that, you know. It was a time in Brooklyn [New York] where you saw everybody. I mean, I saw the Jackson Five before they were the Jackson Five that we knew of, right at the community theater when they came through here. Story_ID: 116910 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you come here, you came out to San Francisco [California] in, what year was it? Speaker 2: I got married maybe about, I think about 1975. First of all, like I say, my son [Habib King] was killed and I moved from teaching in the schools to working on Wall Street. And that gave me a chance to shuffle papers, because the emotions of schoolchildren are just too powerful. So, with that, after he got sick we moved out here, and after he died I started working again, for a brokerage firm. I worked for Charles Schwab. I first worked for Dean Witter, that's what it was called, now it's J.P. Morgan. At Charles Schwab I grew up and became supervisor. I went from there and became a supervisor at the Federal Reserve, always a financial researcher, in problem solving. And I was injured on the job back in 1997 when computers was coming in. I didn't pay attention to this pain in my wrist and kept on working. It just went all the way up this shoulder, where I damaged this whole nerve in this whole arm, and I have limited use of it now. I can't raise it above my head and it swells all the time. And they gave me limited accommodations to go back to work. They said they couldn't use me, because it's such a fast pace environment. So, I sued them, because they had brought other people back. And I won, but they did not pay me. Charles Schwab did not pay me. Speaker 1: Have they still not paid--? Speaker 2: No. I filed in federal court and nobody would take my case. And in my community, everybody was very proud because they'd never known anybody who filed a federal lawsuit against a big company. Everybody said, "Hey, listen this is a working community, it's at will, they can do that." But I filed it. Speaker 1: Okay, you say you're still waiting to see the outcome? Speaker 2: I don't wait no more. I went on and I started my own business, which is a genealogist--called Creative Genealogist Services. One of the parts of this injury is the pain, you know, not sleeping, not being able to lie down. One of the things the doctor said is get yourself a hobby. And I got myself a hobby by going back to school. First, I went back and I got a degree at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], in human resource management. And then everything turns over to the computer. But my organization, my employment organization for the community is called Each One Teach One. And that was designed for high school graduates on this side of the law who weren't going to college. And that became very--the youth just seem to me to be so entitled, it was their attitude, and I said, I don't want to deal with this. So, then I started the Creative Genealogy Services. Speaker 1: Now, what year did you get your degree from San Francisco State? Speaker 2: Maybe in 2000. Story_ID: 116911 Speaker 1: Okay. Shortly after your accident, there was an article that appeared in the-- Speaker 2: Which accident? Speaker 1: The accident with your, I mean, your injury. Speaker 2: Oh, it was before that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before that time, my son [Hakika Miller-Drisker] was in high school and he entered a city-wide essay contest with Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. And he wrote about my experience, he wanted to talk about it, you know. He used to talk about it every year during Black History Month. But he wanted to talk about it, and he wrote about it. And he won the city-wide contest, with a $500 money order, and a chance to meet Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, for both of us, and I was very proud of that. In fact, I was working for Charles Schwab and they wrote it up in the job paper, and a lot of accolades. The next year, and they don't relate at all, one of the white students I'd gone to school with named Ken Battles wrote an open letter to the Birmingham [Alabama] newspaper, an open letter of apology. And like maybe a hundred different people from Birmingham [Alabama] that knew I was out here, mostly relatives, sent me the cut-out article itself. I didn't know if it was from the Birmingham [Alabama] paper or whatever--and they sent me that article because they knew they were talking about me. And, finally it got around where he finally contacted me and said he was graduating from college and he wanted to do a thesis. And we worked together with it. But I told him that first of all, you need to tell me some things, you know. What happened with the prom? Why did they treat me that way? What did you do to stop it? And he was the first one to tell me he couldn't do nothing, and although his parents weren't racist, they would have teased him too. And he says "We're having a class reunion next year, I want you to come." I said, "I'm not welcome." So, the committee sent me a letter, inviting me to come back to the 35th year anniversary. And you know, you a fee like everybody else who would come. And I decided to go, because the year before I had broken my silence. So, we put together a speaking engagement. So, when I go to Birmingham [Alabama], it would be 'Breaking Your Silence and Moving Towards Reconciliation and Racial Healing.' Speaker 1: So, who was that set up with? Speaker 2: It was set up with, my sister has an organization called QTI, Quality--I'm sorry, QTI Public Relations firm, out of Atlanta. So, she set up everything. And I would speak at the Birmingham [Alabama] Civil Rights Museum. She submitted the information to the Birmingham [Alabama] News, and the same day that I hit town, they had this picture that you have. It hit the front page, and my story, and inviting people to come to the Civil Rights Museum to talk about racial healing. And we had Dr. C. T. Vivian as the headline speaker, and they introduced me and told my story. At that time, the President of the United States was President Bill Clinton. He sent me a letter of apology and congratulations. The city of Birmingham [Alabama], and it's up on the wall, gave me a key to the city, and an apology. And my family gave me these plagues and these posters, the same thing, for recognition as an unsung 'she-ro'. When I--and the church sponsored the hotel that they put me up in--I'm sorry, the Civil Rights Museum did. But, I wanted to stay a couple days and the church did the other half. Story_ID: 116912 Speaker 1: And what they did, once it was in the news I was there and I was going to black and white radio stations in Birmingham [Alabama], telling my stories and everything. Well, I guess people found out where I was living, and the night before the prom, the hotel I was staying at started getting I would call--what we call now, terrorist telephone calls. I meant, it became so bad that the manager came up and said that you guys are getting these calls and we had gotten two up to the room; they told them to hold those calls. So, we went back to the church I grew up in, St. John Missionary Baptist Church, and told the pastor. And it was an FBI guy and a policeman, a Birmingham policeman, that goes to the church. And they provided security, not only from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], but also from the Birmingham Police Department. They came up and they talked to us, and you know, and told us to be careful, but we'll be here. And when we left going from the hotel, and they put security around the hotel so nothing would happen there, because they were scared, and they wanted to put us out. So, what they did was they provided an escort to, to the prom. And with that, I took along with me as my guest the newspaper reporter named Vicky Howell, who had written the story that appeared on the first page. She had called out here and I had given her everything. Beautiful article that captured everything, including the prom. When she got there--and she just wanted to keep knowing about my feelings, my feeling. I didn't have no feeling. First of all, when I asked people who did come around that were in my class at the time, and they--and I didn't know, I didn't know anybody from my class. I had met Ken Bell, I mean Ken Battles, and when I got to the prom, I met the committee, who they told me who they were and what role they played during that time, but I didn't know them Adam from Eve. Of course, they all apologized and told me things, "Well, you know, I own a car dealership. If you're ever here and you need a car, call me." And the other one was a real estate--, "If you ever need a house, call me." That sort of thing. And, so, you know, they all wanted to know what's my feeling, what's my feeling, you know? I'll say out of the maybe five hundred, six hundred people there, maybe about fifty came up and said I'm sorry. And out of the class I graduated out of, it was 107 of us, and for that class picture maybe it was about, I'd say it's about eighty, ninety. These are all adults now. And I recreated that picture by standing in the middle, and I'll share it with you after this, and they all stood this time by me. And all of them said they were sorry. Everybody wanted to hug me. When I asked them point blank, "Why didn't you do anything?" And that's when they said that, you know, they were afraid that something would happen to them, they would be teased. When I asked them about the prom, they said, "We thought you were going to bring the whole black community to our prom, and we were scared." When I asked them about meeting with the mayor during senior week, and this was thirty-five years ago, they said, "We didn't think you wanted to go, because you didn't come to school." "But the principal told me not to come." "Well, we know." So, all those were lame excuses, and I told them I didn't buy it, and please don't tell me nothing like that before--anymore. For those who said that--for the taunting things they did to me, even the--it looked like all the boys was in the gun club at the school. During that time, gun clubs in school was popular. And as far as I'm concerned, they all sprayed me with--shot me with those little plastic water guns. And they--, "I don't remember doing that, I don't remember doing that," you know, but they all were there, and when they--I looked at a picture of them during that time, in the yearbook. I said, "Yes, you were, this is you right?" "Right, yeah, yeah, I'm sorry. Can you forgive me?" And I told them what my father said, "I forgave you at that time." I was raised that you had to forgive at that time if you were gonna go ahead, and that's what has gotten me this far. You have to let go, you have to let go. Story_ID: 116913 Speaker 1: Okay. So, since, tell me about the genealogical business [Creative Genealogist Services]. Speaker 2: Well, one of the problems that I had after I won the lawsuit and they didn't pay, is that I wanted to create a business for myself. I had a hard time, being sick. I only have one arm, you know, to use, and I went back to workshops to be certified as an African American genealogist. It means just going to a lot of workshops and publishing your first book. And it's really more like a pamphlet, but publishing it--and giving a copy--I gave mine to a genealogy library down in San Bruno [California]. Actually, it's the national archives. So, if anybody goes in there looking for genealogy on this particular family, you can find it. But, it allowed me to keep my mind active. It allowed me to take my mind away from the pain. When I started charging as a business--and now I'm stopping, because people don't like to pay. They don't like to pay on time, and I'm not--I guess I'm still that non-violent thing, where I don't want to run you down to make you pay. And I think I have about five in there I've completed, but they need to pay me. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how do you manage to live now? I mean, are you--? Speaker 2: I'm still on long term disability insurance, and that should be running out soon. And I'm still trying to create either a speaking engagement--for the last ten years--just during Black History Month, I go around to the universities here in San Francisco [California] and to the high schools, and talk about either genealogy or my integration experience. I used to do that with the churches around here, with the integration. And I'm pulling away from that. I've written a grant thus far, with something called the Pepsi project, and I would like for them to pick that up, and I would like to do that. By the way, I also go and speak during Women's History Month. And I speak under that 'Women Who Dared, One Who Dared to Integrate.' And I go around with that, and I get a fee for that. It's very hard. It's thankless, but at the same time, it makes me feel good. By telling my story it releases--even sharing this with you today. Story_ID: 116914 Speaker 1: Okay. What's the prognosis on your injury? Speaker 2: It's not curable. It'll get worse before it gets better. I'm in aqua therapy and on medication, and I still go to the doctor for it. When the weather is bad-- it's a muscular skeletal injury, it gets worse. Or, when I sit too long, things like that, it hurts. It's the pain, it's chronic pain from it. Speaker 1: It's primarily in your shoulder, you say? Speaker 2: My whole right arm, from the tip of my tongue all the way up through the middle of my arm to behind my ear on my right side. And, however, my doctor swears that her finger's on the pulse for anything that comes through in terms of a cure. Story_ID: 116915 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, if you had a choice right now of doing anything, I mean, that you could get funding to do, what would you do? Is there any particular thing that you would do? Speaker 2: Absolutely. The first thing I think I would personally like to do, is pay off my son's [Hakika Miller-Drisker] student loan. He recently graduated from San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] with a B.S. degree in kinesiology, sports medicine. And I also would pay for him to go on to be a Ph.D. When I think about the people who I have--you hear Oprah talk about this all the time. She thanked the people who crossed the bridge before her, she always talked about, she always honor them and things like that. When I look back at Birmingham [Alabama], and you have somebody like--that had a black mayor, a couple of black mayors--there are some that are younger than me that I paved the way for. You even had Dr. [Condeleeza] Rice, she's younger than me. In fact, she was in the 16th Street Baptist Church, a member at 16th Street Baptist Church, when it blew up. I paved the way for--meaning, opening integration. Now, my siblings who went after me to high school at Jones Valley [High School, Birmingham, Alabama], had a horrible time. Families tell me that the boys got in fights everyday, that it was horrible after that. I didn't have that. When I go back [to Birmingham, Alabama] today--when I went back in 2000--and I did not see integration like I know it here [San Francisco, California], I questioned them and they said--and I said, "Well, you know, what I did was all for nothing. It was like a year stole out of my life." And the principal swore to me, and said, "But we all get the same money. We have some white teachers, but the white students just moved away and built their own schools." When I think about the education system, how bad it is, I feel embarrassed. And even when I was down there, some people said, "Why can't you do something about it?" You know, it's nothing I can do. I can't do anything about the ones in San Francisco. However, in 2003, the Birmingham City Council named a street in my honor, the street I lived on, and the street in front of Jones Valley. And it's named Carolyn King Boulevard, and I'm very proud of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had all the big civil rights icons that are still alive, like my parents' friends, to come there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your father [Floyd King, Sr.] live to see you honored? Speaker 2: No. He did not. He died in 1995 at the age of I believe eighty-five. Story_ID: 116916 Speaker 1: I think you mentioned off camera that he [Floyd King, Sr.] had a radio show in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] and traveled to Paris [France] with his gospel group and made recordings, and was known as the Bicycle Preacher in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Would you like me to share that story? Speaker 1: Sure, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, actually he started radio when I was a kid. You know, he would go to the radio station, like I said, black stations in Alabama were on from sunup to sundown. And on a Sunday, all the black stations had a gospel show on, and you can go from there. And when we lost our home and we moved to New York, he went to a station in New York, and I forgot the name of the call letters, but he started again, buying time for his gospel show. And he started something called the American Trailblazers. From the American Trailblazers, a young man, a white man, came and followed their group and sponsored their group, a group of about five. And the name of that group was called The No Name Gospel Singers and took them all over the world to sing. And they recorded albums, and Paris, France was where they would go back every year. He also taught one of my sisters how to come up to the radio show. And upon his death, my sister took over his radio station in New York. And after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], she moved back to Birmingham [Alabama]. She moved back to not only just Birmingham [Alabama], she moved back to our home community. And she went back to the radio store and bought time. Every Sunday morning, even as of last Sunday, she comes on 9:00 a.m. in Birmingham [Alabama] on WJLD for fifteen minutes of the American Gospel Trailblazers, where she promotes young and upcoming singers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, and recently, I should say, and recently she started her grandchildren into learning this business. She has a grandson that sings very well and a granddaughter that's also working with her. And they are, I think she's about eighteen and he's about six. And if you hear them, you wouldn't believe it. Speaker 1: So, was your mother [Eugenia Miller-King] still alive when you were honored? Speaker 2: No. My mother died in 1986. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In New York. Speaker 1: Okay. But, your siblings did come and--? Speaker 2: Most of them, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 116917 Speaker 1: All right. Uh, what--we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I believe that the African American community needs to teach about the past. We need to understand, you know, that our future is in our youth. We need to understand where we come from, we need to understand slavery, we need to understand--we need to be an example for the young people. And I think that--I really want them to know more about slave reparations with what our part in building this country is, and not just thinking, you know, that we're just here. It's about more than that. And creating your own, building your own, having your own, buying from your own. But most important is racial healing. We need that, really need that. We need to talk about it. When I go and speak about public school integration and the torment I went through, and how I didn't talk, most of the people who respond--I usually give the teacher maybe about two questions to ask the kids to ask their parents of what they remember, so when they come to a workshop, they can at least have one question about their own family. And most of the kids who really, really come out and just say, "This happened to my family" and they know their history, is the Chinese. And I've learned more about how the Chinese lived and how they were discriminated against in San Francisco [California], especially around the early 1900s. And when they come to my genealogy workshop, those are the ones who've taken up the reins and not only learned about their history, that I know them personally, but they also have gone back to their homeland. Now, when I become a millionaire, I'm going right back to my whole--my community, in Birmingham [Alabama] and I'm going to do the improvements needed to the community. I will probably go, if I can get a chance financially, I would like to go back this June 2011 to a family reunion. And I would like to educate--starting with my own family, my own church, and let them know that I'm no longer ashamed. You know, I no longer feel oh, woe is me, I did this and I lost this, because I'm still here, and a lot of them are gone before us. So we should be able to tell our own history. Story_ID: 116918 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you look back on everything you've gone through, and even your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I get that question a lot. In fact, I get that question a lot from high school students. They want to know, why didn't you go back to the black school? What would they have done? And they really want to know, "Why didn't you just go back? You said things could be different." I think that I probably would have stayed involved with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and I probably would have pushed my education. Maybe be more like a constitutional lawyer, or a constitutional type person who would fight for the little man when rights are being violated. And although a lot of people say it's not too late for that, that's what I would have done differently. Story_ID: 116919 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, likewise when you look back at everything, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I opened doors based on the constitution of the United States, the 14th Amendment and the 15th Amendment. Those are rights that are inherent to us, and those rights are not just written for one people, it's written for everyone. I would teach children constitutional rights--you know, know your rights. And how I have, all of my life, I've worked all of my life. All of my life mostly I've been the only black there. At the base end of what they call, I forgot what they call it, when they allow one black person in. But at the same time, I have allowed myself to educate every child I meet. When my son graduated from high school--and they were all on the championship football team--we pushed that those kids are going to walk across that stage with a decent grade, with a high school diploma, with their selective service card, and their voter registration. And even today, if there's an election, they all come over here and we go over the issues and why they should vote. Why it's more important to them than me, to educate them. Even when they bring their little children over, try to educate them, someone that knows. All that's necessary. Having--the first thing youth want is a driver's license, usually, but-- Speaker 1: They get those in the eleventh grade. Speaker 2: But they ought to be guided to get their voter's registration card, I would think. Speaker 1: And vote, they need to vote. And I signed them all up for absentee voting. California and San Francisco is like that, so that we could all talk about the issues. They're the ones who helped me change my mind from Hillary Clinton to [HM] Barack Obama. Many of them I've tried to get to run for government here in the city. Speaker 2: So, you're involved in community organizations here in the city? Speaker 1: Not as much, not since this rainy season. This has been the one--no, I should say not since the last two years, I've had this genealogy. During campaign seasons, especially during national elections--Al Gore and all of them--I've been very involved and getting other people very involved--other seniors, young people involved, talking about the issues. Since Barack Obama, I've met every year, sporadically, with Nancy Pelosi and Diane Feinstein and Barbara Boxer. Those are the main ones. I've even helped with the campaign of Representative Miller over in Richmond. I have family over there, you know. But to stay on top of things, just to be educated. Okay. When you look back on it, do you think the experience at Jones Valley [High School] helped you in corporate America, in terms of being the only black person in the departments at Charles Schwab and Federal Reserve Bank and such? Speaker 2: No, I think all that dealt with education from the beginning. And even now, I teach young people, read the rules of where you are. Follow the rules from within and if you get in trouble, you use those same rules to get ahead. You know, follow the rules on this side of the law. Follow the rules that are written, and you won't go wrong. Speaker 1: Okay, ah-- Speaker 2: Versus being defensive and want to fight. And, pull up your pants. Alright. Now, is there anything that I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 1: Well, if anyone's out there that want to help me a) trace and find those other 101 people to talk about their experiences inside the school--public school integration--it was a big thing, and want to sponsor me, then fine. I'm not afraid anymore. I still think that my name, Tasmiya, the name I selected for myself, is one of tranquility, and I hope that I can find the opportunity to teach, to go around and tell people, it's okay, it's not that bad. A lot of things that's going on now, people in the world think it's just so bad, and doing genealogy, I find out my ancestors had it worse. Our ancestors had it worse, but they survived because they had each other, and I'm very proud of that. So, knowing where you came from, so you can decide where you want to go. Story_ID: 116920 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as the first of the first, among the first of the first in Birmingham [Alabama] history. Birmingham [Alabama] is a very crucial part of the civil rights movement. During some very hard times of Jim Crow, and the Ku Klux Klan--and bravery was the thing in making a difference that we can have a better world. I often look at, not only the blacks, but other third worlds--the Mexicans, the Chinese, the Cubans, everybody else is third world--how they all walked through that same door that I opened, that whites say you cannot do, only because of the color of your skin. And I would like for them to take advantage of it, really take advantage of it. We need to get back to where kids are learning and applying themselves and being self-sufficient. I often think someone like Oprah that opened her own school--and if I had an imprint in that, I'd say, well I want to make these--she wants to make leaders, make them self-sufficient. What does self-sufficient mean? Go back to the olden days where they learned how to wash, iron and cook. You'd be surprised at how many twenty-one-year old young ladies don't know how to cook, you know. I can get down (laughter). But I got down for a whole family, and didn't think nothing of it. Or sew, or read, write, you know. That I made a difference for not me, not for my race, but for America, in making it a better place. And I'm proud of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you for sharing your story with us. We're honored. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: Alright..