 Story_ID: 99471 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Claudia E. Deliano. Speaker 2: De Llano. Speaker 1: De Llano, okay. And ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, I am T'Keyah Crystal Keymah; that's T'(apostrophe)-(capital) K-E-Y-A-H, C-R-Y-S-T-A-L, K-E-Y-M-A-H. Speaker 1: All right, and can I ask you how you acquired that name? Speaker 2: Yeah, my birth name was Crystal Walker. And when I was, I don't know how old I was, maybe nine years old--I, I don't really remember--in Illinois, where I grew up, there was a governor named Govern Dan I think his first name was. Speaker 1: Dan Walker Speaker 2: Walker. And he had this big campaign, Walk for Walker. And I thought, oh, we're relatives. We have to campaign with him, Walk for Walker. And I told my grand let's, you know, we all have to do this. And she said no, honey, there is a relationship between you and white people named Walker, but it's not what you think. And I think that was my, my introduction to the understanding of slavery, and I felt really, really tricked. I felt I didn't understand why people coming through slavery given names by the people who owned them would keep any part of that. And so I decided at nine that I was gonna release that trick on me and that no one who came after me would be tricked like that. And of course, you know, at nine I thought Crystal Blue Star, Crystal Blue Casuasian (ph.), you know. And luckily, I, I had no legal rights to change my name right away. But I never forgot that, that moment and that feeling of being misconnected. And my whole life I looked for a name, and when I was in college I started thinking about it seriously again. And after I graduated I said okay, okay, I'm gonna do that. And I didn't have the confidence of a nine-year-old. I had, you know, the, the weariness of adult to say: what are the repercussions from this? What, what is everybody gonna say? What's my family gonna say? I'm not gonna be like them anymore. But I thought it was more important to me, for me, to do something that I felt was spiritually empowering, to say I'm not gonna participate in this trick anymore; I'm not going to participate in this misconnection. I'm going to correct the connection with me. And people will understand or they won't; they'll follow or they won't, but I needed to make that correction for me. And I started looking for names, and I looked in all the name books. And all the names for women meant peace or Wednesday or flower. And I thought no, no, no (laughter). I, I want something more empowering than that, more powerful than that. And I just kept an open mind, and in 1985 I think, I was reading a book called "God, the Black Man and Truth" by Ben Ammi. And a chapter in the book was on resurrection. And resurrection was defined at the beginning of that chapter with three words: t'keyah, keymah, and hakatcha (ph.), t'keyah meaning mentally a revival of God's spirit (I'm translating loosely), keymah meaning to establish oneself, to come to one's feet, to move from invisible to visible, and Hakatcha meaning a, a fearful and dreadful awakening. And I thought of all the things that black people need to do. I think our main thing is to re--resurrect ourselves, to be reborn again and living, because to a great extent, I see black people as the living dead. We survived this horrible thing, but more in appearance than in reality. We, we don't--we survived because we're survivors, but to a great extent, our insides are hollow because of it. And in my opinion, until there are no more monuments to slaveholders, until there--the currency does not glorify the slave trade, until the history books are corrected, and the language of the psychologists are corrected, we're going to be a living dead people because you can't, you can't be alive in a world that, that says you, you never really existed in a certain way. Story_ID: 99472 Speaker 1: And so I, I began to look for--I thought that last word was a little, little too much for me, Hakatcha, but those first two words, t'keyah and keymah, I thought that, that's what I need; I need to, to have this, this God force behind me; and I need to, to come to my feet, so to speak, and, and be a, alive, awake person. And I started looking for names that mean those things and found tulip and Thursday. And eventually in 1986 I said I'm, I'm gonna take those words as my names. And people will say what kind of name is that? And I'll say it's my name. And I think that--well, certainly, after the fact, I've met other T'Keyahs, and I've, I, I know the names and the, the wonderful thing to me, certainly the book was, Ben Ammi's book, the Hebrew Israelites, the words are Hebrew. But I found those words with similar or, or the same meaning in many, many African languages, not just Hebrew, and Keymah, also in Native American languages. And so for me, I felt like I was guided to that book, and I was guided to, to pay more attention to that chapter than any other and to those words, because those are the names that were correct for me for what I needed spiritually to continue on my path in this life. And I kept the names. I did a whole ceremony, I--with my whole family. It was, it was wonderful actually, and--because I knew that there would be negative repercussions. Whenever you leave a group, the group, even when they, they understand, part of them is offended. You're leaving us. What does that say about you, what you think of me, and me for staying behind or staying in this place? When you, when you move left, what does that say about me standing right? And so I thought I, I have to include everyone in this decision, in this journey so that whatever the repercussions are, you know, I can stomach them, and I can have this shield to say, you know, I've taken my time; I've taken twenty years (laughter) to think about, and--well, not, maybe not that long, but, you know, fifteen years. That's a long (laughter) time for me to think about it, and I've included all of this energy. And my immediately family definitely, they, they thought it was a great thing, or at least that's what they said at the time. And, and I have--and even going to court to change your name was odd. And I remember the judge, and I thought, please don't let me get a judge named Walker. I don't want a (laughter), a white judge or a black, you know. And I thought, oh, I don't wanna, I don't, I, you know, I don't wanna have to deal with this right now. But it was odd because the judge assumed that I was Muslim or there as some religious reason that I was changing my name. And that was the first kind of, you're gonna be questioned about this again, and again, and again, but--and it's been a long time now. For me it's been going on twenty years, and so I'm, I'm comfortable with this. And certainly, as an actress signing autographs, I've signed Keymah I think 10,000 more times than I ever, you know, wrote Walker in my whole (laughter) life until then. And I, I understand the reactions now on all sides from, from white, people, from black people, from Jewish people who say what are you doing with that Hebrew name? Do you know what it means? And having to say for the 10,000th time: you know, what, yes, I actually do know what my own name means. What does that say about the mindset of black people that you would assume that I don't? But I understand, I understand all of it. And to me, every reaction is evidence that something's not quite right with black people from, from your name on. Story_ID: 99473 Speaker 1: Okay, that's a, that was really thorough, so. And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, I was born October 13th, 1962. I think it was a Wednesday, and I think it was around 11:00 in the morning, Cook County Hospital. Speaker 1: Now this is really thorough (laughter). This is good. Now we do a thorough interview, and this is, is for history, so this is good. This is really good how you're approaching this; I like it. So, tell me--oh, another question. This is, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an actress, a singer, a writer, a producer, a director, a publisher, and an idea person, and a teacher; all of those things are my profession. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 6th, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the Burbank Hilton Hotel in Burbank, California, not far from where I live in North Hollywood. Story_ID: 99474 Speaker 1: Okay, now we, we always start off with five lightweight, "People" magazine-ish type questions, and they compel me to ask these of everyone. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: The first one is--they just require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food would be, it really depends on, you know, what time of the day, what, you know, what my mood is. But one of my favorite foods is broccoli. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sauteed broccoli-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I'll say that's my favorite. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: That changes too. Sometimes my favorite color is purle, sometimes it's orange. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: This is my favorite time of year, fall, maybe because my birthday is right in this time. I, I really appreciate all seasons for their uniqueness, especially living in California when there, there are no seasons. I love to go home every season, home to Chicago [Illinois]. But I like fall the best because there's something just so beautiful about leaves changing colors and the fall colors. That, that's my favorite, and I like sweater, sweater weather, not, not cold, not, not coat, you know, overcoat, scarf in your face weather, but I like sweater, sweater weather. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I, if I could blink right now and be someplace other than here, I would be on the beach in Gambia. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have--the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I've many, many favorite phrases and sayings, and the, the one that comes to mind that I say a lot is love and forgive. Story_ID: 99475 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Now I want to start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name is Arlene Levergne Carter, and that's A-R-L-E-N-E, L-E-V-E-R-G-N-E, C-A-R-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place? Speaker 2: You got me there. I can't, I can't think of, of her birth date. She was born in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what do you think in the 19th--'20s [1920s] or '30s [1930s] or? Speaker 2: The date '34 [1934] pops up, but I, I wouldn't swear to that. Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure what her birthday is. Speaker 1: Okay, but she was born in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what do you know about her side of the family? What do you know about the ancestors on that side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Okay, ooh, wow, I should have done a little research. I could have been much more brilliant on these answers. Let's see, on my mother's side, well, I know a lot more about my mother's side because I was raised by my maternal grandparents. My, my, let's see, my mother's grandmother, my great-grandmother, who also lived with us until she passed--do you want names-- Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: --of people? Okay, so, my mother's parents are Mary Louise Zeno, M-A-R-Y, L-O-U-I-S-E, Z-E-N-O and Carneil Carter, C-A-R-N-E-I-L, C-A-R-T-E-R. My grandmother's parents, my mother's mother's parents are Mintha, M-I-N-T-H-A. I'm not certain what her maiden name was. Her father's name was Arista Zeno, A-R-I-S-T-- Speaker 1: A-R-- Speaker 2: --A. I, I'm not sure if there's an h on the end--Zeno, who was called Willie. He was Arista William Zeno, and he was called Willie. I, I believe my great-grandmother's maiden name might have been Harry, H-A-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm just, because I know something about Chicago, are you related to LaMont Zeno? Speaker 2: Correct, yeah, yeah. LaMont Zeno is my cousin. Lamont Zeno's father, William Zeno, is my grandmother, Mary Zeno's, brother. Speaker 1: And there's a theater in Chicago, Better Boys Foundation-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the Westside-- Speaker 2: LaMont Zeno Theatre. Speaker 1: --that's called the Lamont Zeno Theatre. Speaker 2: I was there when it was dedicated. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he died in the seventies [1970s] I suppose, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: Let's see, my, my grandmother, my great-grandmother, Mintha Zeno, her mother--gosh, I don't wanna say the wrong name; I think her name was Mary, but I'm not certain--was a slave. Speaker 1: So this is your, your-- Speaker 2: My mother's great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's great-grandmother, my mother's, mother's, mother's mother. Speaker 1: So you, okay, so you, your great-grandmother was Mintha. Speaker 2: Mintha Zeno. Speaker 1: And was she-- Speaker 2: And this is her-- Speaker 1: --a slave? Speaker 2: --her, her mother. No. Speaker 1: No, her mother. Her mother is Mary-- Speaker 2: No, her mother was a slave. Speaker 1: --so that's a great-great-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm, great-great-grandmother. Speaker 1: --great, I think, isn't it? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, great-great-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --grandmother-- Speaker 1: Grandmother, okay. Speaker 2: --was a slave. Speaker 1: Mary, okay. Do you know here? Speaker 2: --who--must have been in Louisiana--who was freed in her lifetime. And my grandmother remembers her--she was a cook, and my mother remembers her cooking for the men who worked in the--gosh, I don't want to say the wrong thing, but, but remembers her cooking lunches for, for working men and cooking lots and lots of, I mean everyone in the neighborhood came to her house for these lunches that she would cook. And what my grandmother remembers is that she died as a result of she had some sort of--I mean it wasn't diagnosed at that time because of the times, but because she was, she cooked all day; she cooked all--you know, she got up, you know, in the night to cook all of these lunches for the morning. Then once they were gone, she started cooking right away for dinner, 'cause they would come back at, at dinner. And her head was in the oven so much that, my grandmother says, her brains cooked, and that's, that's how she died, that some sort of, had, they would probably have called it some sort of aneurysm or something like that today. But you don't--no one stands in the oven eight hours anymore. But that's, that was her life: she'd been a slave; she was freed; and she was a cook when she was a slave and continued to do it in her free life. Story_ID: 99476 Speaker 1: Her daughter, Mintha [Zeno], was not a slave. She was born free, to my knowledge, but was a house servant and treated pretty much like a slave, was not called by her real name, was called by pet names, but was indicative of the time, enjoyed her position as a house servant for wealthy white people who gave her things, gave her linens, and, and wedding--when she got married, gave her an ex--probably her most expensive wedding gift, things like that, but indicative of that period of time. That's, that's Mintha Zeno. Now my grandmother's father, Arista Zeno, if I can get this right, I believe was one of nineteen children, thirteen by his mother. His mother--gosh, I don't want to say the wrong names, as I, I know all this stuff--well, I don't know it. It's written down someplace. I, I wish I had known that you were gonna go that deep 'cause I could have given you lots of history. But I believe his mother's name was Sara (ph.) also, but I'm not, I'm not--I'd have to look that up. But at any rate, she was a slave and never married because slaves were not allowed, but had one common law husband all of her life, started having children when she was thirteen and had thirteen children. I, I took my grandmother to Louisiana to visit relatives maybe more than ten years ago. And I think every other person in Louisiana is my cousin, or so it seems, but there're certainly a lot of Zeno. And actually the name was Zenon, Z-E-N-O-N. And-- Speaker 2: Now, now what part of-- Speaker 1: -Arista dropped the, the, the last n. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's why the Chicago [Illinois] people are Zenos and not Zenons. Speaker 2: Now is it-- Speaker 1: He was from Lafayette-- Speaker 2: Lafayette, Louisiana. Speaker 1: --Louisiana. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my great-grandmother was from a different place--Crawford or--a, a different, a different city in Louisiana. Speaker 2: Okay, right is there a, is there a story as to why he dropped the n? Speaker 1: There probably is a story, but I'm not sure. What I do know is that they were well-to-do in Louisiana. They were established black people, more than the average, and that did not go over well with the Ku Klux Klan. And my grandmother, up until recently, remembered that they were driven out of Louisiana by the Klan, who didn't appreciate a black man owning his own home, which was not very common at that point in time. My grandmother remembered that, you know, what had happened, that someone from the Klan said be gone tomorrow or we'll burn you down and, and kill everyone. And so they left in a hurry, leaving everything that they had there. My grandmother remembered riding on her father's shoulders, walking through the swamps of Louisiana, away from where they lived and away from that, that life. When Arista Zeno came to Chicago, like so many other people making that migration, he started working in the stockyards and made quite a bit of money, saved his money, and unlike a lot of the other people at the time who caroused on the weekend and had no money on Monday. He did none, none, none of that and became a lender of money to the carousers and made a lot more money working as a lender. And for whatever reasons, maybe because of the way he had to leave Louisiana, he, his mindset was that being Creole was a disadvantage. And so, he decided that once they were in Chicago, they weren't going to be Creole. They were just going to be Chicagoans. They were gonna be like the other Northerners. Creole was not allowed to be spoken in the house. And as a result, my grandmother doesn't know how to speak Creole. She thought--she, she used to say that when she was in high school she took French, thinking that it would come easy and that her father could help her, but he knew no French and was of no help. And I think that's when she realized that it was not such a good idea to negate that history. And certainly, when I took her down to Louisiana, I was--I found it extraordinary that there was this whole other language that, that I felt I should know. And I didn't, much the same as when, when I first went to Africa, and I felt like these are people who look just like me speaking this language that I felt like I should know. Why don't I know that? And the sadder thing--and I think that was not completely uncommon, what he did. And the sadder thing to me was that, that we did it to ourselves, that he decided that, that this part of his history was a negative and to cut himself away from that and to say, you know, we're not Creole; we're not, we're not that anymore. Now we're these Northern people, and that's a better thing to be than Creole. Story_ID: 99477 Speaker 1: Now, what year did your family move to Chicago [Illinois]? Do you, do you-- Speaker 2: This-- Speaker 1: --do you have any idea? Speaker 2: Let me thing back, 'cause it had to be 1919, 'cause, because my grandmother was six years old. She was born February 18th, 1913, and she was six when they came, so this was 1919. And she, up until recently, could have told you all about the Chicago riots because she and her family-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna ask if---- Speaker 2: --and her friends-- Speaker 1: --she was there. Speaker 2: --lived through all of that. Speaker 1: So she arrived just at the-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --just-- Speaker 2: --when it was-- Speaker 1: --the year that the riots-- Speaker 2: --happening. Speaker 1: --took place. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: We've, we've interviewed now I think at least three people that remember the riots that were there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. There's a man in Chicago who's 104 who was, who was there when the riots were going on. Yeah, so, where, where did your family live on the, in Chicago? They live on the South Side-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --or the West Side, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they lived on the South Side. I don't know where they lived when they first came, but I know for a long time they lived where a lot of other people lived, renting rooms on or around Michigan Avenue. As I said, my, my great-grandfather worked in the meat factories. My great-grandmother was a domestic servant. She also was a seamstress. Yeah, and they, they stayed. They moved around, but they stayed on the South Side, and I grew up on the South Side. Speaker 1: Now did you know your, your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, Arista, died before I was born. My great-grandmother, Mintha Zeno, who we call Grandma Fats (ph.), lived with us in the house. I was raised by my grandparents in a house with my great-grandmother, three of my siblings, two uncles, and a cousin, so it was quite a full house-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --quite a full house. Speaker 1: Now, now what happened to your mother in this sequence? What, what happened to her? Speaker 2: My mother [Arlene Levergne Carter] died when I was two, and that's when I came to live, that's when we call came to live with my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did your grandparents tell you anything about your mother that you remember that you can share, share with us? Speaker 2: Well, you know-- Speaker 1: About what kind of person she was, and what did she do, and-- Speaker 2: You know, it's--what I can gather, my, my mother was a teacher. She taught at Doniac (ph.) Elementary School. I think that's Doniac--I think that's the name of it; I, I don't think it's around anymore--Elementary School. My understanding was that she, she was a great person and a good student. I, I know her--I was two when she died, so I don't know her directly, but I know her through her friends. She was in a club called Les Cher Amis that, that was founded I guess in tribute to a club that my grandmother and her friends had called Les Ritz A Fin (ph.), which, which means the, the sharp ladies. And my mother's club was called the, the dear friends, Les Chers Amis. And from what I can gather, they were part of the, the group of black people, the second generation people that, that went to school, that went to college, that finished college and entered society, and the, the, the highest echelon that black people could attain at the time, teachers, no, that, that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, where-- Speaker 2: --that sort of thing. Speaker 1: --where did your mother go to school, do you know? Speaker 2: Let's see, well, my grandparents both went to [Wendell] Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't, I don't, I don't, I don't, I'm not certain, so I won't, I won't say; I'm not certain where-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my mom went. Speaker 1: Where she went to college or-- Speaker 2: She went to, she attended two schools. One was Illinois Teachers College, but she went to--I don't want to say the wrong thing, and I'm thinking it might even be Chicago State. I, I believe she went to-- Speaker 1: And Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: --to Chicago, yeah, Chicago, Chicago Teachers College-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and, and Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago State. Yeah, because my, one of my brothers attended Chicago State, and he said that when he graduated he got this listing that lists all the graduates. And he looked to see--there she is--so, yeah. Story_ID: 99478 Speaker 1: All right, now, oh, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. My father's name is William Joseph Walker, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --and place of birth? Speaker 2: Let me, let me go back because we started on my mother [Arlene Levergne Carter]'s side to her mother and mother and them, so let's go back to my mother's father, who is Carneil Carter, Sr. And his parents were Sara (ph.) Car--Sara, gosh, I knew that--and James Carter. And James Carter's father was also James Carter. And gosh, this is a bad question because we just had a reunion and I--all this stuff was really, really in the top of my head. But there, there are quite-- Speaker 1: That, the name Carneil Carter now, I--it rings a bell here someplace, but I--where would I know his name from you think? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, and this is what I remember about my grandfather, that--I mean certainly, you know, every little girl loves her daddy, or in my case, granddaddy. My grandfather's family came from--there are some debates, you know, in the family so I, I won't, I won't, because that's written down, I won't say the wrong thing. But they came to Chicago [Illinois] around the same time that my grandmother came to Chicago. My grandparents went to high school together. They both went to [Wendell] Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois], and they married right af--right after their senior year. She was nineteen, and he was eighteen believe and had to get permission 'cause he was a little too young to just go and do it. He was an insurance salesman for Metropolitan Insurance and an accountant. And so my extraordinary work ethic comes from my grandparents. My grandmother had a lot of jobs, you know, in her--I mean unlike the--her contemporaries and like most African-American women, there was no such thing as being a housewife. She had to work. She worked a lot of different jobs, mostly in sales, until she came to the Illinois Department of Public Aid, where she worked as a caseworker until she retired past retirement age so that she could get me through college. My grandfather was the kind of person that everyone loved. And what I remember most about my grandfather was that he was the coolest person that I've ever met in my life, and I've met so many cool people (laughter) as an adult. And every time I meet a cool person I think: you cool, but you're not as cool as my grandfather (laughter). Speaker 1: Now by cool, now, now, people had different def, definitions of cool. You know, there's a fifties [1950s] kind of jazzy definition of cool. There's a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --hey, he's way cool definition of cool, which is different. So what, what kind of cool-- Speaker 2: He-- Speaker 1: --was he? Speaker 2: He was like, you know, Sammy Davis, Jr., Dean Martin rat pack kind of cool. He, he was, he was the kind of cool that now, now women who are older swoon and when they say: you're Carneil (laughter), you're Carneil Carter's granddaughter? Well, I remember Carneil Carter (laughter). He was that, he was that kind of cool. And he died when I was ten I think, and the only--his funeral was so big, the only time I've seen a bigger funeral was on television for some sort of head of state. I don't, I don't know how, or, or why he knew so many people, but it seemed like he knew everyone in Chicago. In addition to the fact that our family is huge, it just seemed like he knew everyone-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard-- Speaker 2: --in the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: --the name myself, and I don't know where. I know I've heard the name. Speaker 2: Well, and you might have known or, or heard of him, but his son is Carneil Carter, Jr., and his grandson is Carneil Carter, III. So between the three of them (laughter)-- Speaker 1: There's three different chances of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. His son, Carneil Carter, Jr., is an electrician, and he knows a lot of people too. He's cool too (laughter). They're all cool (laughter), so you might know him. But just, I think I just didn't wanna say that, that certainly being raised not by your parents but by your grandparents has a disadvantage. But to me, the advantage of it so outweigh the disadvantage that I've come through life just feeling lucky. And I think that, that feeling that I'm lucky has affected everything I've ever done in, in terms of going after thing, where a lot of people would think: oh, I can't do this; I can't do that. In the back of my head, my head I've thought: I'm lucky; I think I can do that. Story_ID: 99479 Speaker 1: So now, my father is William Joseph Walker, Sr. His family was from Springfield, Illinois, the opposite of my mother [Arlene Levergne]. My mother was very much a city girl. My father was very much a country boy. My mother was the, the elder of two children. My father was the youngest of seven children and apparently, and this is what I've gathered from other people, spoiled rotten. He was an Illinois state trooper, so again, that level of, of, of success he was on, on par with my mother, being a teacher, and moved to Chicago. But I don't know if--but I, I guess I would say remained a, a country guy at heart. My, my brother tells a story that my father told him as a child that, that this is the--you gotta be tough, son, story, that when, when my father was a young man, his older brother took him out hunting and said come back with a rabbit. Here's a rifle. We can only afford one bullet. Don't come back without the rabbit. And of course, he came back with the rabbit because that's what needed to be done. And that was kind of his philosophy in life, that, you know, you make happen what you need to make happen, no matter how little you have to make it with. Speaker 2: Okay, now do you know much about the ancestors on that side of the family? Speaker 1: Yes. Actually, my, my father's father--I always get the names wrong on this side--who I believe is John Walker, his mother is Lena Scott. John Walker's father, I believe--I don't think it was John Walker; maybe, yeah, grandma--yeah, grandfather, yeah. So, John Walker's father, who was married to a full-blooded I believe, I believe she was Cherokee Native American, but there was some debate over that. We think that she was a Cherokee or Seminole. Speaker 2: That's Lena Scott or, or-- Speaker 1: No, this is-- Speaker 2: --that's-- Speaker 1: --this is John Scott's-- Speaker 2: Father. Speaker 1: --father, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. And his-- Speaker 1: --and I, I know his name, but I can't, I can't think of it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --right at the moment. And he married this Native American woman. He escaped from slavery and married this Native American woman, came to Springfield, outside of Springfield, Illinois, but came to Illinois and bought a farm. And the farm, which was called the Walker farm, was a safe house for slaves. And many, many, many people in Illinois and in Chicago know of and knew of that farm because they came through that farm to freedom. The farm stayed in the family until about twenty years ago. Speaker 2: And the farm was in Springfield or-- Speaker 1: I was-- Speaker 2: --in-- Speaker 1: --not in Springfield. It was outside of Springfield but Illi--in Illinois. Speaker 2: And this is a well-known Underground Railroad-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --station I guess-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That, that if you made it to the Walker farm, you were all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, that's an exciting history to have. Anything else about the--any stories from, from that side of the family about the Underground Railroad or? Speaker 1: That's the big story, that, that and certainly not so now, but certainly in my--my aunts say that when they were children they were favored because their family was the family that owned the Walker farm, and the Walker farm was the farm that saved so many other families. And so, that growing up, if people found out that she, you know, this aunt that was telling the story, was one of the Walkers from the Walker farm, it was like, you know: we owe your family; what can we do for you; how can we help you, that, that sort of thing. So they--she appreciated the privilege that, that gave her in the black community, that, that the historical importance of that, of her family farm. Story_ID: 99480 Speaker 1: Okay, now, your father [William Walker, Sr.] was a state trooper. And did he go to school or just go right into the, the-- Speaker 2: Don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did, did he die when you were young as well, or-- Speaker 2: No, we, we were estranged from him. I had every now and then contact with him. But he just died actually last year of diabetes I believe or complications. But he just died last year. Speaker 1: Yeah, but he lived the balance of his life in Springfield [Illinois], or-- Speaker 2: Back and forth. He went back and forth between Springfield and Chicago [Illinois]. And you know, like I said, I think that his heart stayed in Springfield, and so he, I think he always went back there. The bulk of his family was there. He had five sisters and one brother. His brother, Uncle Jimmy, never left Springfield. And of the five sisters, I think eventually they all came to Chicago I think except one, and Aunt Alice never--and Aunt Alice, gosh--no, I can't think. I, I knew it, I, I know, I, I knew 'em growing up. But her husband was the sheriff of Rockford, Illinois, and so a lot of people know that side of the family because of that. This was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's something. Rockford is the second largest town in Illinois (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --outside of Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 99481 Speaker 1: Well, tell me now, so you were raised by your grandparents. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I have a lot of early childhood memories I--that are, that are in, you know, sketches. I mean and sometimes when, because I'm the youngest, most of the talk is over my head. Remember that time we...no, I don't remember that time. Oh, you weren't born yet. Remember that time we...well, what happened? What happened? Oh, you weren't born yet, oh. Remember that time...yeah, I remember that. You wouldn't remember that; you were just a baby. I remember it, I remember it. And so, I don't know if I--if some of my memories are created, you know, I, that I wanna include it or not. But I certainly remember living in the house where we lived as a baby. I remember being inside of my crib and looking out of my crib in that house at my mother [Arlene Levergne Carter] coming, coming to me, bringing me something. I don't remember what she was bringing. That's probably my earliest memory. I remember, and this is still, I'm still, too, being in my grandmother's house, in probably the same crib, crawling out of the crib in the dead of night, going down winding staircase, going down a hall, and finding my grandparents in their room, and jumping in the bed with them. And that's probably my second clear, clear memory. Speaker 1: Okay, now what are the--what neighborhood did you all live in on the--when you, when you grew up? Speaker 2: My grandmother's house was 75th and Aberdeen. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Is 75th and Aberdeen. Speaker 1: So that would be like west of the Dan Ryan, I guess, expressway? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's 1100 West. It's just east of Racine. Story_ID: 99482 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. So what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I think that the, the biggest thing for me and when I think of my childhood is holidays, because my grandmother was very much the matriarch of the family. And certainly when I was really little, both my grandparents were there, and my great-grandmother was there, and so it was the meeting place. It was where everyone came for every holiday, and my grandmother cooked for every holiday. And I didn't think that, that was odd for a long, long time that no one else apparently knew how to cook (laughter) or invited us anywhere. And so, and she was tireless. She would, probably like her grandmother, get up in the middle of the night and start making whatever, and cutting, and chopping, and seasoning. And she would make rolls from scratch, I mean everything from scratch. There was no boxes of anything. Everything she made was from scratch, and it tastes like it. She was an extraordinary cook. And there was always a full house, in addition to the people that, that I named that lived in the house. We had cousins always that lived right across the street, and so there were at least four more children to be had, and then lots and lots of friends. So there was always noise, yelling, screaming, fighting, kicking, punching, and someone gettin' a whuppin' (laughter) all the time, all the time, and the smell of something good in the kitchen all the time, all the time. I, when I think of my childhood and my grandmother, I, I see her coming and going to work in the morning; I see her in the kitchen; and I see her in her garden. She had a garden every year, and I remember being really, really little thinking: I hate this garden, worms and weeds. What, what is the point of that? And it, and it--I ended up being the one that said, I'll help you, I'll help you, I'll help you; I love this thing; I love that we grow stuff, tomatoes, and pole beans, and strawberries. And when I bought my house here, I bought seeds before I bought the house for my garden. Story_ID: 99483 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did your neighborhood look like? Do you have a-- Speaker 2: Seventy-fifth and Aberdeen was where we lived. Auburn Gresham is the neighborhood, bordering Englewood in Chicago [Illinois], and it was pretty typical middle-class neighborhood. The houses kinda looked alike. We had a block club. Everyone--at the time growing, the block was very, very active. There were things alike with the block clubs getting light poles; the block clubs getting address signs; the block clubs getting, you know, curb things. And so it was very manicured. These were people who were many, if not most first-time homeowners, and so they were very, very proud to be such. They--because certainly when my grandparents first came, their parents never owned a home. They, they rented; they roomed when they first came and then moved up to renting. So this business of owning a home was spectacular to them, and, and it, it showed. Most of the people on the block-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --really, really cared for the block and the neighborhood. Speaker 1: So you're great-grandparents grew up in the era I guess described by Lorraine Hansberry. People were rooming in these big-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --greystones on King Drive-- Speaker 2: Very much. Speaker 1: --and in Bronzeville-- Speaker 2: Very much. Speaker 1: --in what they, what they now call Bronzeville-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and with a lot of families in one dwelling and yeah, and bursting at the seams type. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: So this represented this new freedom I guess to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very much so, and, and, and not just them. It, it was I think quite typical of the neighborhood. And it was a neighborhood that, I mean by the time I was around and aware, I, I grew up thinking I living in a black neighborhood. But the transition was phenomenal. I attended Saint Sabina Church and school, as a child. And there was a family on my block, the, the Knox family, and the oldest daughter in that family was the first black person to attend St. Sabina Grammar School, which was a big, big thing. And she was I think two years or so, maybe three years, older than my oldest brother who's six years older than I am, five and a half years older than I am. By the time I attended school, so this is eight years later, nine years later, there was--no, I think that there were two white, maybe three, all, altogether, three white children in my class. So in a span of--and by the time I graduated, there, there weren't, there were none. And no, by the time I think I was in third grade, there were none. So in a span of ten years, that school, that church, and, and a lot of other businesses went from all white to all black. I mean they, they ran fast (laughter). And the, the thing that, that I find amusing, I, I'll say, later on in life, I became a substitute teacher. And I taught at school, Barton, my favorite school; I love that school. And I met one of the women who worked in think in the cafeteria or something in the school, and we were talking, and somehow it came up that I attended St. Sabina [Academy]. She said oh, oh, St. Sabina, oh, I attended St. Sabina. Oh, we love that neighborhood. We love the church. We love this school. And I thought, and as soon as I showed up, you ran like the dickens. But that--I mean certainly she wasn't thinking like that, but that's what happened. I mean the, the, the white fright, the white flight, I mean they, they got out of there quickly, which, I mean to me, fine. Story_ID: 99484 Speaker 1: This is in Chicago [Illinois], probably still is now, though it's improved somewhat, is, was, is one of the most-- Speaker 2: The most segregated city in the world. I remember I used to ride the Racine bus, that which was a block from my house, all the way downtown. And, and even as a child, I was amazed at how drastically the neighborhoods changed from one group to another. You get on the bus, everybody's black. Ten minutes later, you know, there's something else; ten minutes later, the, the, the, the Italians (unclear); ten minutes, then, then the, the Chinese people, then the, and then they're white by the time you get downtown (laughter). And it's, it's an amazing thing and I think still very much like that. I mean people--I think it's normal and natural for people to gravitate to people who are like them. But in Chicago, I think there is a very different thing happening that's still happening, that not I'm gravitating toward me, but I'm, I'm running away from you. Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the viaducts are, you know, that, that they are the demarcation points-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of the neighborhoods. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sometimes you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you go under the wrong viaduct you're in trouble and-- Speaker 2: My, my brothers, who were a thousand times bolder than I, used to, as, as sport, cross the line. And I remember as a child when Damen was the line of demarcation. Do not ride your bike past Damen or you won't, you won't get back over that line. And as we rode past Damen, and the white boys chased us and threw rocks, but we, you know, we got back. That was the big--and then it went from Damen to, you know, Vincennes to Western to, you know, to wherever now there, you know, you gotta go pretty far to, to get chased back now, but yeah. Speaker 1: Every now and then somebody gets it, you now--you know--I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --even, even today, I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure. Speaker 1: --just a small, you know, as little--I mean I guess it's 1999 [sic 1997] or so a kid [Lenard Clark] got, you know, beat up, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --real, real bad, crossing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --into Bridgeport. Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear)--Bridgeport I think--that would be something if Bridgeport ever was not Bridgeport, you know, the, the--I think that's a, a daily de--demarcation, the, the, that has a, a daily line around it that, that I think won't ever be erased or, or certainly no time soon. Story_ID: 99485 Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe yourself as a little girl? What kind of a little girl were you, and what were you interested in, and what did you do? Speaker 2: As a little girl, I--there was a, a big dichotomy between I, I--schizophrenic or (laughter) at least multiple personality. Part of me was very outgoing and energetic. And certainly, people said oh, she was the friendliest baby. She'd walk up to anybody and smile and just start talking. And I thought, me? But, but part of me is that gregarious, you know, I want to see the world and love it personality. And then the other side is extremely bashful, good conduct awards all through school because I was terrified to speak and, and without permission. My grandmother and my great-grandmother were extremely strict, I mean extremely, like present day cir--circumstances, you know, DCFS [Department of Children & Family Services] (laughter) would come and get, get us out, and they'd be in jail (laughter). I mean it, it was a different time. Everybody got beaten, but they were like--and, and I don't, I can't speak for my siblings, but it worked on me. I was good. I mean I, I was afraid to do anything that was the least bit wrong. I, I never spoke out of turn. I was afraid. And I think--and I was talking to my sister the other day. And I think that because my natural personality is more outgoing than I was allowed to be in the house, I had to be a performer or explode. I had to find some arena where I had permission to speak and be loud, and wild, and crazy, and unladylike, and free, that, that kind of permission that the stage gives you as a performer. And I don't remember not being a performer. I remember standing in front of the television set with Jimmy Durante on TV, some show he must have had in my lifetime. I remember it or reruns or something and thinking, you know--'cause I'm the baby of the family, and the baby gets attention. And suddenly, this box talking was getting more attention than I was. And I remember standing in front of it and saying, you know, why are you all watching that? I can do that stuff, and having people say get out the way; you can't do that, and me saying: ink, I think, I think, I think I (unclear). See, I can do that. And suddenly, I had my attention back, and I thought hey, that, that works; I'm gonna keep doing that. And so I found ways to, to perform whenever, whenever I could. And to me it was just my permission to speak, that I felt like I didn't have in this noisy household where, you know, it's like, you know, grandmother's the boss or grandfather--Grandma Fats so, so, so, so--and there was no dog to kick (laughter) when I was little, so it was just--I'd better just shut up. I, I think-and, and, and not, not just performing, I was very, very artistic, to the dismay of my grandmother. She--my favorite teacher as a child was Ms. Smith, my kindergarten teacher, who introduced art to my life. And my grandmother had this phrase about me. Is she cuttin' up papers again? Because I would, I, I would find stuff to make of anything. You're throwing that out? I'll make something with it (laugher). And so, in, in any way that I could be creative, I was. And when I wasn't--when I didn't have permission to be creative, I was completely and utterly silent. I, I just did not speak. I didn't speak at all. Story_ID: 99486 Speaker 1: Okay, well, now, you went to school at St. Sabina [Academy]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to St. Sabina-- Speaker 1: And--yeah. Speaker 2: Elementary School, graduated in 1976, went to Academy of Our Lady High School [Chicago, Illinois], graduated in '80 [1980], and performed, I started performing in school. I was in the church choir and the school choir in grammar school. I, I think that, yeah, I think that was still elementary school. In the transition from elementary to high school they had these summer programs called CEDA [Community and Economic Development Association]. I don't, I don't think they have that anymore, but it was for poor black children (laughter), give them something to do during the summer. And the job that I selected was the, the drama program. And so, during that summer, after my, my eighth grade graduation, I sung in a choir as my summer job. And out of that came--I think one of the other people from that, we formed a little, little duo dance company, and we performed liturgical dances in church. But I had been performing--like I said, I don't remember when I wasn't performing. I used to put on shows in my grandmother's living room. And in fact, the name of my show was "The Cool Crystal and Carneil Comedy Half Hour." (Laughter) And I would rope whatever cousin or sibling, you know, was willing into these shows. And we would do sketches and songs, and, and our, our big closer was the nanny from "Mary Poppins." That was like the big, you know, show closer. Speaker 1: You, you can do the nanny from "Mary Poppins?" Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was--there's--[singing] "You must be kind. You must be witty, very smart and fairly pretty." I won't sing the whole thing (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, that's--I'm convinced. Speaker 2: But that, that was the big--and I, and the whole thing, I made tickets, and no, the show started at a certain time, not at dinner time, but just before dinnertime (laughter). And you know, everyone had to be quiet and, and have a ticket. And the tickets I think, I don't know if they actually paid or anything, but I--we printed up tickets. And I, and I printed up pro--wrote up a program, and it was, it was like a real show; it was, it was a real show. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99487 Speaker 1: All right, now, okay, now did you have any, were there any teachers in, in grade school or high school that were, served as mentor or role model to you or anybody in the community really? Speaker 2: Well, cer--certainly. Well, the, the first teacher that, that was spectacular to me was Mrs. Smith, my kindergarten teacher, because like I said, she introduced art to my life. And wherever she is, I'll be forever grateful to her for that--but so many. I mean not only were we raised our grandparents but all of their friends, and everyone had something to say. You know, what are those children doing (laughing)? Let me come over there (laughter). So, and, and, and the advantages that, that I have such a respect for elders, because I'm comfortable with people who are fifty, and sixty, and seventy years older than I am. And I have I think a greater understanding of the history of people who are that much older than I am. So, all of my grandmother's friends who are aunts and uncles to us. Aunt Ethel, who was my grandmother's best friend, Aunt Louise, and Aunt Eloise, and Uncle Thomas; that was her crew, and they're the ones that--the family came over on, on every other holiday except New Year's Eve. New Year's Eve it was friends, and they a party, and she made gumbo. And she was every bit of a Creole Louisiana girl (laughter) on New Year's Eve because she made some gumbo that, you know, was the talk of the town, so to speak. So all of them had a major influence on me. And certainly, I think of them when I'm, when I make decisions in my life. You know, a lot of people say to me now, you know, you play a lot of roles that are positive. You know, what, why do you do that? And I said 'cause I hear my grandmother's voice. I hear my grandfather's voice. I hear my great-grandmother, and I, I know that they're watching me. I know that what I do affects them and reflects on them, and so I bring them with me to the decisions that I make in my life and in my career. Story_ID: 99488 Speaker 1: But I've, I've had a lot of really, really great teachers. I, I--in high school, we had this teacher--well, just a lot. I don't know, I don't know, I, I, I've always had an appreciation for teachers. I thought that they were amazing people, especially because I was so good in school that I thought now why don't you beat those kids (laughter) that are bad? How do you stand to come here every day? It's so bad (laughter). And so, you know, I thought, you know, I'll be so good that you'll keep coming tomorrow (laughter) and you know, teach me something. But among, among my favorite teachers, I guess I should say Mr. Neil, who taught music in, at St. Sabina Academy, which it's called now, who I just thought--I'd, I'd never--I remember the day he came, and I had never seen anyone like that, a black man who knew something about music. He was, he was like Julie Andrews. No, I mean not a woman, but I mean it was, it was like that to me. It was like who is this, this lyrical man with, with such bounce to his step, who, who taught us music and so different and where it wasn't dull anymore; it wasn't boring. Everybody wanted to be in the choir and have something to do with Mr. Neil. And so I think that he was the other major, major influence on me in grammar school. I wrote, the first song that I wrote was in grammar school and at his encouragement. It was, it started off an assignment. He was teaching us composition, which I think, you know, was unheard of at this school before that. And as an assignment, try to write something with, you know, the A and B lyric and the bridge and all of that. And you know, he collected them all. And Crystal, I, I, I want you to, you know, perform your song in front of the class next. Oh my God, really? No, but it can't (unclear). Oh, but it is. I mean he made me feel like I was, you know, Babyface or something. You know, I thought hey, this is great. I'm, I, I had never been so encouraged since kindergarten by, by anyone to do something creative. It wasn't considered a waste of time like it was at home. It was, it was very much encouraged, and I certainly never forgot about that. But I had many, many great teachers. I'm trying to think of the teacher I had in third grade, 'cause I was in third grade when I wrote my first play. And gosh, whoever the teacher was, and I'm, I'm ashamed to say I forgot who it was, but encouraged me to do it and said yeah, don't--it was in English class. And she said yeah, you've written a play, great. I think I might have done it just to say I could, and she let me perform it in, in class. And we had little rehearsals in the coatroom (laughter), and it was called "Can Helen Stop Smoking?" It was a satire on the ill effects of cigarette smoking, because at home, at the time, my grandmother was a cigarette smoker, both my grandparents were. And my brother was on a campaign to get her to stop smoking. We all kind of joined in and hid cigarettes. You don't wanna hide cigarettes from a woman (laughter) who will beat you (laughter). But in the end, she quit and was grateful for it, and I came out with a play. Speaker 2: You had the presence of mind in the, in the third grade to write a play. That's something. That takes a little--how long was it? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure it was like a one act. It wasn't this really complicated piece of literature. It, it, it just showed Helen and how she was this chain--and it was, it was a satire; it was a farcical satire at that, its exaggerated mannerisms. And she made the decision to quit smoking, then she couldn't do it, and she was back and forth. And the people in her life, like us at home, were trying to get--and they were hiding cigarettes. And she was going mad, and she became berserk and ah, give me my cigarettes (laughter) (unclear). And then in the end, I can do it, and the world is better because I've quit smoking. Speaker 2: I'll bet the kids really like that. Speaker 1: They did. It was really, really fun; it was really fun. Story_ID: 99489 Speaker 1: Now, did you--now, I know you probably saw a lot of television, from what you describe. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I-- Speaker 1: And did, did, did you go to the movies a lot? And I know you--we, we talked-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about Julie Andrews and "Mary Poppins"-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Those are the kind of-- Speaker 2: I, I ate television. I mean television just--I was television. And we couldn't afford to go to the movies all the time. So I probably remember every movie that I saw at the theater, and certainly "Mary Poppins" was one that I remember going to see. I remember going to see "Cleopatra" and saved the program from it (laughter) for--I might actually still have the program from the movie "Cleopatra." There was a program, like if you go to the theater-- Speaker 1: Well, you were quite young. You were lil--you were a little girl seeing these. Speaker 2: Yes, little-- Speaker 1: 'Cause-- Speaker 2: --very, very little, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause-- Speaker 2: But it was, it was a, it was an event. We were going to the movies, and we couldn't afford that, so that was like, you know, going to the Oscars. It was a big, big thing. Speaker 1: And that was the age, the age of the early sixties [1960s]. Mid-sixties [1960s] was, was the age of big blockbuster movies and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I just, I, I fell in love with, with television, and with film, and with this, this thing that allows you to be anybody. And, and I just, I loved it, and, and I never thought that I wouldn't grow up and do that. Speaker 1: And did you have a favorite performer on televisions or a show? Speaker 2: The, the first mind of favorite, ironically, that I, that I remember having was the "The Bill Cosby Show," "The Bill Cosby Show" with Lola Falana and Oscar DeGruy and the drunk guy. And I would do all of them. You know, I would do "Cool Crystal and Carneil Show" of "The Bill Cosby Show," where I would play everybody and Lola Falana, and Bill (laughter) and Oscar DeGruy (laughter) and so that was my first wow, this is my fav--and Lola Falana, I thought she's got to be the prettiest woman that was ever born. If when I grow up, I can look half that good, oh my goodness, I'm gonna have fifty husband s(laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right about that. She's, she's probably one of the prettiest-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that ever-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but certainly-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the first glamorous black woman I had ever seen on television, I mean and, and even Diahann Carroll [HM], who is gorgeous, was nurse and very conservative. And even when, when Julia went out on a date, you know, it was very, very conservative. She didn't ever get hot, you know what I mean, like Ms. Falana (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, Diahann Carroll, well, yeah, that, that character was really stiff. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they, I guess they do that on purpose, but I certainly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they were scared to death. Speaker 1: --to--yeah, yeah, to-- Speaker 2: Of course they were. Speaker 1: They're scared of criticism-- Speaker 2: Of course, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --putting this first black woman on the air-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --like that. Story_ID: 99490 Speaker 1: But okay, well, in high school did you do the regular high school things, or did--now you, did you go to all-girls high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, and I--and that was not at all my intention. My sister went to Academy of Our Lady [also known as Longwood Academy, Chicago, Illinois], and I had every intention of going to Whitney Young [Magnet High School]. I don't know why that was my intention. I don't remember why. I'd heard of it someplace and just decided that's where I wanna go. And I found out only when it came time for me to go, that I had to go wherever my sister went. And I thought well, that's, that's a trick. I, I didn't have anything to say. You should have told me that two years ago. I would have voted on where she was going. Why the heck did she pick that school? So I was completely miserable until my sister came home from school and said they have a mime troupe at Longwood. And I said a mime troupe? You mean like Marcel Marceau? Ah, I'm loving that she went to Longwood. I can't wait. It was my goal to get in Longwood and get in that mime troupe. And of course I did, and that was so spectacular to me. And I think that certainly it's an, an odd thing. I, I found out later that going to a Catholic school was kind of an odd thing (laughter) for, for a black person to do. But certainly, none of my friends in, in the arts have ever performed mime but me. And so that was a uniquely odd thing, but I think wonderful because like dance, and I'm a dancer, mime is very much a universal art. And so you don't, you don't have to be able to speak. You don't have to understand the words I'm saying. No matter where, where you live in the world, you can understand what I mean if I'm performing without words, if I'm performing a pantomime. And so that was cool to me, and, and certainly the discipline; it's a very disciplined art. Like ballet, you have to exercise a lot because it's very, it's very particular. You, you can't be loose and, and flailing about or, or nothing will--the cup won't take shape unless your hands know how to do that and let it go. And so you have to be very disciplined, which helps me as a performer do everything else that I do. Story_ID: 99491 Speaker 1: Now you grew up right in the midst of the Civil Rights Movement. You're born just before the March on Washington. And [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed when you were a little girl. Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were killed in 1969 or '70 [1970] on the West Side, and that was a big deal in Chicago [Illinois] I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you--was your household a political household? Did people talk about the, the Civil Rights Movement or the Black Liberation Movement at home? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would not say our house was a political house. There was so much going on in our house that part of me was oblivious to what was going on outside of the house, but certainly, I was aware of it. I remember Dr. King came to Chicago before he died. I remember it was the first time for me seeing older black people be impressed with a black person. And I thought, you know, what is that? Because there were no black people in charge of anything. And so the people that had that kind of reverence attached to them were all white. And so, I was very much aware that this, there was something with this guy that was outstanding, that made elders reverent. And I remember when he died, I remember my, my grandparents crying. I remember, you know, that everyone we knew was sad about it. I remember that very clearly. I remember being sad without having a full understanding of why I was sad, that feeling that something really, really bad has just happened, and I wish it hadn't happened. Story_ID: 99637 Speaker 1: So, I am stating my name? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I am T'Keyah Crystal Keymah. Speaker 2: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is November the 17th, 2004. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We are in the Glendale Hilton Hotel in Glendale, California. Speaker 2: And this is a continuation of an interview that we started back in September I think, right-- Speaker 1: Yes, it was September. Speaker 2: --something like--okay. Speaker 1: It was September-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --sometime. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99638 Speaker 1: So now, now we're, we're both trying to figure out where we left off. And I, I think we, we had you just about to go to high school I believe. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We talked about your family, and we talked about where you grew up, and we talked about doing shows when you were a little kid, making up things. And you know, some of the grade school we talked about. And what, what grade school did you attend, just for the record again. Speaker 2: I attended St. Sabina-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --Elementary School [now St. Sabina Academy] and church, yeah, kindergarten through eighth grade. I graduated in 1976-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from grammar school. Speaker 1: All right. Now did you, when you were graduating, you, did you know exactly what high school you were going to? Did-- Speaker 2: Yes. And maybe I, I did say this before. I don't remember, but I--if I remember correctly, I think I wanted to go to Whitney Young [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or some other school, but I found out after it was too late that I had to go wherever my sister went. And she decided and was attended Longwood [Academy], Academy of Our Lady. And so I begrudgingly attended the Academy of Our Lady. And I remember being just really, really disappointed that I didn't get a say, that I had to just follow her where she went, and she got the chance to make the decision. And I remember my sister, Karen, making me feel better by saying, you know, she coming home from school: they have a mime troupe. You'll like that. I said ah, okay (laughter), okay, I'll go, I'll go. And that, and, and you know, she, she couldn't have been more accurate on that, because in grammar school I was painfully shy. I mean I think the most out of character thing I ever did was to, and I think this was in eighth grade, might have been seventh grade, become a cheerleader, which shocked everyone, most of all me. But it was the sorriest cheerleading team I thinking ever known to man. And no one would get in it, and I guess I just had a bold moment and said you know, I can't flip, or like split, or cartwheel, or do anything, but I can like hold my hands up (laughter) and carry pom-poms. And they said okay, no one else will get in. And I think our uniforms were sorry too. I, I think I still had that sweater up until a couple of years ago. And, and we wore this sweat--cheerleading sweater and the uniform skirt. So all the other cheerleaders who had real uniform skirts and tops made fun of us mercilessly. But at any rate, other than that, I just got good conduct awards and said nothing I think throughout my grammar school career and performed, but mostly at home around the house. I got in the choir when I was I think in the fourth grade, and that was my only outlet. And in high school is where I think without--because I think what frightened me about grammar school were boys. I mean I didn't understand 'em. You know, they smelled bad and would hit you (laughter), and I, you know, I didn't--you know, they just made me not want to talk and participate in life. And so in high school there weren't any boys to, to, you know, what is that thing? And so I, I think I blossomed as a performer at, at, just exponentially. I think I, I lost myself completely and, and became probably as, as divided as I ever was between me, the bashful, really shy person and me the performer. Speaker 1: Now, now when, when you were at home you did the fam--you did a lot of performing in the family, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I started-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I mean I started--I don't remember when I first started performing. I remember--I think I said this last time. I have a clearly membrey--memory of watching the "The Jimmy Durante Show" and standing in front of the TV and doing, doing Jimmy Durante. And that must--I must--I may be four or something like that. And my family says, you know, things that I did performing earlier than that, but I don't remember. But in high school, and it was, and was still kind of separate. I, I was very different outside the house than inside the house. And I was--I mean I grew up in a, in a crowded house where, you know, it's like, you know, you could say, then you get, then you get, then you--by the time it got to me, no one wanted to hear what I had to say. And so performing became my outlet, the, the place where I was allowed to speak and that I gave myself permission to speak. Story_ID: 99639 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now [Academy of] Our Lady is at, is it 95th and Longwood? Speaker 2: Ninety-fifth and Throop. Speaker 1: And Throop, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's, and it's, it was a hundred and something years old. I don't know how old it was, and it had a long history. It started out as a boarding school, and then it became a grammar school, and then it became a high school. It was co-ed at some point in the history of the school, and for the, the most of the time it was an all-girls high school and, and a wonderful place, very nurturing environment for me. I did join the mime troupe, and I was in the mime troupe three years. There wasn't a mime troupe my senior year, but I was above that anyway (laughter). And, and I got in the talent shows, and the spring plays, and every chance that I got to perform, I performed there. Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was it an integrated school for the most part or, or all black or-- Speaker 2: By the time I got there, it was pretty much all black. I, I think I had--there was one--I think just one. There might have been two, and I don't remember the other girl's name. I remember Sophie Koslowski (ph.) was, was the remaining white person I think my sophomore year, and I, I think she was probably the last white girl that attended the, the school. And just like St. Sabina [Academy, Chicago], the transition from what I understand was, was fairly rapid when I started--well, I, I should say when my older brother, who's five years older than I, started at St. Sabina, I think he was one of a handful of black people there. When he graduated--I don't even--there were a handful of white people there. So in the course of eight years, the turnover was almost complete in, you know, in the cycle of his attendance. And that had happened at Longwood just before my arrival so that by the time I got there, it was predominantly a black school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and that's out of what, what they call Beverly Hills in Chicago, right, so-- Speaker 2: Beverly--not Beverly Hills, but the Beverly district. Speaker 1: Yeah, they actually have a sign that says Beverly Hills, believe or not, out there on 95th and--but it's, yeah, it's Beverly-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's-- Speaker 1: --you know, yeah. Speaker 2: --it's, I think it's officially the Beverly district, but yeah, there, there are signs up, yeah, Beverly--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I thought it was kind of odd when they came to Chicago to see Beverly out there. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Story_ID: 99640 Speaker 1: Well, so who was your theater instructor--(unclear)--that--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Gosh, Sister Terrence was in charge of the mime troupe when I first came there. My sophomore year a girl name Karen Shalady (ph.)--woman, named Karen Sheridan, who was still a student at Northwestern's--she was in the Northwestern's mime troupe, and she was still a student at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], led the mime troupe. My, one of my favorite theater instructors was Joan Lamb (ph.) who, who taught theater and directed some of the plays. We also had Ms. Blalock who was also one of my favorite, who had the mime troupe one, one of those years. I think it must have been my junior year. And gosh, yeah, those were my favorites, I guess I should say, but a lot of, a lot of really good instructors there outside of the theater that, that helped me-- Speaker 1: Who were some of the others that you remember? Speaker 2: Gosh, now I can't think of her name, and I can picture her because--and I know it's subliminal because I was so very afraid of her because I was just awful. I relied completely on my intelligence and was just god awful lazy in high school and--because all my focus was on theater. And English, oh, it came and went. All, all other subjects were banal to me. I, I didn't, you know, why do we have to do this? So I was notorious for writing papers--Kelly, that's her name (laughter), Ms. Kelly--because I would sit in the front, and she would bang on my desk (laughter) and use me as an example of people who wouldn't do their work and were underachieving. And still, I don't know how I, I was, I stayed in, in the honor society and got honors classes, because you know, I was then quite smart (laughter), but I was notorious. We had this thing where, you know, we had to write papers, and you had to have a draft in by this date. And she would extend it, and you could have the draft in by this date. And then you'd have to (unclear) and turn in the draft with the paper. And we would do this thing where at the day the paper was due--Crystal, you got your paper? Yeah, I'm working, I'm working. I'm having my lunch (laughter) time. And then in the hallway my friends: how's that paper? I would literally write it in the hall between classes or sneak and write in the class. And I don't know how many times, but just, just horrible. I, I did not apply myself nearly the way I should have in high school and didn't regret it until I got to college where I couldn't play that anymore. But Ms. Kelly was a wonderful teacher. All my theater instructors were great, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well-- Speaker 2: Sister Charlotte (laughter). There all in the, there all in the back and behind there. They're coming out, they're coming out. And Sister Charlotte was my history teacher and the first person that, that made me suspect that history wasn't an awful, boring, dusty thing to be ignored, because she encouraged the class to enter the history fair. And Chicago has a wonderful, wonderful history fair every year that I knew nothing about. And she campaigned, she started a history fair at Longwood and made everybody participate in that, everybody in her class. And then she--the people who did well in, in the Longwood's history fair, she, she in--she really, you know, get in the Chicago his--and so I was one of the people that got in the history fair, and I thought very differently about history after that. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have black history in school? Speaker 2: No, no, no, but it was, it was that, that enthusiasm for history that made me connect my history to history. And my project was a family tree. And so it, it said all this, you know, these dusty dead white people, that, that name for their stories is an umbrella that also includes my story. Story_ID: 99641 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, did you know about some of black companies in town? And did you go to any of the productions of Kuumba [Workshop] or X Bag [Players] or-- Speaker 2: Vaguely I knew of Kuumba. I guess probably somewhere in the back of my mind I'd heard of X Bag, because when I started meeting people from these places, it was like oh yeah, yeah, ooh, I heard that (laughter) somewhere. I mean I don't know why. I don't remember. I think that we went to--my grandmother took us to one Kuumba production. I don't, I couldn't even tell you what it was 'cause I think it was later that I went to see "Amen Corner" when they did that. But I, as a child, I don't, I don't have a clear memory of going, and I, so I'm thinking that, that we must not have gone. It must be just that I heard about it because theater was so big to me that I think I would have remembered if I had of, if I had gone. And it just wasn't--we, we didn't go to theater. Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of people in the black community-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --just, you know, don't and didn't in those days. It's a growing audience now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But of course in those days, it probably-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Kuumba I think was the, was probably the number one group, and those are in the late seventies [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: --ETA was Ebony Talent and Associates then on, yeah, they were on, operating on for 63rd and Cottage Grove I think. And Parkway had X Bag. So, well, it's not unusual that, you know, high school students wouldn't be necessarily exposed to these. Speaker 2: Oh, definitely not in high school-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --definitely. Story_ID: 99642 Speaker 1: I mean the students were black, but the high school [Academy of Our Lady, also known as Longwood Academy, Chicago, Illinois] was definitely white. It was a white Catholic high school. And (unclear) part of me wants to say, you know, may it rest in peace (laughter). But, but just the mindset was, they were not trying in any manner to, to let the school be a black school, to acknowledge the change in the student body, and to respect that. And it wasn't necessarily I don't think malicious on their part. It's just that, you know, they, there weren't, there weren't, you know, thirty young black nuns saying this is what we should be doing. They were, they were very, they were--it was 100 percent white older nuns who had been there fifty years ago, some of them. And just I mean they must been overwhelmed. What has happened? Oh my (laughter) (unclear). And so, there wasn't this push to see how can we really fulfill the cultural needs of who we have now. They just, they didn't know how to do it. Speaker 2: Okay, now did, did you--what, what was, what, what would you consider the highlight of your, your high school-- Speaker 1: There were many-- Speaker 2: --days? Speaker 1: --many highlights of my high school career I think. To, to, but to capsize what my life was like in high school: I went to this all-girl high school. And we used to--and to talk about how the neighborhood changed, even in, in my time, I lived on 75th and Aberdeen. And there used to be this bus called, that we called it anyway, the suburban bus. And it went from 63rd and Morgan up Morgan all the way to I don't know where it went, and it ended up on 95th Street and, and went 95th West to the Western Suburbs. And so Morgan is two blocks from Aberdeen, so--two short blocks, so my sister and I walked the two short blocks and took this bus that dropped us off right in front of our school. And I imagine that that route began when there were people who needed to go from 63rd and Morgan out to the Western Suburbs that weren't, that weren't us. And I think it was my junior year that there was no longer a need to transport a certain people to--'cause we were all still--the buses were crowded. The buses were crowded till way past my school. People took that bus to Evergreen Plaza to go to the mall, you know, and points beyond. So there, there was a need for the route, but it was a need for certain people that they were, you know, trying to protect along that route. And so they stopped that service, and we started taking--I started taking the public transportation. And you know, you had to walk to 79th Street, take the 79th Street bus to Western, take the Western bus to 95th, take the 95th Street bus back to--you know, all, all that. Well, not Western, whatever the, the other streets were. I don't remember at the time. But my, you know, we got to school, whatever, 8:15, whatever, so there was no one there. Everyone was running, running in the building. And when school let out at whatever time, 2:15, 3:15, you would think that it was not an all-girls school but an all-boys school, because whatever time we got out, somehow the boys, from wherever they came from, got out earlier and were there to greet you at the door when the doors opened. And I think I saw this mass of boys maybe twice when I didn't have a rehearsal. Because my life as that I went to school. At the end of school, I was always in some kind of rehearsal, rehearsal for mime troupe, rehearsal for the (unclear), rehearsal for the forensics team, rehearsal for whatever play, rehearsal for something that I was doing, performing most of my life from, from freshman year. The first time they said sign, do you want to sign up for something (unclear) till senior year when I was kind of running (laughter) things. And so when I came out, there were no boys; there were no girls (laughter)--(unclear)--adults coming home from work, but that, that was kind of the, the community and how the high school worked. Story_ID: 99643 Speaker 1: I--there were a lot of highlights in my high school life. Probably the first big thing as a performer was I had done a talent show and somebody, you know--we were having a talent show. Okay, what do I do? I'll do impressions. You know, that'll be easy. And I think for that first talent show I did Andy Kaufman's character from "Taxi," Latka. And I did, oh, Steve Martin, his character from "Saturday Night Live," you know, wild and crazy and whatever else I did. And I thought, ah, I'm doing this thing, getting the show, and it was completely nothing to me. It was something that I didn't remember not doing. And suddenly, I became not the bashful Crystal that, you know, my two friends knew but that the whole school knew. And peep--the cool girls were passing me in the hallway and go eabeeda (ph.), and I'm like she knows me (laughter). And, and I learned too, so I got a, I got a great taste of fame in that. And I learned too that--'cause I thought what's the big deal? And I learned that everybody doesn't do impressions, ah. So that was probably that moment, and there were a lot of other moments like that. There was the, the time when the mime troupe went somewhere. We, we toured a lot. And there was the time that we went someplace where Marcel Marceau was performing, and we saw him perform. That was really, really cool. But I think that moment that I first got recognized as a performer was probably the most memorable moment, single moment in my high school career. Speaker 2: And that, that was from a talent show? Speaker 1: That was from a talent show. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 99644 Speaker 1: And I did talent shows, and I was in the dance company for a minute, until the dance company director, Inga (ph.) Jackson, said you have to choose mime or dance, mime or dance. And I thought how can someone choose mime or dance? Mime isn't anywhere else. Mime is here. I gotta choose mime. I can dance at home (laughter). So, I was in the dance company for a second, and the mime troop--until there was no more, and talent shows, and the forensics team. My, my categories were dramatic interp and di--what is the, the scene with two people--whatever they call that--and I think original com, comedy, so I had three categories that I competed in at some point or another. And I won some sort of state award for, for my original comedy routine once. Speaker 2: Did you have to go to Springfield [Illinois] for that and all that or-- Speaker 1: I don't remember where (laughter). Speaker 2: You don't remember? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I don't remember. I don't remember where it was. Speaker 2: Was it just in one of the Catholic schools or, or-- Speaker 1: No, no, because I met some people from public schools. It was, yeah, just a statewide competition, yeah, and then the plays and stuff. And so I was in anything that I could get in. Speaker 2: What, what roles did you get in these plays, I mean? Speaker 1: Gosh, and I was, I, I think I was awful too. I, I think, think the first show that I did was my sophomore year. I think I missed freshman year, the, the play freshman year, so I think my sophomore year was the first time I got in a play, and it was "You Can't Take It With You," and I played Essie, the, the weird, ballet dancing, cookie baking, nutty sister of the lead woman in the play. I just, I remember, to this day, I'm thinking, you know, I'm really an actress now (laughter). And I remember the, the moment that I came out on the stage with the, the first show. And probably, you know, we did a weekend of shows and the first time I came on, on the stage with people and said my, that kitchen's hot. I think that kitchen's awfully hot (laughter) and whatever. And I thought I'm, I'm saying my lines. I'm saying my lines to people who are watching me, and so that was, that was really cool. And I think the year after that we did "Godspell." And that was a, a big transition for me because I was a singer and a dancer, and I got to sing, and dance, and act. And I think that the director--what was his name, Jim, gosh, Jim something--gave me every like weird, nutty, odd bit in the show, in addition to--Nixon, Jim Nixon was name--in addition to songs and dances and stuff. And that was a big transition for me as well because I wore glasses. I wear glasses, and I wore glasses all through high school. And when you are performing, you know, and you wear glasses, they don't let you wear your glasses for a show. So they say--you know, they give a cutoff date. By this date, you know, you should know your blocking and no more glasses 'cause we wanna see the show, how it's gonna look. And his cutoff date was just way too soon (laughter). And I, I hadn't--you know, 'cause you have to kind of see the stage blind, the way your eyes see the stage. And with every as fuzzy, I didn't, I didn't, you know, I wasn't there yet. And I remember two things happened that I'll never forget in that show, or three things actually. One of them was when we were dan--we were dancing, and you know me, with no glasses, no cons, and I'm, and I, and I'm, out of the corner of my eye, I see people waving, and I'm--from the orchestra pit, and I'm thinking I am doing good. I'm doing my--and I'm dancing and dancing, and then my foot goes right off the stage. And I go oh, oh, oh, and I realize the people are telling me to get back (laughter), 'cause I don't know, 'cause I can't see that I've danced right--and I've almost danced myself right off the stage. And I, oh, oh, oh, scared myself to death. And I went home that night and I said grandma, I gotta get contacts; I gotta get them. My life is in danger (laughter). I've gotta get contacts. Story_ID: 99645 Speaker 1: And that same run, two things, two other things happened. One, I was--I had the song that was the hot song in the show, "Turn Back Old Man." And we didn't have a lot of lyrists at the school, and so what, what we did is--and I started the song from the back of the house. So the director sat in some seat in the audience and held the mic for me. And I walked down the aisle till I got to him. And I just sung, you know, without the mic till I got to him, then I picked up the mic and you know, made my way through the audience, as was choreographed in the show, and then made my way up on stage. And again, you know, I can't see for the life of me. The, the house is crowded. I've done my bit. I've gotten to the, the part of the song where, you know, I'm supposed to have the mic by now. And I thought, oh, I didn't, I didn't see him, did I? And so I start, you know, sashaying back up the aisle (laughter). And I'm-- going over the song, [singing] turn back on me, it's where the foolish (unclear). And I thought, oh, I'm in trouble, I'm in trouble, and then I, you know, I don't know whether I had gone down the wrong aisle or what. He just--I just didn't see him; I couldn't see him. And I thought well, I've just, I gotta do the show without the mic. I'll just project and, and I made it all the way, and then I see--(unclear). He's running, he's running down the, down the aisle. He just hands me the mic, and he goes away, but you know, I didn't care 'cause it's, it's such a vampy song that, you know, you just have to, to go with it. And the, the oth--the third thing that happened on that show, well, okay, one more story about, about "Godspell." But the same song, we had this at the, I think it was at the dress rehearsal or something, the, these nuns that, that kind of lived in the hills of (laughter), of, of, of the convent would come out for the dress rehearsal, and it would be just about only them. And so this song is really a vampy song; it's, you know, hot and sexy. And I'm supposed to find a guy in the house and flirt with him. So there's like a hundred nuns in the place. What am I supposed to do? It's ad lib. So I come up and I, you know, the, the some--the part of the song, and I go [singing] turn back old man, turn back old man. How's your habit honey (laughter). I thought, oh, that was funny, and I, and I realized that, that I was good at improv. And, and, and you couldn't--I mean when you throw a nun at me and a sexy song I, I knew, I knew there that you couldn't throw me off and that nothing could throw me off. And the last thing about that show was when I discovered that I had fans outside the school, because the, the shows were open to the public. And the night that one of my brothers came to the show, and really and that, that was a two-fold turning point because up until then, most of my family thought, when will she grow out of this? Ah, still she's doing it, still? And, and, and my grandmother came to every show I ever did, ever, you know, until she couldn't come anymore just recently. And you know, she would say you did good, the next day--I, I hope you're done with that now (laughter), and so there was never any inkling of, you know, you're gonna be doing this for awhile ever. And one of my brothers came and was amazing not only that I did a good job, but he said that some boy had come to the show the night before and came back just to hear me sing that song. And right before I came in he apparently explained, ah, we're supposed to be downstairs, we're supposed to be downstairs and tried to break his neck getting from the balcony downstairs so I could maybe walk by him and sing my song. So that was, that was really nice to know, that feeling that, that, you know, my friends just shining me on. This is something that I, I think I really am good at, and my, my fan base is outside. It's, you know, it's becoming whoever sees me now. Story_ID: 99216 Speaker 1: All right, so, now did--were you involved in other activities in high school at all? Did you run for class office or did you-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). I, well, like I said, I participate in the history fair. I was-- Speaker 1: What did you focus on in the history fair? What, what phase of history? Speaker 2: I, I did my family tree, and then I did--gosh, and I should remember this project. I don't think I remember the project that I did, 'cause I had two, I had two entries. And well, the one, the one that was most memorable for me was my family tree because I started with--I think my sister had it assigned to her to do a fam--family tree when she was in high school--[clearing throat]--pardon me. And I took what she did and kind of went from there. And I, I drew a picture of a tree. I was copying her there too, and--but I made mine really, really big, and I found photos of, of everyone could find photos of to put on the tree. And then I wrote--you have to write a paper to accompany it, so I kind of wrote what I knew at the time of the history of my family for that. And that was my main--and I, I don't remember what my other entry was. But in addition to that, I, I did--yeah, let's get to that--I did run (laughter) for senior class president, yeah. Walker will work for you was my slogan. And I had all of these ideas for what we should do, what the yearbook should be, what--we should have the best trip ever. You know, I, I, I think even then, I was--'cause I'd, I'd found my blackness. I, I found my, my blackness in high school somehow. Story_ID: 99217 Speaker 1: How did you find that? Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I don't, I don't know how I found it, because I think part of it had to do with me not being Catholic anymore, not considering myself Catholic. And I think--did we talk about me being a Catholic and being confirmed Catholic the last time? Speaker 1: I'm not sure-- Speaker 2: Well, just-- Speaker 1: --but-- Speaker 2: --to go back to that a bit, my family, the family where I was raised was Catholic. My gra--my grandmother was Catholic, and to my knowledge (laughter), my brothers and sis, sister and I supposed to be Catholic. We were all baptized Catholic. We were--they had all been confirmed Catholic. And so this business, I mean everything that they experienced, you know, I saw peripherally, and then and I, I'll get my turn to do that too, I'll get my turn to do that too. And this business about being confirmed, I thought well, now that's exciting. Because I assumed that, as I knew that there were classes for it, in preparation for it, and I assumed that the classes were to tell you about all the other religions in the world and that Catholicism would shine up so brightly like a beacon that you would pick, you know, Catholic, and say yes, I confirm. I am Catholic. I'm glad you baptized when I didn't have a say and yes, that Catholic is the best one out of all these ones that we've been studying in these classes. And so I'm waiting for these classes to start, and the classes finally start, and they're all about you're gonna down the aisle; the bishop is gonna be there, and I--there was nothing, there was nothing about being Catholic at all. It was all about this ceremony to be confirmed, and I was aghast. And I, I think I asked very timidly one question like: will anything other than the ceremony be covered before we do this? And it was met with confusion, my little request, and I just didn't have the, the strength to say stop. I'm gonna need some more information before I did this. And so the really, really creepy, odd thing is I went on with it because it was expected of me, and I didn't know how to get out of it. I wasn't brave enough to get out of it. So at the point that I was being confirmed a Catholic, I made the decision that I wasn't Catholic at all. And at I began kind of a search to see what else was out there. And I, and I started really, really examining this church that I thought had kind of duped me. I thought now, this has got to have been a given that if you're saying that I need to confirm this because I didn't have a say when I was little, I didn't know anything, then it would only stand to reason that you would tell me (laughter) something before I have to confirm it. Speaker 1: Now, now, now were, were you coming in contact with other information that, that may have contradicted the, the, the Catholic instruction? Speaker 2: Well, in my own house. I mean I, I was raised to believe that Catholics go to church every Sunday and that it's a sin not to. And I, I discovered, and I'm being the youngest, at a certain point you could just drift off (laughter). It's not such a big deal (laughter), when you're little. And I thought well, how does that work, that you have to go, you have to 'cause it's a sin not to till you get a certain age, then--(unclear)--(laughter)? Now wait a minute, if that's not, you know, what else y'all got over there behind that curtain? And I think that, that more than anything else is what started this for me and, and basic. I mean think I'm probably--my sister called me Agnes of God once (laughter), that, that I'm probably one of the most naive people, that I, I, I took everything at their word. I, you know, I felt sorry for the people that weren't Catholic 'cause I, I was sure they were going to hell 'cause that's what they told me, and I believed it. Oh, poor guy, he's a sweet kid. He's going to hell (laughter), and, and just, you know, little things that, that Jesus said you turn the other cheek. Why you still mad at him though? Jesus said you're supposed to turn the other cheek, and we're Catholic. And, and I, I just--little things that, that were inconsistent that I thought, you know, that were bothering me, that I thought all of this will go away at this confirmation and none of it, you know, it's like we're not gonna address anything but how to stay Catholic. I thought ooh, no, this is, no, this, this is not good. And I think, I mean, there had to be a lot of things. We had this one professor, Claude Hubbard, who made the mistake of saying (laughter), 'cause we looked very mature, "call me Claude" (laughter). You know, all, all heck broke loose after that. But he had us read--I believe that it was, it was Claude Hubbard that, that assigned us to Toni Morrison's book "Song of Solomon." I think as Ntozake Shange would say, that was the beginning of reality for me that I don't think that I'd ever read a book that, that moved me so personally as that one. And I went back and read "The Bluest Eye." And every book that she's written, you know, I'm waiting at the store to get the copy. And I'm mad if somebody says have you read--I didn't know. Let me run, stop what I'm doing and run out. I think that, you know, it, it changed the color of literature for me, as a college professor, changed the color of history for me later that I started really, really thinking about, you know, I'm not just one of these people. I, I'm a black girl, and what does that really, really mean to me? Story_ID: 99218 Speaker 1: And I remember at the, the height of my revolutionary rebellion I sat in this, this professor's class. He was actually a college professor. It was a college level English course that we were taking. And I sat and I had braided my hair, and I was putting red, black, and green beads (laughter) in class, was completely disrespectful, the whole class. And by the time--'cause you know, in the whatever, late seventies [1970s], people used to wear those beads that clank and clank and you know, the Williams Sisters would wear them until they said no, no, no, you'll have to behave and not, not be black girls. So I put, I was putting those beads in the class. And by the time--and I remember him kind of looking like, what's going on over there? And by the end of class I'm looking like, hmm (laughter), little afraid of that one (laughter). And I never really tried to start a revolt or anything, but I was just, I became very, very aware of being black, being a black person. I started a club of my friends that was loosely based on a club that my mother had, had when she was in high school. And I might have missed--mentioned--this before that my grandmother's club was called Les Ritz a Fin (ph.), and my mother's cla--club was called Les Chers Amis. And so I called my club Rafiki which means friend, but I thought, you know, (unclear) French, what does that have to do with rafiki. Our group is called Rafiki (laughter). Speaker 2: That's Kiswahili for friend. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And so, you know, you had to, you know, answer questions about, you know, something black to get in the club, you know, and name ten Shakespeare plays 'cause I was, you know, not quite clear on (laughter)--you know, you had to--you know, whatever my, my Eurocentricity was so engrained that, you know, I kind of felt like you have to mix it up to, to get good members. But at any rate, that was, that was my, the beginning of my, my black, the acquaintance with my blackness. Speaker 2: About how old were you when, when you had-- Speaker 1: Fifteen. Speaker 2: Fifteen? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --maybe fifteen. Yeah, I, I, I was thirteen when I graduated from, from grammar school, so fifteen, maybe sixteen. And-- Speaker 2: So this is about 1978? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so, might--right--when--and that too because, yeah, probably that was the beginning because my sister started wearing an afro. She got away with everything, and I was not allowed to wear an afro. I guess my grandmother thought one afro wearing thing (laughter) in the house. Speaker 2: And your sisters-- Speaker 1: That's enough. Speaker 2: How, how much older-- Speaker 1: She's just a couple of years-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --older, but you know-- Speaker 2: So she was a senior then? Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a senior when I was a sophomore. And that was probably the beginning because I felt like, you know, I'm gonna have to push harder to be black than she, she--this is, this being bold is easy for her. And so that's when I started growing into my boldness, my, my, you know, revolutionary-ness. So at any rate, I'm running for senior class president, and I think probably I'm thinking I'm gonna--we're gonna go to Africa on our trip. And I'm gonna start--I'm, I had all these plans, and, and I, you know, I, I said we have to have debates. And we would have these debates, and I don't even think the--did the other--yeah, yeah, I--she came and I would say I'm--we're gonna do this, and we're gonna this, and we're gonna do this. And she was saying hey, and then she'd get a standing ovation. And of course she won, 'cause she was the most popular girl. And God bless her. You know, she was sweetie pie--I liked her. But we had no yearbook which was the first time in the history of the school that there wasn't a yearbook. And we had no senior trip, which I think was the first time in the history of the school that there was no senior trip. But the prom was on it (laughter), and that was what her focus was. So, yeah, that was my, my little dabble into, to politics. Story_ID: 99219 Speaker 1: Before we leave high school and grade school, do you remember the soap opera, the--was produced by Okoro directed it. Okoro Harold Johnson [HM] directed it, and it was produced over at WTTW, called "Bird of the Iron Feather." It was on I think for about six months in Chicago. And before on WTTW pulled the plug, I think it was on, on in the early seventies [1970s], and [Richard] Dick Durham, the author, you know, of the Muhammad Ali book and was the, was the script writer for it, and--but it had a, it was, it had some popularity. I'm not from Chicago [Illinois], but I've heard of, you know, people talk about it, and there's been a lot of discussion about it. But it was television for a-- Speaker 2: No, I don't-- Speaker 1: --brief period of time-- Speaker 2: --I don't think ever I've-- Speaker 1: --with black actors and actresses from Chicago involved, yeah. Speaker 2: No, I don't think I ever heard of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. I just asked 'cause I thought, you know, that's something that was theatrical that was going on. Let's see, and in '77 [1977] they had the big production at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] with some of the dancers from Najwa or the people "Kintu and the Law of Love." That's another thing that-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --Harold Johnson was in (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --the only--I don't remember going to any ETA productions, any--I, I heard of Najwa in high school because the person that I considered the most talented performer at the school during my time, Cathy Williams, who just was--is--an amazing, amazing performer. I haven't seen her in many years now. But she was so far beyond high school that it didn't make any sense that she was in high school. And in high school she performed with Najwa junior corps. She sung with Count Basie's band, toured with them. And in the statewide--I think every two years, something like that, there was a statewide organization that, that had a play that would, that people could compete with state. They did a whole bunch of other things, had a whole bunch of other activities. But it was for Illinois high school students, all of Illinois, white, black, Catholic, all of Illinois. And you could send the theater department or the school could send a tape of one boy and one girl to, to audition on tape for this play that they did every, you know, whatever time that they did it. And so, we know, we got to send two, two girl tapes, so they sent Cathy and whoever else was next in line. And that year, the year that I remember, the, the play was "Jesus Christ Superstar." And out of all--and this is, you know, Illinois, so predominantly white. Out of all of these people in Illinois, Cathy Williams was chosen to play Jesus. And this (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Cathy Williams? Speaker 2: Yes, was, was chosen, and, and she rocked the house (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: It was a mixed production or it was an all-girls production? Speaker 2: No, this was statewide-- Speaker 1: Statewide, okay. Speaker 2: --boys, girls, white, black. And Cathy Williams, this black girl, was chosen out of all of these people statewide to play Jesus, yeah, so. Speaker 1: Okay, nontraditional casting (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: And was--well, I--you know, somebody looked at the tapes and said you know, I don't care what the role is. This is the most talented person that, that's in the state right now that's also in high school. We better have her do it. Speaker 1: (Unclear) 'cause I always thought the best role was Judas Iscariot (laughter), but I don't--you know--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Ah, it, it is a good role, but that reminds me of, you know, not long ago seeing Carl Anderson sing that song from "Jesus Christ Superstar," oh, my goodness. Yeah, yeah, if you've seen him do that role, then that's definitely the role you want. (Laughter) But if you've seen Cathy do Jesus, then that's the role (laughter) that you want. Story_ID: 99220 Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else from high school that you remember that was a-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh gosh, lots of performers. Like I said, I haven't seen Cathy. And her sister, Mitzi (ph.) Williams is, is--was a performer in high school too and was performing I think recently. Most of the people--I mean it wasn't high school for performing arts, so most of the people that were performing did not intend to be professional performers. They were, you know, doing something while they were in high school. And so not a lot of people have performed since Adrienne Locke, who was in the year, the class behind me, I think at least one year behind me, phenomenal singer and at least--last time I saw her was several years ago now, but she was sting--singing still. She actually sung as part of the, the background music on a show that I did. And I came to Chicago, and a friend of mine who was helping me with it said we're gonna call Adrienne, just get her to just hum and stuff (laughter) on a tape recorder, and we can use that as the background music for your show. But not, not a lot of--Sharon Smith, who, who was a very talented singer and performer, but she's, you know, she's a closet singer. She, she actually has a whole studio in her house. And she records her own music and plays it for her friends (laughter). Yeah, but I don't think anyone that--unless I'm really, really, really missing someone that, that I'll kick myself for later that you would have heard of. Speaker 1: Okay, the reason I was asking about these, the, the black theater in Chicago and that sort of thing is because you, you are so, you're known for your consciousness in terms of who you are and how you approach your work and everything. I mean so much so, I mean it seemed like there'd be strangers--you wouldn't be involved in any of that in high school. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: But (unclear)--you know-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --a lot was going on. Speaker 2: Well, a lot was going on with me, and, and I, I mean that I can't overemphasize the duality between me the really, really meek, quiet person, and--I mean I had permission to go to high school. Story_ID: 99221 Speaker 1: Something other than that, there was no time for it; there was no money for it; there was no one to take me to it. It was burden to even get me to the shows. I remember one time in high school it was for a mime troupe show, and my grandmother and I, God bless us, were on the bus in a snowstorm, because we didn't have anybody to take us. And I'm like grandma we're gonna late, we're gonna be late, we're gonna be late, we're gonna be late. And she's, you ga--you know--(unclear)--it's like you don't understand performance, can't be late, we can't be late, we can't be late. And I'm, I'm in tears by the time we got there because it's, it's too close to whatever time the show was, 8:00, and we're still on the bus at 7:30. We're supposed to be at the theater at 7:30, so I'm in tears and, and frozen. And we finally get there I think maybe five minutes to eight, and I run in. My face is red because it's, it's so cold 'cause we have to walk from wherever. We, we get there. My grandmother goes in. And this mime troupe was such a, such a really close company, I, I--the first thing I heard was she's here, wait! She's here! And I was so frozen I could barely move, and they're just snatching my coat off, snatching my clothes off--[sound effect], something goes over my head and people are snat--and now I'm shaking because you, you know, you're face should not be half frozen when you're puttin', you know, clown white on your face. But these wonderful sister-friend mime troupe members of mine slapped that makeup on my face faster than it, I'm sure it's ever been done in history. And I was out on that stage for the first, for the first mime. But yeah, so it was, it was just kind of too much. I didn't, I didn't--I mean I, I was very--I knew what was going on right in front of me, in my house. Because I went to this school, I knew what was going on right in the school. I didn't, I, I didn't--it didn't occur to me to be aware of what was going on in the world. It, it was by happenstance that I heard it about anything else that was going on in the world. Speaker 2: But somehow it did though, because you seemed to train--change--your whole (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, eventually-- Speaker 2: --focus (unclear). Speaker 1: --but not--I mean in high school, I, I didn't know to find out what the X Bag was, you know, what's Kuumba doing? It wasn't--I mean it--that was outside of my, my thinking. It was--I was very, very single focused. What am I doing at Longwood [Academy] this week? And there really-- Speaker 2: Or it just seems like, as you describe it, it was on parallel with those other-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --theatrical activities. Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm just-- Speaker 1: You know, while they--I mean, and, and that's true, you know, for the history of the universe. While this person is doing this over here and has no knowledge that there is this person, they're doing the same thing over here, because it's time to do that; you know, thought evolves universally, I believe, and so-- Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, you know, some people like no, no, I thought of that and I alone, and it's my idea. Ah, yeah, and (laughter) the universe has allowed for you to have it and for this guy who will never meet you to have it at the same time. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99222 Speaker 1: So, well, when you were a senior in high school, now what did you determine to do in terms of--did you know you were going to college at that point? 'Cause you were taking college prep course on it, did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was taking college prep courses because I was in the honors program, and that's, that's the level academically where I was working. And so, I mean it would have--you know, that's--you know, they give you--you test and they give you the classes that they think you can excel at. But I don't think that it was ever an option for me not to go to college, and I, I never asked. You know, grandma, can I, can I not go to college (laughter)? I knew the answer. I--because it--other than going to college, it would have been going to pursue theater. And theater was considered something to grow out of. And so it, it didn't occur to me to even ask. Speaker 1: Okay, so your vocational aspiration I guess as a senior in high school was to, to go to school for some other, to pursue some other vocation? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, I had a plan. My, my plan was actually to--earlier on, before I--probably when I was a freshman and a sophomore my plan was to eventually go to college in either New York or California. And I thought I'll, I'll be in the place where, where pe--where theater is happening, performers are, and then I'll, you know, fall into it somehow. And when I started getting recruited my junior year for colleges, and I was recruited--I mean I did well on some tests and became a national merit semifinalist, and so I was recruited by schools all over the country and, and not a lot from either New York or California. And so I started thinking for the first time, oh, maybe I won't go to school in New York or California. What would I do then? Hmm, and I thought well, now that I'm used to this business of following my sister, maybe I'll follow my sister to University of Illinois [U of I, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], or maybe that coor--cool--girl that held the--led the mime troupe in my sophomore year, maybe I'll follow her to, to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] because I know that there's a mime troupe there. And I thought well, other than that, I'm not, I'm not sure. I just kind of changed. That had been my plan for so long, to go to New York or California to school that I thought now I have in--new information I don't quite know what to do with it. And school began aggressively recruiting me by my senior year at the point where, you know, late junior year and senior year where you have to start really making a decision. And so I went to U of I, where my sister attended school, and I auditioned for their theater department. And while I was there auditioning, and I was brilliant and got accepted of course, I decided this is not the place for me. And I remember the recruiter, the person testing me or whatever, walking me down the halls that were supposed to impress me so much, and they had pictures of the plays that they had done there. And they were just one lily white picture after another, lily white picture after another, and I thought, hmm, I don't see me anywhere near here. I'm not trying to like play somebody's little maid. I mean I'm coming from an, a completely inclusive environment, all-girls, all-black environment where I, I had the--more confidence than I had ever had and have had since, frankly, where when the school had auditions for shows, I would come to the audition and say I'mma show you what I'm gonna do in the show. (Laughter) And I mean it didn't occur to me that it was really an audition. It was just like, I'm gonna show, you know, Ms. Lamb, Ms. Blalock, you know, Mr. Nixon what I'm gonna do once, you know, they--you know, it never occurred to me that my name wouldn't be on the list. And suddenly I'm in this place where, you know, I don't even see me in the fringe someplace, and I didn't like that thought at all. And I thought, you know, and then being used to, you know, having my sister there to kind of protect me, you know, when you're, when you're new, I thought, hmm, that's, that's not quite outweighing this business of I'm not gonna be happy when I get there. Story_ID: 99223 Speaker 1: In the meantime, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was heavily recruiting me and Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida]. And Fisk had really no drama to speak of. They had the Fisk Jubilee Singers, which I thought okay, that's good, that's good. I'm gonna need a little more than that. And the recruiter said look, if you come to Fisk, you can start a mime troupe there. I said hmm, now that's, that's sounding good. And then Florida A and M's recruiter came and in a half an hour talked me not only into going to Florida A and M, which I'd never heard of, but talked me into majoring in business, which I had no intention of majoring in. But my thinking--well, one, 'cause he's made it sound so good and that my thinking was-- Speaker 2: What sounded good about it? I mean it's, it's like completely different from what everything that you wanted to do. Speaker 1: What sounded good about it was that the fact that, that it would impress my grandmother and that I would have this degree that would mean something for her. Because I, I mean I understood--I mean like I said, I, I, I've never had as much confidence as I had in, in high school as a performer. It didn't occur to me that I wouldn't do well as a performer. But I acknowledged that my grandmother didn't--you know, she came from a different time where it was, you know foolhardy for a black woman to think that, that she could make a living at that. I mean it wasn't--you know, get a job that's gonna pay you some money. You can't afford--you know, you don't wanna be hungry in, you know, ever, and, and you don't wanna be hungry at this time. And I thought I'll get this degree that will impress her. I know this (unclear)--after this man talks, she'll be impressed with this degree. And I'll frame it, and I'll give it to her. She can hang it up. And then I'll either go to New York or California and be an actress, and she won't worry about me being an actress because she'll know that I have this really good degree and that I'll be all right no matter what. And whatever time, if I ever fail at being a performer, I can say well, I've also got this business degree, and I can pursue business. My sister was an accounting major at the time at U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], and so I know that that was an acceptable profession (laughter), you know, something in business. And I thought hey, show business, it can't hurt (laugher)--(unclear)--it can't hurt. And so that, you know, I completely shifted my plan to this business of getting a degree that would--I mean the so--I mean there was no point in which I, I thought that I would work one day in business after graduating. My only plan was to have something that my grandmother could frame and hang up someplace and not be worried about me. Speaker 2: But Florida A&M did have a theater department or did they? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. It, it had a wonderful, completely fledgling theater department that was run by two tireless and noble men, Keith Tucker and Mr., who is now Dr. Ron Davis, who did everything that was to be done with, with that little theater department. Story_ID: 99646 Speaker 1: Okay, well, so you chose Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about Florida A&M. What was it like? Speaker 2: Let's see, let, let me go back to that, that afternoon at the, you know, Dean, Dean George Auzan (ph.) recruiting me and whatever he was saying, what I heard was they'll be palm trees; you'll have a book slightly open as you lounge on the beach; someone will bring you fruit drinks with little butterflies on; and someone will run down the beach and say hey, guys, the test is in ten minutes, and then you'll run up to class and take a test. That's, that's what I was hearing when he was, you know, going on and on about, you know, if you're not in business, you're, you're, you know, you might as well sit down. And so it, it, I don't think it could have been more of a shock to me. And it started, I remember the day it was like right before my high school graduation because I had gotten a couple of scholarships. And one, I think I got the mayor's youth foundation scholarship or something like that, and it was they needed to know what school you were gonna attend. And maybe it must not have been before graduation but was before some kind of whatever, and I hadn't made the decision yet where I was going. And it was probably the one time in my life that I had asked my grandmother for her opinion on something. And it was certainly the biggest, biggest decision I had ever made, and I was really vacillating between following my sister to U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] and going to Florida A&M, two very, very different courses. And I remember saying, you know, really, really, really, you know, which one, which one? And she said nope, this has to be your decision. And whatever the deadline was to tell the school, you know, what I picked, you know, I told them Florida A&M. And when it came down for her to say, you know, what are you gonna do? I said well, made decision, I thought, I thought, and I'm going to Florida A&M. And her face dropped. I thought, aaah, that was wrong? That was the wrong answer? You said, you said for me to decide. What? Then she recovered as quickly as she could. But you know, it didn't occur to her that I was gonna pick Florida A&M. It was, you know, so far away. I, I had never-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was that-- Speaker 2: --even heard of it. Speaker 1: --it was so far away. Speaker 2: Yeah. And she said no, no, that's your decision (unclear). But, I mean, in retrospect, she was scared to death for me and, and rightly so. And she went with me, you know, when I, when I came there. And I--there was, the business program is extraordinary. And the, the moment that you tell them that you're going, they give you this reading list that, that's over a hundred books, and they tell you to have them read by the time you show up to campus. Yeah, they're, they're, they don't play; they're, they're, they're very, very serious--and to have them read by the time you show up for student orientation. I thought, aaaaah, what have I done (laughter)? So I'm searching. You know, it's like you, you can't just flip through--on a clear day you can see General Motors (laughter). You know, this is gonna take a minute or two. So, I, I did the best I could. I'm sure I didn't get through half the list. Story_ID: 99647 Speaker 1: But it was a very, very serious program, the, the School of Business and Industry, and that's obviously the program that recruited me. And I remember arriving on campus thinking: what have I done? I don't--the--it's--I think Springfield [Illinois] was as far south as I'd ever traveled up until then. And the taxi--we stayed at some hotel until it was time to go the campus. And the taxi driver is like, where you going? We're going to Florida A&M University [Tallahassee, Florida]. Oh--he took the slowest route, and I remember thinking, you know, nudging my grandmother, seems like it's taking a long time (laughter) to get there. Here, you know, it's, you know, milking, milking, milking the stupid Northerners (laughter) out of every dime they had to get to this campus. We, we pull up on the campus, and I'm overwhelmed at, at the sight of orange dirt. I mean what kind of place has orange dirt? Dirt, dirt's supposed to be black (laughter), you know, not--you know, (unclear). Really, you know, I'm not in Kansas anymore for real (laughter). I'm expecting, you know, munchkins or something to come out. And I remember this, this mammoth guy sitting on, on some bench on campus when our cab pulled up to and kind of slowed down to the stop. And he looked at the guy, he said fresh meat--aaah! oh dear, oh dear, oh dear, oh dear (laughter). And we, we, we get up to the, to the room, and I'm thinking, you know, I've visited my sister in college; I visited my brother in college, U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], and where did my brother go--ISU [Illinois State University, Bloomington, Illinois]--and the dorms were lovely and nice. And I think one had a little gift store at the bottom of it and a little cafeteria, and they just were lovely. And we arrive at this shabby little thing, no phone on the hallway, been torn out (laughter), just, it just was horrible. And my grandmother, whose expression was like aah, and I thought okay, well, she's panicked. I'm gonna let her do that, and then I'm gonna have to have the brave face. So everything we saw I said--and then, before we get to the dorm, we're, we're driving up and somebody else goes, hey, you a freshman? My grandmother says yes, (laughter)--(unclear). I don't know that we need to tell everybody. Where are you staying? She said Cropper Hall (laughter). You need some help? Yes, we would like--and she's, she's a lady. She's thinking this fine gentleman has asked, you know, if he can help. We're gonna take his assistance. I'm thinking, oh no, oh no. So, so now the men have met us (unclear)--(laughter)--at, at this place, Cropper Hall, and they're carrying my, my poor little bags. And I really, really want to cry because I, I know that I'm, I'm in deep trouble already. And everything we saw that grand--that made my grandma say [sound effect], I said oh, no it'll be fine, it'll be fine. You know, I'll go--I'm sure they have a Walgreens or something, and I'll go and you know, get some, get some things. It, it's not, it's not that, it's not (unclear), it's, it's not gonna be that bad. It's gonna be, gonna be fine; it's gonna be fine; it's gonna be--it's gonna be (laughter). And you know, and that was kind of my experience there. I mean I just was, I was seventeen, my first time away from my family, my first time starting something without at least one older sibling to, you know, show me the ropes, my first time a, a plane ride away from everyone. And, and I thought this is good, 'cause I really was wanting to get away from the house. And my logic that came back and bit me at the butt was that I won't be able to come home every weekend. I'll really have this experience and be, you know, far away from home. And so, I remember when my grandmother left me there thinking okay, oh (laughter), and, and I'm not gonna see her again until the Christmas break, because we couldn't, I mean we couldn't afford the one ticket, let alone (laughter) two, and more than two was out of the question. And I, I just was way, way, way in over my head, way, way. Speaker 2: So, so, well, how did you-- Speaker 1: What happened next? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Well (laughter)-- Speaker 2: --well, how did you adjust to this? This is-- Speaker 1: I, I don't know-- Speaker 2: --was it-- Speaker 1: --frankly, that I ever really, really adjusted. I kind of got by and got along. Story_ID: 99648 Speaker 1: I made some really, really good friends right off the top. I mean I went--I, I found someone else that was a theater may--that was a, a business major and was relieved to find that they didn't get through the more than hundred books either. And the business program had all of these things that you had to do, in addition to the book list. They had the Orders Club, which was based on the Toastmasters, where you, you know, learned and was, and were critiqued on public speaking. They had what they call forum, where they had CEOs, presidents, and vice presidents of Fortune 500 companies come and speak to the crowd. And you had--they had to--I forget what they had, but they had--they broke us up into teams of twelve, where that you had to prepare questions that were suitable to be asked to this person that was gonna be speaking every week, and they had something else. And all, all of these activities were worth one (laughter), one credit on your transcript, so you--and you had to dress in business attire, suits. And, and I learned quickly-- Speaker 2: That's all, all the time? Speaker 1: Any, any business activity you had to dress for forum and you--and for a close-up. That's what they called the, the sessions of when you met in groups of twelve and for Orders Club, any business activity, which there usually was one every day. So you pretty much, you know, were at, at, were at least, like three times a week you're in a suit. And, and you know, 90 degree weather you had to select your suits carefully so that (laughter) you wouldn't have wrung out suits by the end of the day. So it was--I mean everything, everything was completely foreign. I mean, I mean the high--the transition from high school to college is always major because you're, you're coming from a group of people who are no more than three years older than you to a group of people who are no more than three years younger to, to the--and especially in Florida where people didn't leave (laughter), people who--I, I was one of the youngest people there at seventeen--to people, there were students there that were twenty-five and twenty-six, twenty-seven; some, some of them were freshmen. So, you know, so that was--and then to go from--I mean the last time I had been in a classroom with boys, you know, I was thirteen, so, and nuns were watching over me. Speaker 2: Nobody yelling fresh meat when you (laughter)-- Speaker 1: No one's (laughter), no one, no, no one (laughter). So, and, and in addition to that, to, to have this, this theater base that was my life and classes kind of surrounded, I had classes that were really, really foreign to me that I didn't like at all. I didn't, I didn't like any of the business classes. The only thing that I really liked was the leadership program, which was worth the one credit where you-- Speaker 2: The public speaking. Speaker 1: Yeah, the public and the research. I liked to do research on the companies; I liked to come up with the questions; I liked forum; I, I liked the information. I, I, I found that I did have some appreciation for business. I just--you know, accountant? No, (unclear)--no, none of that. I didn't like any of that. Speaker 2: So did you stay in the business program? Speaker 1: Of course not, of course not. Story_ID: 99649 Speaker 1: Right away I got into a play. Well, fir--the first thing was, the first week I was there they had a freshman talent show. And I, I jumped into that with, with my new friend, Idina (ph.) Williams. And what are we gonna do? Let's do a dance. Okay, you dance, I dance. And we did a dance, and then I sung a song. I did a solo, so I--two, two entries into the freshman--the first week at school, and that set the tone for my life. Like, I'm a business major, but that's kind of that other thing that I do, so right away I had two lives. I was one of the performers on campus, and I had a whole separate group of friends that were in the business program. And after the, the freshman talent show, there was a freshman play that, that started kind of a little war with me and the theater department that I didn't know yet, because the theater department was the theater department, and how dare somebody else try to throw a play? Speaker 2: Now did you come up with this idea yourself for a freshman play or was it-- Speaker 1: No, no, no-- Speaker 2: --something that-- Speaker 1: --it was, it was this, this really tight-knit group of friends from Jacksonville [Florida], Angela Robinson, Darryl Hall, were kind of the, the runners of it. Darryl directed the, the play. And the play was "The Wiz," and it was this kind of hybrid combination of the play and the film, because you know, it was--wasn't the theater department. They could do whatever (laughter) they wanted. And I tried out for Dorothy, assuming that I would get it, and all my friends said you got it, you got it, you got it. And on my way walking out the theater, I heard this voice that wasn't Stephanie Mills (laughter), but I thought, ah, whoever that is, she got (laughter) it. And sure enough, this person who, who had just had the voice of this angel got the role of Dorothy. And I understudied her and danced, which turned out to be a good thing because the people that danced in the show formed a dance company. And that was my idea and Angela's idea. And so we ran this, this--we called ourself the Magic (ph.) Movement Dance Theater. And we performed most of, most of my tenure at Florida A&M. Speaker 2: Now, now what did, what kind of dance did you do? Some modern or-- Speaker 1: It was modern, modern, modern, modern jazz. It was, it was completely eclectic. It was, you know, street. We did everything; we danced to Prince; we, we, whatever. If--I remember our first professional engagement was at the Kappa's something that they had every year. Speaker 2: The Kappa Karnival or something like- Speaker 1: Some--it wasn't Kappa Karnival that, that they have in Illinois. There's something that FAMU Kappas had. And we made these--we did this jazz dance, and we, we had these red leotards, and we made these skirts with--that looked like, that were supposed to look like fire (laughter). They were--we, we all did our own costumes, so if there was like an econ test the next day--was I studying? Oh, no, I was sewing (laughter), I was sewing costumes for, for my dance company. Also freshman year, I auditioned for the university's dance company, Orchesis Contemporary Dance Theatre and got in the main company of that. Story_ID: 99650 Speaker 1: And so I, I was like in high school, always rehearsing for something and considered, unfortunately, my major to be of peripheral interest except for the leadership program there. After two years of that, I decided that, you know, I, I had to really make a choice. I wasn't doing well in the program, and I didn't like that. I mean even--and that's when those bad habits that I developed in high school really came back and bit me in the butt. You can't write a college paper in the hallway on the way to class. You, you know, you, you, you--it's not possible. And so I, I stopped being, you know, a really good student or, or a good stu--I stopped being the kind of student who can, you know, come in, in the home stretch and still get an 'A' or a 'B'. I started failing stuff, and I didn't like that, and so I said I know I'm gonna have to make a choice. And I decided that I had to put my money on me and not my grandmother's fear for my career. And I decided that, you know, if I was gonna stay in business, I would have stop doing theater and really focus 'cause that's what was required. It was, it was a--just it, it is a terribly, terribly, wonderfully challenging program. You have the brightest students from the, from the country and around the world in this program, and you can't, you know, you, you gotta be more than smart. You gotta work hard to excel in this program or stop and change my major. And I had gotten myself, actually freshman year, into the, the play that, that the theater department was doing my freshman year, which was called "Memories of a FAMU Tradition," which was a retrospective of the plays that they'd done in the history of the theater department, wonderful experience, and made me start thinking, you know, I could stay here at FAM and just, you know, step on over to the theater department. And by the end of my sophomore year I said you know, I can't, I can't do this anymore [clearing throat]--pardon me. I can't be a bad business student in lieu of being a good performer. I have to let that go and then just let my grandmother know that I'll be all right, and she'll have to know it because I, I know it. And I switched my major from business to theater, lost my scholarship, but that's okay (laughter). I started working work study after that and took out loans from my junior and senior year. And you know, I'm, I'm sure it was--I, I mean I don't regret any of it. I certainly don't regret go, going to Florida A&M. I, I'm really, really glad that I went as a business major and not a theater major because I learned things in my, my short time in SBI, the School of Business Industry, that, that have stayed with me now. And even in the classes that I dropped and flunked (laughter), I got a little bit, I got a little bit of them. And not only did it give me a great respect for business, it, it, it made indelible this, this thing about show business being business. And it gave me friends that are now in the business world and so I have a lot of contacts that help me in, in my career in theater because they're in business. Story_ID: 99651 Speaker 1: But I changed my major to theater, and it was, it would have been the last place I would have gone for theater, because it, it, it, I mean it was, it was just barely hanging in there. The president, whose name I can't remember, that was the president of the university just had no love for the theater department, and it's like if you live, you live; if you die (laughter), you die. We're not giving you any money. And so these guys were really scrambling to come up with productions, and I, I don't know how they did it. And I remember my junior year--I mean once I got to the theater department, you know, I'm, I'm here; I'm taking over now. I remember convincing Dr. [Ronald] Davis that, you know, if we're a real theater, we should have a box office. He said there's no staff; there's no money; there's, there's no--I'll give it going and I'll run it myself (laughter) I said to him. And such a wonderful person, he said okay, you want to take it on, take it on. I don't want to hear about any challenge that you have with it. So singlehandedly, I organized the box office system for the theater department at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida] and got my friends, Stanley and Luther, that were theater majors at the time. This is what we have to do; this is what we have to do; this is what we have to do. And the show that we were doing at the time was I believe "The Wiz," and that was not because of the box office, but it was, it was the most successful show that we ever had at, to date, at Florida A&M. And I was glad that it was also the show that introduced the box office system at Florida A&M, and of course they still have it there. Speaker 2: Was that the same-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --freshman production? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Or was this, this the-- Speaker 1: This, this, this was-- Speaker 2: --theatrical production? Speaker 1: Yeah, this was two years later, and it was the real, the play "The Wiz," based on the Broadway play, "The Wiz." And there was, you know, no Ms. Green and Ms. Red and Ms. Gold (laughter). It--there wasn't anything from the movie in the, in the play. It was actually the play version. And again, I danced and understudied Dorothy and, at, at--and again, as it should have been (laughter) in that production. I did a lot of productions at the theater department. I--the--I on--I was only in the university's dance company the one year, my freshman year. After that, I remained with my own company that started with the freshman class, Magic Movement, and we performed I think all, all four years while I was there. The other plays that I did, I did a play called "Moon on a Rainbow Shawl," which was another kind of turning point in my career because I, I look young. I've always looked younger than I am. And when, when this play came up, Mr. Davis, the director, said he wanted me to, you know, audition for the little girl in the play. And I said ah, little girl, ah. I'm a woman, and I want to audition for the woman in the play. And he said you know--and I, I just, I remember so many thing now that, that I didn't--you know, I had my hand up when he was talking then. But he said you know, you have plenty of time to play a woman. Right now you, you have a talent for playing a little girl, and you know, that, that's not gonna go on forever. You should audition for the little girl. Talk to hand (laughter). And so, defying logic, reason, and commonsense, I audition for Rosa, and, and he cast me as Rosa. And I-- Speaker 2: And that was the-- Speaker 1: That was the woman who got to go on stage in her slip (laughter). Yeah, and I remember in the review, you know, I got mentioned, you know, and Crystal did Rosa (laughter). And who got the best review? Well, the person who played the mother in the show, and she was phenomenal, got the best review. But I remember the, the girl that played the little girl. I mean they mentioned, you know, that, that this, you know, college age person played this little girl. And I thought well, I could have done that. And it wasn't (laugher)-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --it wasn't the first thing that--I mean he, he gave me--I just will love him forever. He gave me nothing but really, really good advice about commonsense in, in this industry that, you know, I, I was too young to hear at the time. But I, but you know, my brain saved it for me for later and thank goodness, yeah, thank goodness. Story_ID: 99652 Speaker 1: Okay, well, now was the, "The Wiz" the big, the biggest play at Florida State when you were there? Speaker 2: It was biggest play-- Speaker 1: I mean Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: --the, the, the big--oh yeah. I was the, "The Wiz" was the biggest production that I was in. And no, it was, it was the biggest production that, that we did. The first show that I did, "Memories," we actually toured with that for a moment. So, that was probably--if there can be the longest running show that we did when I was there, it was that first show, before I was even in the theater department, "Memories." But "The Wiz" was the biggest show, second to "Bubbling Brown Sugar," which I was not in. We did that my senior year. And the part that I wanted a good friend of mine wanted it and was not in the theater department, and I said you know, I'm not even gonna audition for it, you know. You should, you should, you know, do this. And I was at the time fighting furiously to get out of school. And I thought if I even try to do this, you know, something's gonna have to give, because I had been a business major for two years, and suddenly I had all these classes that I needed to take to graduate. And at Florida A--beca--the theater department was so small, there were a lot of classes that were only offered once every four years. At the height when I was there, I think there were only seven theater majors. And so I co-opted at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] to take classes that, that I missed in those first two years in order to graduate on time. And I took whatever they call it, exaggerated loads, my junior and senior year every quarter so that I could--and I, I, I don't know why I was so determined to graduate on time. I think I'd had enough of Tallahassee, but I was determined, and I got out on time. And what I did for that last production in the theater department, I told Dr. Davis that, you know, I'll do anything else, but I don't think I can be in that show. And I ended up running the spotlight, which was pretty cool, and I traveled with them when they did some shows out, out of town and ran the spotlight for the show. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99653 Speaker 1: All right, so, now at this time at, at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida], did--were you introduced to some of the, oh, I don't know, the, the black plays that, that were being produced in the seventies [1970s] and some of the, the-- Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, maybe I-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I know some schools-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --focused on that and some don't. You know, that's why-- Speaker 2: Well, I--going back, 'cause I think I lied. I, I must have been in high school. I was in high school. I--forget what I said before about, you know, whatever I lied about. I, I lie sometimes. I went to see, while I was in high school, and it must have been with, with, with my high school--I don't, I don't think it was like my grandmother took me; I think it was a group from my high school--"Your Arms are too Short to Box with God." And I thought that, that was the best play that I had ever seen in my little life, and it was definitely the first black show that I had ever seen of, of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in downtown Chicago [Illinois], right, I think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Arie Crown [Theater] or something. I, I don't remember where it was. But we did this thing, this, this--in theater we had this one class. I think it was theater history or something. We had these--we had to keep these note cards of all the, this stuff that we learned, and there was different sections of, you know, what they called theater and you know, whatever it was, different--we got to the point where genres of theater, you know, comedy, drama, history, (unclear)--(unclear), but whatever. And we got this one section called black theater. So my little revolutionary hand went up, and I wrote a whole--it wasn't a dissertation (laughter), but I wrote a paper on, you know, how dare you categorize black theater as if it is all inclusive, as if it is, you know, this, the same--you know, unless, unless the next chapter, the paper, you know, the focus on the paper was unless the next chapter is on white theater, I'm offended that we have such a category as black theater, because, you know, whatever I said at the time, you know, James Baldwin is not the same as LeRoi Jones [now Amiri Baraka], it's, it's, it's not, it's not the same. Zora Neale Hurston is not the same as Ntozake Shange, and they should not be grouped together in this one category, black theater. And so there as actually Florida State University brought in more black productions. Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida] didn't really have the money to bring in productions. And so it was at Florida State that I saw "Sophisticated Ladies" I think for the first time, and I don't know, this, another review that was going around at the time, but not at Florida A&M, but Florida State [University]. Story_ID: 99821 Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: I just wanted to say something else about--it was in high school that I first read "For Colored Girls [Who Have Considered Suicide" by Ntozake Shange]. And I didn't see it, I don't think, until college, and that was at Florida A and--at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] as well. But that was my bible, "For Colored Girls." I, I thought this, this is the play that all black actresses should know by heart and do. And, and you know, it was I felt like the first time--I mean be--I didn't read Zora Neale Hurston, you know. It was for me the first contemporary, I guess, literature, theatrical literature that I read that I felt like, hey, this is, this is my voice. Now, of course, I didn't know what they were talking about because it was, most of it was over my head (laughter). But still, I related to the passion of it. And I think that I chose half of my friends at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida] for who knew "For Colored Girls" (laughter), like you know--yeah, all right, you're in, you're in. So that was, that was part of my-- Speaker 1: Now where you aware at the time of all the controversy around "Colored Girls" nationally and locally? In Chicago [Illinois] I know they had a big forum about it and-- Speaker 2: You know, it, it wasn't completely foreign to me, the controversy. I, I kind of heard a little bit, but that was way, way over my head. I didn't, whatever they were talking about, I didn't, I didn't get it. Speaker 1: So you were just pretty much excited about the fact that young black women were on stage saying what they wanted to say and-- Speaker 2: Saying what they wanna say, and I mean every actress, every actor is looking for a great monologue. I got an email last week from someone who had emailed the, the FAMU Playmaker's Guild. They--she emailed, put an email out a month ago: I need a monologue. And she emailed last week: I said I (laughter) need a monologue--(unclear)--you know, everyone is always looking for a great monologue. And this was a whole play of great monologues, and they were, they were so dramatic and so intense that, I mean, you see--and now, you know, that I'm older, I see really young people doing these adult monologues or young singers doing adult songs. And I'm thinking, honey, what do you know about that? Then they, and they don't, they don't--they might, they might know, but you know, I didn't know about anything (laughter) when I was high school. But I knew about the passion that was in these pieces, and that's when, you know, I got a chance to really throw up my emotions, and that was, that was the most important thing for me as an actress to be able to do. Story_ID: 99822 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about graduating from Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida], I mean, and, and what did you--where, where, where were? Speaker 2: Well, I, I try not to regret anything, but I do, every once in a while, think what if I had stayed that one more year? I was so hot to get out of Tallahassee my senior year that, like I said, I took accel--I--accelerated loads for two years to graduate on time, but I could have stayed one more year and gone to grad school at Florida A&M and had a masters in theater, their program--at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida], rather. There was youn--one-year program, and it--we covered in, at Florida A&M's senior graduation requirements in theater half the stuff that they covered in their, their master's program. So, it would have been quite easy for me to do that, but I just wanted to get out, and, and I had no plan. My plan was just to get out. As, as, as badly as I wanted to get away from home when I left, that's how badly I wanted to get back home after those four years were gone. I had--it was, it was a difficult life for me at Florida A&M, and theater, once again, was my saving grace. Story_ID: 99823 Speaker 1: I had, and I had a lot of great professors I think in addition to the, the theater professors. My favorite professor was Dr. Theodore Hemingway, who was my history professor. And I'd kind of gone back to history, something you have to take, and I know I'm not gonna get any history (unclear)--what's the point of this? And he was just so wonderful and really connected. History is black history for black people, and that was a phenomenal concept to me. And I remember he had such influence on me that he mentioned in class one day the, the book "Roots." And we had all seen the, the show, and, and I think I did lead a small revolt in high school when that came out. But-- Speaker 2: A revolt in terms of when-- Speaker 1: You know, well, just a revolt at a Catholic girl's high school was we bang on the lunch tables and say roots, roots, roots, roots, and that was supposed make the nuns recognize that we were black girls and to respect our blackness and you know, do something for Black History Month or something. I don't know, we, we had no demands. We were just, you know. At any rate, he mentioned this book and said well, of course, you know, everyone in my class has read the book, at, at which point I shrunk in my chair and say I'm not gon' ask anything else, God, except don't let Dr. Hemingway call my name and say, you know, Ms. Walker, did you read the book, just please. And I prayed until the bell rung. I went from that class to the bookstore, and that book was read two days later when, when I got back in his class. Of course, he never mentioned it again, but I didn't care. Story_ID: 99824 Speaker 1: But anyway, yeah, I got--I graduated, and right before I--not right before I graduated, but my senior year. And by then I'd been per--performing all through school, and people knew me as a performer. Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity on that campus, the Beta Nu Alphas decided to have a pageant. And it was their first time having a pageant, so no one knew about it; no one would get in it. And a friend of mine was an Alpha, and he came to me and my roommate, who was also a performer, and he said now, Crystal, you--(unclear)--to get in this pageant. Nobody's getting in it. Just get it in it, please, so somebody else can get in it, and said mm, okay, we'll get in it. And they were rattling on about, you know, what the rules were, and how to win, and what the winner would do and like, you know, talk to the other girls. We're really just in it 'cause you asked us to be in it. And I thought this'll give me a chance to do some more impressions before I graduate. And I came up with this routine where I did singing impressions. I did Nell Carter, and Billie Holiday, and Nancy Wilson [HM]. And I won, and when they called my name, I said wait a minute, what? And I'm thinking no, no, I was just, you know, in it. But what did you say the winner had to do? Oh, I didn't even--they, they had a ball that, that was supposed to be the Queen's Ball, and they, they expect you to have this dress for the ball. I didn't have a dress 'cause I wasn't even gonna go. And suddenly, I was scrambling to see what, what my duties were, and my duties included competing in the statewide pageant that the Alphas had. So, I guess a week or so later, I'm on the road with this car full of Alphas, and their cheering me on. I'm thinking (laughter) what have I gotten myself into now? And I get into this pageant. Now this, this is, you know, Florida, so these are like tall, lean, beautiful, you know, glamour girls in this pageant. I'm thinking guys, the excitement stops here (laughter). This is, you know, I'm gonna represent you the best I can, but I don't think, you know, we're gon' be coming home with anything. So cut to I won that. I won the, the southern regional pageant, and I won the national pageant. And in fact, I had to accelerate my class load even further and opt, I opted out of one test I was taking, whatever test I was taking. I negotiated an average grade and opted out of a test in one class. I was taking directing at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida], and I negotiated for my project. And all the directors had to be actors in someone else's project and the, the project in which I was acting to be done a week earlier. And I, in effect, left school a week earlier so I could compete in the National Miss Black and Gold Pageant, and, and I was glad 'cause I won that too and became the National Miss Black and Gold for 1984. I went back for the graduation and--no, I went--no, no, no, sorry, that, that was--I'd actually, I'd, I had--the graduation was at the end of the spring. And I had to continue in the summer to get out on time, and so I had to come back to like get the rest of my stuff, but I left. I was finished class a week early to compete in the, the Alpha pageant. Story_ID: 99825 Speaker 1: And I had no plan for after that except to, to be at home. And I thought, I have this degree. It's in theater, and I, I, I had the, the courses completed for the equivalent of a minor in business. And so I thought well, you know, I'll be a bum until I figure out, you know, what I'll do. I was living at home with my grandmother. She was glad to have me back, and I started just look--I, I didn't have anything theater contacts. I mean my, my high school friends were not performing at all. I didn't know anybody that was a performer in Chicago [Illinois]. And my high school drama teachers weren't there anymore, and they, they weren't--you know, it wasn't a school for the performing arts. They weren't connected to professional theater in Chicago. So I was absolutely starting from scratch. I think the first thing that I did was I signed up to be a substitute teacher so I could, you know, eat. Well, my grandmother would have fed, but you know what I mean (laughter). And I, I was looking for in the newspaper, which is not necessarily a place to look for anything. And, and I would go to--I mean if there as a theater crook in Chicago, I met 'em, I met 'em, and I auditioned for 'em. I ran from 'em (laughter) and then made a narrow escape from--I mean every crook (laughter) in Chicago-- Speaker 2: So what kind of schemes were, were afoot now? Speaker 1: Oh, I mean if you go in the paper, I mean, I mean I had lil--literally--this one guy, and I won't mention the name, but people who just--you get there and no one's there. You get there and then somebody say okay, we're gonna do something. You go and do something, and the paper said you were doing something. Yeah, we were gather everybody together and then--oh, Lord, I spent all my money on this bus ticket to get to--somebody who said okay, we're, we're doing this play, and I want you to do the lead. Now you're gonna have to put out. Put out what? Oh, my God (laughter) oh, no thank you, mister, oh, Lord (laughter) to just, just everything. You get there and okay, yes, and we're gonna--and we want you to be in the show. You're gonna have to pay $50 dollars a week. I'm gonna have to pay? (Unclear)--no, no, no, I, I don't have any money, what? To--I mean just you name it, you name it, and I saw it, met it, ran from it (laughter) in Chicago because I didn't, I didn't know where to start. And somehow, and, and I think, yeah, it was--I have to give the Alphas credit. Because I had done well in the Alpha pageant, my brother said, one of my brothers said hey, you know, you're good at this pageant thing. Why don't you get in the Miss Black America Pageant. It's on, it's on TV; you'll get on TV. And I said yeah, yeah, I am good at that pageant thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah, how do you, how do you--and so we found out that there is a Miss Black Illinois Pageant. And the winner of the Miss Black Illinois Pageant goes on the Miss Black American Pageant. I said okay, fine, I'll get in that. I'll win that, and then I'll go on TV, and that was my plan. So I get in the Miss Black Illinois Pageant, and, and I was so obnoxious that, that it, it's amazing that those other girls didn't just hit me. And, and it was just. It was confidence that, that I had a plan that my goal was to get on TV. And so--and I would tell anyone who asked, 'cause were eventually interviewed. And then well, so why'd you get in this pageant? I got in the pageant to win so I could be, you know, get in the Miss Black Illinois--America Pageant. And I would say, in front of all the other girls, well, I'm gonna win. And they, I, I, I guess they think they're gonna win too. I, I don't know why they're here if they don't think they're gonna win. But I'm going to win (laughter), and I won and got in the, got in the, the Miss Black America Pageant. And the--and, and I don't know, you know, if I should regret it or not because I think everything happens as it's supposed to happen. But part of me just wish that, that my plan had been beyond to get in that pageant, that my plan had been to win that pageant, because I was kind of done once I showed up there, 'cause I knew I was gonna get on TV. Story_ID: 99826 Speaker 1: And it was--I mean, you know, the pageant--well-- Speaker 2: So what was the pageant like? You can tell us now (unclear). Speaker 1: I learned a lot. I learned a lot from that pageant, from all of the pageants, from the Alpha pageant [National Miss Black and Gold], which I, I got in completely by happenstance, and, and having gotten in, paid no attention to until I won. But I, I was treated--all of the contestants and queens were treated with such gentility that I thought hey, it's nice to be in a pageant. (Laughter) It's, you know, you're treated like a lady; it's nice; they bring you flowers. It, it just was a lovely experience. And the pageant itself taught me something else about being a performer, because this business of wearing a swimsuit and you know, and walking the line in front of a group of ogling men made me extremely uncomfortable. And the, the thing that struck me about that was it was the first time I'd ever been uncomfortable on a stage. And so I thought I saw it as a challenge that I don't--this is foreign to me, being uncomfortable on a stage. I have to get over this. This is not--you know, I--no, I'm Crystal. I should never be uncomfortable on a stage. And I came away thinking people shouldn't parade around in (laughter) swimsuits in front of ogling men. That's why you're uncomfortable, stupid. And you should never do anything that will make you uncomfortable no matter it is, even if it's in a room full of gentlemen who are at the end gonna give you flowers and be nice to you, that, that I learned both of those things, that, that I should never do anything that made me uncomfortable, and I, I should never be uncomfortable on a stage or any, any performance arena. So, at any rate, the Alpha pageants taught me about, about long term goals, because at every--at, at, at the first pageant I was just having fun. I didn't, I didn't pay any attention to any of the contestants. I didn't care who won. And it wasn't till the second pageant when all of a sudden these friends of mine, these Alphas were counting on me, and I felt like I'm representing them that I felt this pressure. Well, now I have to win. What's going on? Who's my competition? And you meet these girls on the first day, and they're like long legs to the roof and you know, hair and you know, cheekbones (laughter) and, and all this stuff, and I'm thinking I am dead in the water. And then you start seeing them as the pageant, you know, rehearsals we see this person this, you see this person this. You hear them talking, and, and you start evaluating...well, I, I know she's cute, but you know I (unclear)--you know, she's--that talent, that's not gonna win; ah, she's, she's cute; hmm, she's intelligent too; hmm, hmm, hmm, that question, she's gon' get me on the question; this one, this--ah, no, she can't, she can't, she don't, she just barely knows her name (laughter). And so you start--and I, at no point did I ever think I was gonna win any of those other pageants and that--and I remember the first one, the, the, which was the second one, the state pageant [Miss Black Illinois Pageant], that I'm looking at these girls who are just gorgeous. And I've now heard, I've seen their talent. There are some, you know--(unclear)--I've, I've heard some of their questions, and some, you know, some smart, some--and I'm thinking [three out-breaths], I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't the best; I didn't answer the question best; I did--I'm not the prettiest; I'm, you know, I'm, I, I, didn't like--they--for most of the pageant they had, you know, the, the, they didn't have the prettiest, but they had, you know, the most talented this, the most this, the most whatever, and I, and I wasn't winning those. And I remember the, that, that first pageant, when they called the first runner-up, my guys stood up and started cheering. I thought: why would you do that to me (laughter). Because they've seen the whole pageant, and they know if it's not me, it's her. And when they called her first runner-up, they knew I was gonna win, which was a complete shock to me. But what I learned was that, you don't have to be the best at everything; you just have to be good consistently, because in the long run, you win. And that's what happened in every pageant. Every pageant, I saw someone who was prettier; I saw someone who I thought at least was smarter or could answer a question better; I saw someone who I thought might have a better talent than I did. But in the end, you know, they did that one, or they were the prettiest, but, but nothing else-- Story_ID: 99827 Speaker 1: What happened in the Miss Black American Pa-- Speaker 2: With this Miss Black America Pageant-- Speaker 1: --Pageant, yeah. Speaker 2: --I learned all of the other things that you hear about pageant. I learned--and some of it at the, at the state level and some of it at the national level. And I learned about backstabbing, lying, cheating stealing, lying, lying, lying, lying, just underhandedness. I, I learned how, what a, what a big industry the pageant system is and how much money there is to be made, and how girls are literally, if not, you know, if, if not literally, almost literally pimped for their talent. In the Illinois pageant, I was the first person that had a really marketable talent; I did impressions. I didn't need a band; I didn't need an orchestra; I didn't need--I, I just knew they could take me anywhere and I could perform. They could take me to places where I just had an appearance, and somebody could say oh, that's the Miss Black America--(unclear)--(unclear)--would you do something? Mm, sure I will, padadadada. And so, I mean these people made a lot of money off of me. And it, it just, so many aspects of, of the industry that I learned from that pageant system of how--they used to have a phrase in the pageant. The pageant director would, would, while we were contestants, say, you know, and a good queen does this and a good queen does that. And if, you know, if you're a bad queen, I don't care who you are, we will let that crown rot on your head (laughter), which means you'll just be sittin'. Because, and we would ask, where is, where is the queen from last year? Ooh, she did something bad, whoever--we gon' be good. We're gon' be a good queen. That crown is not gon' rot on our head. And who knows what they were asked, but I know, and I won't, you know, you know, there are people who should, you know, should be protected. But, you know, I saw some things I shouldn't have seen. I was taken some places I should not have gone. I mean I was a grown woman; I was twenty-two years old. But I was taken to parties with men who, you know, as the entertainment for the party and with, with people who would have been comfortable leaving me there (laughter), if I hadn't had the wherewithal to say (laughter) no, no, no, I, I, I'm with (laughter) them; I came with them; I'll be leaving with them. I'm not comin' out of a cake; I'm not (laughter), I'm not dancin'; I'm not--you know, it's, so it's, it--I learned a lot, I learned a lot. And in the national pageant, the person, and God bless her, I mean in the end, you know, I, I wouldn't trade places with her now, but there were all these rules about who could compete and who couldn't compete. And you have to be at the place, wherever we were by the certain deadline. And if you weren't there, you couldn't, you couldn't come late. You, you couldn't--the cutoff age was something like 20--24 or 25, whatever, whatever it was. You couldn't have any past affiliations with, with any of the pageant directors or the pageant itself. The person that won--oh, I'm telling it--the person that won--violated--uh, just would, violating every rule that you could violate and, and won. So, I learned a lot about the, the perks and the downsides of this, of, of the entertainment industry. I learned that you can be in jeans and a t-shirt one day, a gown, and a clown, and a banner the next day, and getting out of a limousine, and then the day after that be back in your jeans and your t-shirt explaining what happened to the limo (laughter) and saying, you know, y'all don't have it like that anymore. So I'm, I'm really grateful for that experience as well. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, so how much time did that take up of your, I mean of your-- Speaker 2: This was, I was Miss Black Illinois and first runner-up to Miss--I was Miss Black Illinois '80--'86 [1986], '86 [1986], '87 [1987] and first runner, runner-up to Miss Black America I guess '80--'86 [1986], maybe, maybe thereabout. I don't know. I think they were both '86 [1986] to '87 [1987]. That was, that was the reign. They, yeah, they were--it was that same summer, later on that summer. Story_ID: 99828 Speaker 1: And my, the sponsor, the guy who sponsored me in the pageant, who I found through the pageant, they had these sponsor parties where they would, you know, showcase all the contestants. And you know, it's like if you see one you like, you can sponsor her (laughter), that sort of thing. And the guy that sponsored me in the pageant was friends with somebody at eta. And someone dropped out of a play that they were doing called "The Regal Theater", and they asked if, they asked the guy to bring me over and have me audition for it. And that was the beginning of my theatrical life in Chicago [Illinois]. I auditioned and was cast in "The Regal Theater". I played, I got cast to play Dinah Washington, which I did. And then after I got in the show, I also played Tammi Terrell and was swing with the girl who did Claudette Robinson with, when, you know, Claudette Robinson and Smokey Robinson and the Miracles. And later on, the dancers in the show, the Regalettes, you know, the show ran forever. The show ran at eta until somebody said please put a different show at eta (laughter), and then we ran someplace else. Speaker 2: Well, Abena [Joan P. Brown, HM] actually said we're not going to run the one show forever-- Speaker 1: Forever. Speaker 2: --because it's gonna-- Speaker 1: --and you know-- Speaker 2: --kill the theater. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and it would have, it, it would have. I mean it was--and the, the houses were packed. They were packed every night. And the show had been running when I joined the company. The show had been running. Speaker 2: She saw what happened to Kuumba [Theate] with the "The Bessie Smith Story," you know-- Speaker 1: Ah, okay, so-- Speaker 2: And she wasn't gon' let that happen to her-- Speaker 1: And, and, and she was-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: --smart. I mean it's, it's unfortunate that, that, that theater didn't have another space, that it could have run the one theater and done some--(unclear)--at the same time. But-- Speaker 2: And there-- Speaker 1: --I'm seeing the show-- Speaker 2: Behind-the-scene fights I just can't--go, go ahead. I was-- Speaker 1: But we--I, I'm watching the show, the, the whole time, and I'm a dancer, and so one night I remember one of the dancers couldn't show up. And when, when the dancer couldn't show up, they would scramble. Will you do this part--(unclear)--and I went to Najwa and I said you know, I could, I could do that part. She said you're a dance? Yeah, but you don't know the routine. I said--(unclear)--I'm in the show. I'm watching him every night. I, I--put me in. She said you're sure? Sure, I'm her size (laughter) for the costume. And I filled in for whoever was out that night and danced as a dancer in the show from then on. And when we left eta, we just did shows around town wherever, and for years we did, we did shows. And it's like every once in a while Coral will call. Hey, we're doing the show. Okay, (laughter) where are we going? Show up to wherever, and everybody would come together and do the show wherever we doing it. Speaker 2: Now I heard--now I didn't, I didn't know this, but you played Moms Mabley in this show? Did you, did you do that? Speaker 1: No, I-- Speaker 2: You didn't? Speaker 1: --m-mm, I didn't play Moms-- Speaker 2: Okay, well, somebody said you actually--I said well that is really amazing. I mean I guess would guess you'd have the talent to do it, but I just wouldn't of-- Speaker 1: No, we did-- Speaker 2: --typed you as-- Speaker 1: --we didn't have a Moms Mabley in, in that show; m-mm, we didn't have a Moms Mabley. I did, I did Dinah Washington, Tammi Terrell, Claudette Robinson. I filled in a couple of times I think for the, the girl that did Ella Fitzgerald, and I danced as a Regalette, but that's, that's all. Speaker 2: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There, there was no Moms Mabley character in that show. I'm trying to think, was there ever? I mean and there might have been before I joined the, the company, but no, not that show. There were a lot of shows around. Story_ID: 99829 Speaker 1: Yeah, but--and as a result of me dancing in that show, I joined Najwa's dance company [Najwa Dance Corps] and started dancing with her. And from there, I guess doing that show, and it might have been another ad that I answered in the paper for a play, South African play called "Homeland," and a wonderful play, and I did the lead in that. And-- Speaker 2: Was that in, what, what theater was that in? Speaker 1: It was, it was at, actually the Civic Opera House. It was, it was an outside production, just somebody wanted to do it and, and brought it, you know, decided to throw it up someplace in Chicago [Illinois]. The, the playwright is South African and just came to Chicago and got somebody to produce his play. And the guy that play--it was principally a two-person show. There were a couple of other characters but, principally, a two-person show. And the guy that played my brother in the show, the wonderful Phillip [Edward] Van Lear, really was my in to theater in Chicago. That was the first, because eta is kind of eta. And then this other show was just the one production; there was no context to be, to be made out of it. And Phillip said okay, look, girl, this is what you gotta do. You gotta get the Reader newspaper. Okay. And you gotta, call and find out when the Goodman [Theatre]'s having their auditions. And you gotta find out when so and so is having auditions. You gotta send your resume to everybody. Okay. And whatever he said to do, I did everything. I sent--I got pictures made. I sent them and my resume from high school and college. I sent them around to all of the agencies. Then I started calling, and that's when I got listed with, I don't know, twenty agencies in Chicago. And the, the first big break, professional stage theater, was when I did "A Christmas Carol" at, at the Goodman. And that kind of got me in the loop of theater in Chicago. And, and the same time I was dancing with Najwa; I was modeling; I was singing with a couple of fledgling groups; I danced with Bill Cote (ph.) Dancers for a minute. I was a gypsy. I did everything that could do, you know, if I could fit it in--that's from three to three to five? Yeah, I can do that show at seven (laughter). Yeah, I, I was, I was doing it in Chicago, and that was my life. And I, I, I did "A Christmas Carol" a couple of years; I did "Playboy of the West Indies" at the Court Theatre; I did--I was with Chocolate Chips Theatre Company; I was with Wavelength Improv Company; I was with Call to Action Touring Company; and in 1989 I got a call from a friend of mine who said there's, there's this guy ni--named Keenan Ivory Wayans who's doing this TV Show. And he's looking for people who do characters, and you should, you should call them up. I said okay. And now at this point, I'm, I'm completely a theater person. I've no experience in television at, at all except the few interviews that I've done with my pageant experience. I've done some extra work in films I Chicago, quite a lot of extra work and ended up through that getting my SAG card. I was doing extra work, and an agency that hired me a lot to do extra work called me in and asked if I wanted to do stand-in for this little boy in this movie that they were making called "Big Shots," and I sure. What, what, what's, what's that? And she said well, you'd get paid more than an extra. I said count me in (laughter). And you'll, you'll, just stand in for him, stand in his light, and you know, while he's doing something else and so he could set the lights on you, and that's what stand-in does. I said okay, fine. So I, I start working on this film, and I hear the-- Story_ID: 99663 Speaker 1: All right, now, okay-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --"In Living Color" Speaker 2: --I, I was--well, I digress to "Big Shots." And I was working on "Big Shots," and I heard them talk about the stunts (unclear)--the "Big Shots" was about these two little boys. And they were talking about how they couldn't find a stunt guy to play the, the little black boy, and that the girl that was--'cause they usually use women to stand in for little boys 'cause there aren't, you know, little bitty men that can (laughter), can stand in. And, and the girl that was the stunt double for the little white boy was--the, the, there was a stand-in for the little white boy who was trying her best to be the stunt double for him. And they, they kept stringing her along, stringing her along (laughter) her along. An fact, they said well, I don't know, 'cause she had long hair. She's like I cut my hair. She came in one day with her hair all cut off. I'm like whoa, Nana (laughter), what were thinking? And so at some point, she was on such a mention, I said well, do they have one for the little black boy. And they said actually no, we don't. And I said well, could I do it? And they said sure. 'Cause there, there were no, you know, blacks stunt women in the, you know, the Black Stunt As--in the Stunt Association. And there was a chance they could find a white guy, short white guy or woman for the little boy, so my friend that was standing in had to really campaign. But you know, they were like, you wanna do it? Sure, come on. And that's how I got my SAG card, doing stunts for Darius McCrary, who later played one of the lead children in the television show "Family Matters." And he's like three times my size now, but when he was ten, we were about the same size. Speaker 1: So what did you--did you have to do anything dang--dangerous to-- Speaker 2: Yes, and, and the thing was, she had the easy part because, or whoever, 'cause she didn't do his driving, she didn't do Ricky's driving stunts. But in the film the little white--the little boys are bad, and the white kid is driving the car. And he doesn't know how to drive, so he's crashing. And the, the black kid is in the backseat, you know, flailing (laughter) about. And so that's what I had to do, these car crashes where I'm literally flailing about in the car. And so, yeah, it was, I earned my little money on that shoot, yeah. And then after that, because there weren't any black women doing stunts at the time, the stunt coordinators, it was Stacy Logan and the other guy (laughter), but they're like, get in our stunt association because there's a need. There's no, we don't have any black women. So I, I didn't like join, join in with them, but I said well, you know, it--my head still hurts from that last (laughter) job, but if you ever need somebody, you know, go on and call me. And a couple of time they called me. I actually doubled Vanessa Williams in "The Kid who Loved Christmas" in Chicago [Illinois]. And it was driving, and it was like precisi--precision driving, another car crash. But after that, I said you know what, I'm, I' think it'll be safer to stay on (laughter), stay on this side (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So, yes, they had to crash-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the cars or something? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah. I mean, and stunt people are the safest people you ever wanna work with, special effects, not the same. But stunt people, because they know that they can really, really get hurt, so a stunt person is not gonna do anything dangerous. When, when a stunt person has an accident, it's really an accident because they've gone out of their way to make sure that, that it's as safe as it can be and still, you know, be the stunt. But that was a, a big hurdle for me, to get in SAG. Story_ID: 99664 Speaker 1: And so I kept, you know, gypsying around. And my friend called and said this guy is looking for people who do characters, Keenan Ivory Wayans, do you know, that is? I said, no. He said he's got this movie called "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka." And I said it's called what (laughter)? "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka," hmmm, I don't know about that. You going? Yeah, yeah, I'm going, I'm going, I'm going. You should go, you should go. They're looking for people who do characters, she said. Okay, you know, sure, sure, sure, I'll go. And they had an open call that was at the Regal Theatre. Two hundred and some people showed up for this call, and I had called to get the appointment for that. I had called a casting director, who turned out to be Robi Reed, and I said my friend said to call. You are looking for characters. She said yeah, show up at the Regal Theatre and do ten minutes. And I said ten minutes? (Unclear) classical and a contemporary? (Laughter). She said no, 10 minutes of your routine, like stupid. Okay, what have you got me into? What, what routine? I have no routine. What do you, what have you got me into? She said nah, just, just put something together. Oh, okay, so I put together ten minutes based on sketches that I had written and performed in high school, and I came up with new characters and I got--I was in a comedy group in, right out of high school. They kicked me out when I went to college, the Mary Wong Comic Group, 'cause they said you're not serious; you're not trying to be a professional performer. You're out (laughter), but they kicked out everybody at some point in the life of the group. At any rate, I came to them 'cause most of the people that were in the group at the time auditioned. And I said I'm not trying to bara--my--embarrass myself. You know, I've been a theater actress for a long time now. Look at this and make sure it's funny, and they looked at it. They gave me--you know, they brushed up my, my little routine and with these 200 people. And the, the frightening thing about it is there were all these comics which, you know, I knew a lot of 'em because I had been in this comedy group. And they were like hey, Ali! Hey, Tim! Hey--Crystal what are you doing here? Oh, I just thought I'd come. Oh, I don't know. What am I doing here? 'Cause all of the other actors just really, really look like actors. They were doing monologues that were not funny. They were trying--(unclear)--what's funny on stage is not funny if you're in a room with standup comics, it's just, it's, it's not, it's--you know, you know, you don't wanna see Neil Simon go up against, you know, Robin Williams, Eddie Murphy. It's not--you know, you're not gonna laugh at that. And so I thought, you know, just please don't look like the other actors. Please let me look like the comedians (laughter) do. And then I zone into my thing, and I, I got the callback. At the callback there were a lot of theatrical performers who didn't know about this open call who had been called through their agents. Now I'm listed with twenty agencies in Chicago. None of them called me. Despite that fact that I'd been with a comedy group and had it--and an improv group, not one of them called me. And that was the easy part. It was, it was improv. And I made the cut and from there, got the call to, to come in, you know, for the final audition in Los Angeles [California], in which started my, my television career. Speaker 2: So, did you get a role on "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka?" Speaker 1: No, no, no, he [Keenan Ivory Wayans] had--that was the movie that he had done that was out at the time. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: I just never-- Speaker 2: So it was already out. Speaker 1: --heard of it. Yeah, that, that movie was out. I hadn't seen it. And, and when I heard the title, I thought, who would go to see something that and your--(laughter), "I'm Gonna Git You Sucka," oh, Lord (laughter). And so, you know, I kind of went into it, and you know, it was foreshadowing because the show--let's say--and let me start by saying, you know, I, I will forever be grateful because it was absolutely my big break. But it, it, it was not, principally speaking, it was not my sense of humor. And at some point--and then they figured that out pretty early, and I, I jokingly say that I was the gauge. You know, if Crystal's offended then it's funny enough to go on (laughter)--(unclear). So I was, you know, indignant most of the time. That's just you're crossing the line there. You're crossing the line. That's just (laughter)--like (unclear) the right (laughter) track. So, and then you know, the flip side was we did some, you know, really things that, that I thought were just ignorant, and banal, and shouldn't be done. But we did some things that were really intelligent, and culturally responsible, and moving that no one else would have done. And so, you know, I'm okay that in the end I think it, it's, it's, it's a nice show to have been in, and I'm really proud to have been on it and very blessed and lucky, and I've got guardian angels. Story_ID: 99665 Speaker 1: I was on a show by the end of every season, every season since then except one year that I took off. I, I went from "In Living Color" to a show called "On Our Own," where I played a contractor. And I went from that to a show called "The Show," back on FOX, where I played a television writer. I went from that show to "Cosby," where I played a flight attendant, turned lawyer, turned pastry chef, turned teacher, turned housewife. And from that, after "Cosby" I took a year off. And at the end of that year I joined, I started with "That's So Raven," which is the show that's currently on the air. And in between all of that time, starting with "In Living Color," I did theater whenever I could, starting with--I did my first one-woman show when I was still a student at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida]. It was our senior project had to be--if your concentration was performing a one-person show, if it was directing, directing somebody's show. But mine was performing, so I did a one-woman show based on the work of Ntozake Shange. When I was on, just be--when I was in Chicago [Illinois], just before I came out for "In Living Color" I was working on another theatrical show that was supposed to be a two-person show. But my friend, Margaret Kent, did not follow me as she said she was gonna be doing. And once I got on "In Living Color," I felt like I wasn't being used at all. I had way too much time on my hands. I started working on that show again and did that show. I debuted it in Chicago. I did a run of it in Los Angeles. I--eventually it ran off and on for ten years. Speaker 2: Is that "Some of My Best Friends?" Speaker 1: "Some of My Best Friends," yeah. And the response to that, and I never until today equated it with, you know, my love for "For Colored Girls." But whenever I did the show, actors would come up to me and say ca, can I have a copy of those monologues? Do you got those monologues? And I eventually had the show printed in book form and sold it at the show to actors who wanted monologues chiefly. And now I'm talking to someone about redoing that so that it can be performed as a piece because it's not really written. It's written in book form, but it's not this, but no encouragement for other people to perform it, so I'm doing that now. After I finished--and actually while I was still on "In Living Color"--I mean I just, I did a lot of theater whenever I could do it. I did theater; I did guess spots and other, other televisions shows; and occasionally, I would do some kind of film work. Around '96 [1996] I think it was, I--a friend of mine who was a aspiring filmmaker and screenwriter was working on selling a script, and I opened my big mouth and said you know, this script is gonna cost to money--too much money to produce. Why don't you just write a script that doesn't cost as much money to produce? Then I'll help you raise money, and you can just do it yourself. And he said okay. And I said oh, how much money (laughter)--(unclear). And I ended up, instead of being the cheerleader for it, producing this film. And I had taken a screenwriting class, and I was gonna take a film production class next, because even then I knew that I, I had two great challenge with images, and I was gonna have to shift to the other side, at least some of the time, to, to have more say in, in what, what I was doing there. Story_ID: 99666 Speaker 1: Let me backtrack a little bit to "In Living Color." You know, this is a like a sensational show when it came out. People were--it got a lot of attention. And people remember "Homey the Clown," and they remember the gay film critics, and they remember the brother being left on the moon and jumping, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they remember in, "In Black World." That was a, that was a, the, a feature that you were in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did, how was that conceived of, and because it was one of those comedy routines that's re--it makes you--it's sort, sort of like a Richard Pryor--it was some--it was funny and yet it made you kind of go hmm, you know, sort of. Speaker 2: It, it was, "In Black... Black World" was one of the pieces that I, I auditioned for, and Keenan [Ivory Wayans] says it's the reason that he hired me. "In Black World" was created in my own mind with every inequity that I observed from childhood up that I, that I felt I could capture in the voice of a little girl, that, that voice that wonders why things are different for us, that, that voice of innocence that wonders that, and, and was an, an, a piece that I had created for the show that I was working on before I got "In Living Color." And when I had to come up with stuff, I said oh, I can put that in there. And you know, who knew that it would, it would be how I got on the show. And the, the unfortunate thing is, you know, like I said, there were over 200 people at that audition, so when Keenan saw me perform this, this very serious piece, he also saw the audience's reaction to it. And so he trusted that it would work on television like it worked in a live theatrical space. And you know, I foolishly thought well, if they like this (laughter), you know, they're with, you know, they're in tune with my sensibilities--and never again, you know, never again. And every--and I would pitch, you know, black worlds and things like that, and you know, Selma this and (laughter) Montgomery this, yeah, all of these things, and was met with an oh no, no one's doing that, no one's doing that, no one's doing that. And at some point, you know, I said you know, what's the deal? You know, you let me do this one "Black World." You know, this is--I'd written a couple of others, and I said this is the same. You just--and I think that, you know, on paper, I mean if you just read it on paper, not see me perform it, you'll say oh, this is serious, this is--you know. And, and I couldn't sell them another one from the paper. And finally they just shut me up. They said okay, we'll, we'll do this thing. And it was so horrible. They made this pink set. They, they, they just, you know, they, they weren't in my head at all. And I had campaigned for it so long that I went on and did it, and then I said look, Keenan, this is so not "Black World." Please, let's let it dry up someplace and never show it. And he said okay, you're right. And we just, we couldn't recreate it because it, it wasn't--it was the opposite of the sentiment for the show. And I wasn't--I, I didn't have the power to say just, you know, put a camera on me for five minutes; put a camera on me for ten minutes, and then if you don't like what I do, then trash it. It had to go through the script process, and that had to have the okay of all the really, really terrified white people. I mean when we shot the pilot "In Living Color," there were a couple of really nice pieces, and they had what I call the black attack, where they, they said ooh, this show is just way too black to get on the air. We have to color this down and water this down. And let's, and diffuse this. Let's put--let's take him out and put Kelly in (laughter)--(unclear)--you know, they really, really watered down the show to make it palatable. And you know, they, you know, the wanted to get the show on the air, and it got on the air, and there was, you know, there was a long time where, you know, it might not have gotten on the air. And so you know, I--you know, it is what it is, but that, I'm glad I got that one piece on, and I'm glad that people remember that piece and remember me for it. And when people critique the show, I'm glad that, that it stands out as one of the memorable pieces in the show. Story_ID: 99667 Speaker 1: But it ["In Black World"] never--really didn't turn out the way you envisioned it. Speaker 2: That, that one sketch, yeah, because I did it as written. They actually stole it from me. They used the tape from my audition and put it in the script, put someone else's name on it as writer of it, yeah, baby (laughter). And when I got there to shoot the pilot I was like, mm, and they had words wrong 'cause they were going from the tape, you know, what they thought I said (laughter). It's just like, mmm (laughter). But (laughter), you know, in the--and I had to fight to, to, to, you know, get my name on it, 'cause I mean they, they just, they stole it; they, they completely stole it. And I didn't, I mean, like in college, I didn't, I was there alone. I didn't have anybody. Nobody had my back. And the people that brought me there were the people that stole it so, you know, I didn't know what to do. I didn't, I didn't come from an entertainment family. This, this whole thing was foreign to my family. I didn't know any entertainment lawyers. I just, I was completely unconnected and at their mercy, and I, I fought the best I could. And they eventually promised me that they were gonna put my name on it and then didn't. And when, when the pilot of the show went out, when the tape of the show went out to everyone in the industry that saw it, my name wasn't on it as having written "Black World." And when the show got picked up, I said okay, look, you're gonna have to fix that. And another thing, personally, I had changed my name already when I came to do the pilot of the show. But I had this whole ceremony that I had done, and I, and you know, I thought I didn't want this television show to have anything to do with my--it, it was a, a spiritual change, not an entertainment change. And I thought well, my name is this now, but later when this airs it's not gonna be that. I thought I'll just keep that to myself. And in the interim, I'd gotten it changed professionally. And there was a long time--we did the pilot of "In Living Color" in the summer in something like June or July of '89 [1989], and we didn't go until January of '90 [1990], and--or February--(unclear)--is actually when we started production. And in the interim I had changed my name, and when they called me I said okay, but you know, my name is different now, and you have to put my name. I remember that they said oh no, honey, that costs too much (laughter)--(unclear). Oh, they dogged me (laughter). So--but you know, you learn when you, you know, you learn (laughter). And, and I said you know, it's--that's not my name anymore. And they said look, you know, it cost--we've done all the titles, and it, it'll cost too much to, to change your name on the thing. And I remember I got some chutzpah from someplace, and I said well, you know what, you go and find somebody named Crystal Walker (laughter) and do that, 'cause that's not my name anymore. And all of a sudden they came up with the money to, to change it. And, and that's how that started. But yeah, it--that I learned, just with the pageant, that, that could have been a negative experience, "In Living Color." And I spent a lot of time in tears in my dressing room "In Living Color," because I was so frustrated that they weren't using me and that they weren't, you know, welcoming my, my ideas when they were welcoming everyone else's, or it seems to me, everyone else's ideas. When the show finally aired, I was one of the two, and we had a fairly large cast, but I was one of the two--no, I was one of the three cast members who weren't in any of the, the, the sketches that air on the first show. When it, when it debuted on national television, I wasn't in the show. I was there waving at--goodbye at the end. So, obviously, I had told everybody. I was devastated-- Story_ID: 99668 Speaker 1: --What's interesting-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) And so-- Speaker 1: --it's a family dominated show with-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: I, I think you, Tommy Davidson, David Alan Grier were the only-- Speaker 2: And, and Kim Coles and Kelly-- Speaker 1: Kim-- Speaker 2: --Coffield. Speaker 1: Okay, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Jim Carrey. So, yeah, it was-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right, okay. Speaker 2: --it was, it was about half and half. Speaker 1: Half-- Speaker 2: But that's (laughter)--so, I remember that, that next Monday, Keenan [Ivory Wayans]came in and made a little speech: I know that some of you weren't on the show that aired last night, and we, you know, we, we could only choose certain sketches--'cause we, we shot--we didn't shoot like this show for this week; we just shot sketches, and they, they can-- Speaker 1: So that makes to the national-- Speaker 2: --put 'em, put 'em anywhere, right. Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: And so he said I know some of you are, you know, disappointed, and it wasn't malicious. Everybody in the family got on it, but (laughter) it wasn't malicious. But, but if you weren't on last week, you're gonna be on next week. The second show that aired, I was the only one that wasn't in the show again that week. And so, you know, I felt really, really bad and decided--you know, the, the part of me that is not bold took over, and I just kind of collapsed. And I said okay, they don't like me. They can't like me. You know, I'll just, I'll come to work every day and--I don't why they don't like me (laughter), you know. And it was kind of this duality, and I, I thought, well--and it wasn't until much later, you know, way too late to have saved me in that moment that the scuttlebutt around town is--now these people are a little bit--and this--and not to say that any of this is true. I mean the truth is I wasn't on the first two shows that aired. That's, I mean you can go back and look and see that that's true. But you know, there, there was a--la--how do I, how should I put this politically? There was--it wasn't my show. And the people whose show it was, had to set up the dynamic of the show and create the stars that they wanted to create on the show, and that's what they did. And if you weren't in that pack, you just weren't in that pack, and I wasn't in that pack. And so, the--whatever I got on the, on the show, which was usually, you know, the smallest, littlest, tiny thing, I would create a character out of it. I would, I mean I would be woman; it would be, you know, so and so, you're doing this, and so and so, you play the girl that comes in, you play the one--most of the, the sketches were one person ran it, the, the, this character and the people that interact and make faces when this person is obnoxious in some way. And so, time and time again, I would be woman; my character would be woman, and not even a name. And so I would create a character, and often Keenan would say: who's that person that you're doing in that sketch? And I'd say, you know, 'cause I had lots of time on my hand, oh, she's, her name is so and so, and she's so and so, (unclear), (unclear), (unclear). Okay, we're gonna put her in this sketch when there, and that's how I got, most of the sketches that I got were because I created characters from woman in a, in a different sketch or things that, that I created and brought somehow to the table. And among the many, many things that I learned was that my sensibilities were not only not the sensibilities of that show, but they weren't the sense--sensibilities of the, the dominant culture in that town, and that, that was going to be a problem for me over and over again. And someone told me straight out, you know, you're a really talented girl. Your morals are gonna get in the way of your career, and you need to rethink that. Speaker 1: Rethink your morals? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And, and as someone who was a fan of mine in the industry, producer, who was looking out for me--I'm--kid, I'm telling you what you need to do. And I thought oh, I, I didn't notice the heat before. I am in hell (laughter), oh, okay. Story_ID: 99669 Speaker 1: And I began to use theater as an outlet for the things that I couldn't do in television. That, you know, and that's, that's what really gave birth to "Some of My Best Friends," where I got to play real people, real characters. And "Some of My Best Friends," the concept of that was that there are people that you might overlook. There is a phrase, well, some of my best friends are black people; some of my best friends are Jews; some of my best friends are whatever, and I took that concept and said some of--I mean it's, it's really a group of invisible people, people that, that you might not pay attention to; you don't, you don't pay attention. Nobody pays attention to little black girls. What do they have to say? No one cares. Commerce doesn't care. Wall Street doesn't care what little black girls have to say. They're invisible. Who cares what elders have to say? Who cares what, what revolutionary poets have to say? Who cares what teenage black boys have to say? No one cares about these people. But to me, they're the people that I see, and they're the people that I wanna stop and say: what did you say again? And that's, that's--and the things that I could not do on "In Living Color"--I mean "Black World" got in there by the grace of God--goodness--and that's it, because for whatever reason it needed to. But other than that, I didn't--there was nothing else, you know, close to revolutionary, thoughtful, like that, that, that I could do--could get away with, I'll say, on that show. So, I brought all that energy to "Some of My Best Friends," and I had--and this is '91 [1991], the first Gulf War, so this--I had this seventeen-year-old guy who is caught between, you know, how, how do I survive in the street? And he opts for this thing that young--and it's the same, you know. Ten years, what, what, thirteen years later, this, it's this, it's this--I, I could do that show today, sadly, and, and, and not change a word of, of his monologues. And I, I participated in a lot of the war protests then and got a lot of information that I put into his monologues from then about, you know, you look on TV and you think there's just white boys over there. Ain't no black people over there at all, only all the, the mothers at the protests, you know, my son died, my son died, my son died; my son said he doesn't have toilet paper; my son says that, you know, he hears that they're sending supplies, but he doesn't have any; my--you know, all of these things. And, and I thought, where is this, where is this young man's voice? And so I, I gave him voice, and sadly, it's at, it's the same today. And so he talked about opting out, you know, making something of himself by joining the armed forces and to get off of the streets. The streets were pulling him, so he wants to do something better than that. And better than that is being a brown person killing blown--brown--people and not be, being respected for that, even by the people who sent him. And nothing has changed. I got--I wanted to do an older character, and I got a poem from Angela Jackson [HM] called "Miz Sheba Williams." And it's--I, I wrote other pieces. It's, it's a brilliant piece. I love it; it's one of my favorite pieces to do. It, it's--and I wrote the other--I saw Lily Tomlin's show, "In Search of Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe" while I was writing "Some of My Best Friends." And it gave me the idea that I could go back and forth in time and that I could connect these characters, so it wasn't just a series of monologues. And so I wrote characters that knew Miz Sheba Williams and had con--you know, contact with Miz Williams so that she could--even though she wasn't mine, I didn't write her, that she could really, you know, be a part of this, this circle of friends that were somehow connected. And, and the course of the show you find that, oh, this one is this one's daughter. That's the young man that Miz Sheba was talking about. This is the--oh, and, and my, my desire was that, you know, I want to leave people with a lot of impressions, and one of them being that I'm connected to all of these people that I don't see, that, that, whose voice I don't, I don't hear. And the next time I see somebody that I write off as a gangbanger, I won't. I, I'll stop and listen. He might be an okay young man just struggling. The next time I see some little whiny kid, I'll stop and reach down and say huh, what you say, honey? And 'cause she might have something of meat to tell me. You know, I might go to a spoken word cafe and hear what she's not just a rattling, you know, mouth, what, what all of these people have to say. Story_ID: 99525 Speaker 1: All right, well, hmm, I thought I had something (laughter)--(unclear). Now, you were talking about the need now for getting more control over the production aspect of, of, of, of the work-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --directing and-- Speaker 2: --I-- Speaker 1: --like I said, writing and-- Speaker 2: You know, yeah, I, I started writing when I was really little. I, I started writing I think just for my own salvation. And I was so secretive, 'cause I would write, you know, a journal, really personal thoughts. I would write in code, and I would write really, really small, so small and in such code that I had--I never had any idea what I had written (laughter). And I would go back later and say no, now what is that? But I got into the habit of writing for whatever reason, and I kind of kept, kept the habit. Whenever I'm frustrated I write; whenever I'm really happy about something, and I really, you know, recall it later, I write; whenever I'm inspired by something, I write, so I have lots and lots of notebooks and these little scratches of paper and folders that I mean to put on a computer on disk some time in life. And in the course of that, well, a number, a number of things have come and are coming of it. But in television, I learned right away from "In Living Color" that, like in my family household, I had the least amount of say. The actors have the least amount of say. The, the director has say over the actors, and the producers have the say over the--and the networks have the say about that. There's this hierarchy of people, and the last person they want to hear from is an actor. The writers have more to say than the act--the writers put it in front of you, and then it's up to you to argue or not. So I thought I'd better start writing more for--as a performer. And, and I had done that before. I think I mentioned I, I wrote my first play in the first--in the fourth grade. I was producing shows by the time I got to high school, just because I wanted to perform. By my senior year there was no mime troupe. I don't even think that we did a, a real play, production, so I thought well, I'm gonna produce my own shows. I rented a theater. I rent--a theater at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois]. I got my friends to be in this thing with me. I choreographed dances. I wrote sketches. I, you know, I produced this show, and it didn't occur to me that, that wasn't something that people. But when I came to Hollywood, I realized that, that's what you'd better do if you want your voice heard as a performer, that, that you're never gonna--I mean, I mean I, I felt like I was never gonna have my voice heard unless I made things happen myself, so I made the play ["Some of My Best Friends"] happen. Story_ID: 99526 Speaker 1: The film that I produced was not at all my voice, but it taught me how to make a movie. And, and-- Speaker 2: And what, what film? What's the name of your film? Speaker 1: It's, it's the first film that we did it was called "One Last Time." It was a romantic thriller. It was a--what was that--like kind of like "Fatal Attraction" so and so. And we actually got a lot of hype within the black community, and as it happens, halfway through our production, some--you know suddenly there was a studio doing a very, very similar film that was a comedy. And I remember thinking, you know, we're halfway through production. If, if, if they're copying us, it's gonna be another year and a half before they're out. I've never heard of a film go from somebody's doing this to it's out in the theater as fast as this film. I don't know. I don't remember the name of it, but Martin Lawrence and Lynn Whitfield starred in it. And-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, "Thin Line-- Speaker 1: Yeah, "Thin Line-- Speaker 2: --Between Love and Hate." Speaker 1: --Between Love and Hate" ["A Thin Line Between Love and Hate"] Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, and it's not, you know, it wasn't like we were singled out, or somebody stole our idea, or whatever. And you know, could be that the ideas happened to me at the same time, and then they just happened to rush this thing really, really quick, and then that could true. But it happens all the time. And I know that, that my family is sometimes saying, didn't we just see a movie like that come out? I said whoever got it first. You know, whoever got it second (laughter) said let's, let's hurry up and get ours out. That's, that's what happens. But at any rate, I learned how to make a film. And because I raised the vast majority of the money myself, and, and we had, we had not nearly enough money, we had to do--what I learned from Keith Tucker and Ron Davis at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Florida A & M, Tallahassee, Florida], two people can do the whole thing (laughter). If they don't have money and support, they can do the whole thing. Speaker 2: Now, when-- Speaker 1: --and so-- Speaker 2: --is that available? Is your film available now? Speaker 1: No, it's sitting on Bobby Mardis' shelf someplace waiting. Don't know what he's waiting for, for a deal, you know. I, I--it's no, it's not--it's never been-- Speaker 2: When, when-- Speaker 1: --released. Speaker 2: --was it--well, it was, it's been done-- Speaker 1: We-- Speaker 2: --quite awhile ago. Speaker 1: Quite awhile ago now. In fact, and I'm glad we didn't--Mari Morrow was in it, and he was gonna give her an introducing credit. And I'm glad that he didn't because she works all the time now. She's been in a lot of films. She was in a BET show called "Old Drama." So people know who she is, and it would be, if it ever comes out, will be embarrassed to, you know, say, in the middle of her career: and introducing (laughter) Mari Morrow. But at any rate, I did everything, script supervision, to wardrobe, to makeup, to locations, to driving a truck, truck down the road, thinking please don't looking up, stop me (laughter), 'cause I'm sure whatever the license is that you're suppose to have for this, I don't have it. But you have to get the film to, to at it--you know, just everything. I mean learned how to make a film. Story_ID: 99527 Speaker 1: And then Bobby Mardis, the filmmaker, got a grant to do a short film for Showtime, and long story short, I, I produced that with him as well. And I didn't--this was not my vision either and especially and what's sad about that is the Showtime does this thing for Black History Month, they show these, these, these series of short films. And I thought well, now here is a chance to do something really, really positive. It's for Black History Month, sure they're gonna want something positive. And so he pitched them idea after idea of really black, positive, I mean just everything you could name, all, all the people in black history, current modern-day stories, just commonplace stories about average black people that are heroic, just everything you could name. And they'd drown one after--nope, nope, nope, nope, nope. So finally, I said okay, I see where this is going; they want something ignorant. No, no, no, they just don't like this idea. I'm gonna (unclear)--put, pitch, pitch, pitch, pitch, pitch, pitch. And finally they said--now this is after we've pitched real black people like--and, and, and in, even in California the--there was this woman who was the first woman, not even the first black woman, the first woman to graduate from dental school. And she took over her husband's practice when he went to war, amazing story; the story of the couple that ran the black hotel that all the black elite attended because they couldn't go to the white hotels in the heyday. I'm talking, you know, Cab Calloway, all of them. It would have been beautiful. No, no, no, they say we want something more germane to the black experience. More germane than black people (laughter), hmm, that's code, that's code. They, they want something ignorant. I said make 'em say it. Make 'em say we want something ignorant (laughter), so he kept coming up with positive idea, positive this, positive that. We want something more urban. I said that's code. Make 'em say it, make 'em say it. So then he started, you know, the, the ideas gotten more and more. No, okay, what about this then, and what about this then? Finally, they settled on young man is just released from prison (laughter), and his relationship with his parole officer--I mean and it's, it's like people say to me so often: why aren't black people doing this? Why aren't people doing this? 'Cause we don't own the (unclear); we don't own the studios; we-- Speaker 2: Was that the movie with Lou Gossett [Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr., HM]. I think, I think I've even seen it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, it was, it was Todd Bridges, who was wonderful and excellent, and Glynn Turman; and we had Anna Maria Horsford. And it was actually Rosalind Cash's last film that--she was a friend of mine, and you know, she said sure, I'll do this thing for you. And it was-- Speaker 2: What was the name of it? Speaker 1: It, it was called "Circle of Pain." And it was as positive as we could make it with our hands bound (laughter), be, behind us. And you know, that's the reality--we, we, you know, we don't own the studios. We don't own the networks. We don't, we don't have distribution, and so we're at the mercy of the people who could care less about our honor. And that's what happens time and time again. But it didn't dissuade me, I mean it's--there was not time. I was working, thank goodness, in television consistently. And so, it wasn't like I'm gonna stop what I'm doing, and especially because there was no money in it for me. Every time I was coming out of my pocket (laughter). What we ran out of this? That's broken again? The (unclear) in the pool? Oh, my (laughter)--(unclear), you know, I mean when--you know, it was completely guerrilla filmmaking, but I, now that I've survived that experience, because after that, that first one, I said I don't ever want to see another film, let alone make another film. I, ooh, God, I, I, I was completely burned out. But now that I, I'm over it and I've survived it, I very much want to make another film, lots of films, the kind of films that have my voice, because I'm, I'm hungry for it. And if I'm hungry for it, there must be other people who are hungry for it as well, and God bless 'em. I don't, I, I don't want to believe that there's this group of, you know, horned white men (laughter) that are, that are at the roundtable saying what can we do to them today? I would rather believe that it's, it's innocent ignorance and that it's in a--an innocent sense of survival - if I give it to you, then I won't have it. That, that makes sense to me, that, that makes sense to me; I understand it. Winnie Mandela said before the, the, the end of apartheid, you know, I understand their struggle, because they know that when we win, we will win forever, and when they lose, they will lose forever. And, and I understand that as well. And so I don't, you know, hate whitey (laughter). I just love blackie. I'm trying to get blackie's voice heard however, however I can, whoever will let me, let me whisper it if I can't shout it and in, in all aspects of my career. And I don't, you know, I'm not--you know, it's not like--I mean I have a friend who said, you know, I was preaching about, you know, why it's so many hoes and this and this and this. And I have a friend who said well, T'Keyah, next time you refuse to play a hoe, call me 'cause I'll play two of 'em (laughter). And, and, and I don't say well, I will never do this, and I will never do this. I don't think that all actors should resign themselves to children's theater, or, or theater of the elite, theater of the politically correct. I am a performer, and I want to be able to play anything and everything. But I want to remain conscious that in the, at the end of the day, I, I, I hope that the preponderance of my work will be something that would make my grandmother proud and not ashamed, that, that would make my children, if I had any, be proud and not ashamed, that make, that make me proud and not ashamed at, at the end of the day. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 99528 Speaker 1: Just a min--a couple of projects that I mentioned that you were involved in, I mean that you act, you acted in. And one is "Tales from the Hood"-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is an interest--so Rusty Cundieff-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Rusty-- Speaker 1: --will be-- Speaker 2: --Cundieff-- Speaker 1: And that, that seemed to--I mean it really made a big impact on my family when we saw it. We really--I was pleasantly-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --surprised. I mean it wasn't pleasant, but it was a surprise-- Speaker 2: Right, it was-- Speaker 1: --a positive kind-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --kind of surprise. Speaker 2: It, unlike the--there, there was a little wave of black horror films in the, in the seventies [1970s], you know, "Blacula" and you know "Blacula 2" and, and those that were kind of what else can we, you know, pit black people to do? Unlike that, I think, and I think that Rusty did, did an extraordinary job with that. It was a really nice, modern-day horror film. And the, the, and, and that's, that was actually Rosalind Cash's last feature film, tales from--"Tales from the Hood." But the, the plum in his hat was what a surprise to suddenly see Clarence Williams III again and honey, wiping the floor with that performance. I mean of course I'm biased. I know Rusty. I was, I was in the film. I mean he threw me some little part in the film, you know, because I knew him. But when I think of that film, and he was coming from "Fear of a Black Hat," the, the film that kind of got him his name in Hollywood, and I look at, you know, his options since then, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, "Sprung" I think is the only thing I can remember, and that wasn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They, they didn't seem to live up to the standards of either of those two films. Speaker 2: I, yeah, I, I don't think so, and, and--but I don't, and I don't--I'm not like close friends with Rusty or anything like that. I don't know what went into him doing "Sprung." I don't, you know, I don't know what his battles were on that, but I know it wasn't his studio that (laughter) did it. So I know that there were some other voices in his head when he was doing it. And I mean so many--I mean it's, it's just, it's just typical. You see someone with, with above average talent, who obviously can get--it's hard to get a film made, and finished, and be able to hand it to someone who can do that and do it well. And the reward isn't something on par with what you did well. It's, it's always, you know, to, to, to us, something less than that. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And the, the fight never ends to, to get the next one and the next one-- Story_ID: 99529 Speaker 1: --next one. Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Now, Bill Cosby is somebody that can pretty much get done what he wants, pretty much, if he--I, I guess if anybody can, he's probably got more teeth in the industry. But you, you play his daughter on his last Cosby show-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --called "Cosby," the, C--the CBS show, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, you know, unfortunately, I don't, I don't think there's anybody black who can get whatever they want done. I don't think Bill Cosby can do it; I don't think Oprah Winfrey can do it, and if--I don't think Spike Lee can do it. I don't think that there is anyone black, because there's no one black--even Oprah Winfrey owns her own studio, but she doesn't own her own network. And I think-- Speaker 2: What did you think of "Beloved?" I hate to cut you off, but what did you think of "Beloved," because it was-- Speaker 1: Do we really want to hear what I think of "Beloved?" Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause-- Speaker 1: Okay, let--you first asked me about Cosby. And let me say-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --that "Cosby"--going back, going back from "In Living Color," which taught me the most about television that I, that I needed to learn and about Hollywood, but they were good and bad days on "In Living Color." I went from there to my favorite television job, "On Our Own," which was an, an ABC show, a Miller-Boyett production. I was never treated better and have never been treated as well as they treated me on that show. It was a, it was a children's show. Coming from "In Living Color," I was really, really happy to do something that I didn't mind my nieces and nephews watching. I came, I went from that show to the show that was the most fun for me, was called "The Show." John Bowman, who was a writer/producer on "In Living Color," pretty much did the show about his experience on "In Living Color," where he played the white head writer of a black show, and I played one of the writers on the show. And that was the most fun show for me because I liked everybody in the cast, and we were kind of, kind of the same, young comic actors and comedians who, I, I could hang out with the guys on that show and--you know, as much as I hang out. I don't hang out. As much as I hang out, I hung out with, with them while we were doing that, that short-lived show. Story_ID: 99530 Speaker 1: I went from there to "Cosby," which was the most enriching show that, that I did because it was the show that gave me parents. And I remember a conversation that I had with Dr. [Bill] Cosby before I got the job. And they had replaced Audra McDonald, who I didn't know at the time, or I would have been really intimidated (laughter), because she's phenomenal and has now four Tonys to prove it. But they replaced Audra McDonald and wanted somebody else to play Erica Lucas on the show. And I got this call from my agent that say Bill Cosby wants to talk to you before you go. And I said okay. So I, I called this number up on the phone, and I'm talking to him. And he says--and he, he's really just trying to feel me out because he, he works like no other performer that I've worked with. It's sort of like Cosby-(eck)(ph.) improve, like not just improv, but he has his own rules for Cosby improv. And you have to be able to keep up with him, or you'll just get knocked over. And that's why you saw Phylicia Rashd in that role; that's, that's why she teamed with him again, because she can hang. She's I think just now starting to get her due. She is a phenomenal actress, and I will forever be proud that she played my mom for four years, and, and as proud as I am that, that I was across the hall and had America's dad, Bill Cosby as my dad for four years. And in this conversation with him, you know, trying to feel me out, you know, like can you hang, little girl (laughter)? He said well, you know, in most instances just, you know, be yourself. React to me like you would react to your dad, react--your--I thought oh, I'm not gon' get this job. I said well, you know, I really don't have that sort of frame of reference. And he kind of paused, and I think that's when he decided to hire me. He probably said oh, this poor little er--orphan girl, let me take (laughter) her under my wing. And so it was--and I struggled, I struggled with that when I first got to this set because, one, they, they had no idea who the character was, and they didn't really care. They, they cared about his character, her character, Madeline Kahn's character. Doug E. Doug's character was, was a little defined, but Erica was the daughter. And they had no--and they would write one thing this week and then write something, and I said last week she said she would never do this, and now she's doing this? Do, do you all pay any attention to--so that was very, very frustrating. And to add to that, in the scenes when I would come on stage and Erica's supposed to be sad about some broken nail or something (laughter), I'm looking at, you know, whatever, I'm exaggerating, but whatever the scene was. And I was like well, she's got a mom and dad. I don't know why she wouldn't just be happy (laughter). (Unclear) I couldn't, I had to really shift my thinking to get to who this person could be who was, was not written and who, who--I mean to me, I mean certainly--I, 'cause I had this really childlike, like misconcept that, you know, people with parents are just happy all the time. Don't you have to be happy if you have a mommy and a daddy? Gosh, you must be really, really happy. And so, and you know, I'm looking at--and my pretend parents are Bill Cosby and Phylicia. I was happy. I mean I was happy, and I didn't understand why Erica wasn't happy, and so I had to struggle. I had to really struggle to make her this real person who'd had her parents all her life, and were over them, and took them for granted like everybody else did, and could be unhappy that she didn't get the apartment that she wanted or, or whatever that--you know, so. You know, I came on like ha! Okay, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, okay, all right, all right now, you know, who is this? But it was, it was phenomenal; it was extraordinary. And in a lot of ways he was, he was very much a dad to me. I don't think he can help it. I think that's kind of who he is. He takes people under his wing and coaches them, and advises them, and scolds them, and, and is their dad. And you know, it's not always pretty. I mean it--'cause I--you know, he didn't let me do things that I wanted to do. And I--and he put his foot down, and I'd be like mad, like you're mad at your dad (laughter), you know, that kind of thing. But for me, all of it was just phenomenal, and I'm grateful. Story_ID: 99531 Speaker 1: Now, have you had to--are, are you basically self, self--well, you, you went to school for theater, but you-- Speaker 2: I, yeah, I-- Speaker 1: --do you-- Speaker 2: --I Speaker 1: --do you take a lot of courses? Or have you--when you came out here, did you have to take, take a lot of courses in film acting, or did you try to, or did you want to, or? Speaker 2: I started studying, I mean I studied even in grammar school; I studied in high school; I studied in college. And when I got back to Chicago [Illinois], because I didn't know anyone, I started looking for classes. And I studied at this place called the TV Actors Studio with Paul Cook; and I studied at this place called the Audition Centre with Peter Forster, and I don't know who the other instructor was there. And that's, that's the like class official studying. I took ballet at the Bois--Bossov (ph.) School of Ballet when Najwa said all y'all fatties get in the classes (laughter). Okay, I'll go to Bossov (laughter). And that's probably the extent. By the time I got to--and, and I always, you know what--you know, not, not every day, but, but I always, you know, in, in patches had a vocal--coach--because I sing. And I think my--other than high school teachers and, and I studied voice in college as well, but I did a play called "Land of Smiles," an opera by [Franz] Lehar. I was in the chorus and--'cause it's real, you know, sing opera singers. I was in the chorus, and I had a speaking part. But one of the other women in the chorus came up to me and said you, you have a beautiful voice. You should let me coach you. And I said oh, sure, sure, fine. And she became my fo--first really official I'm a professional performer vocal coach. And I'll never forget her because she started teaching me this song that I didn't know at the time, and we never, we never got to the singing of it. She started--you know, you--her method was to, to say the words in the time that they are sung in. And she started teaching me the words to this song that she said was just perfect for my voice. And I'd, I'd study with her for some time, and then she moved. And it wasn't until years later that I heard this song (laughter), and it, it's like, what a minute. That's my song, but I never got to--[singing]--quando men vo, quando men--it's, it's an aria that I'm still afraid of. And the fact that this person thought that it was perfect for my voice, gave me a lot of confidence in my, in my singing. And so, I, I used that as my bar when I--I mean I don't sing opera. I've never sung opera. I sung in the chorus of that one show. But whoever is singing, I think it's Leontyne Price that's singing it on the CD that I have. She doesn't know it, but she's one of my vocal coaches, and Kathleen Battle doesn't know it, but she's one of my (laughter) vocal coaches, because I play their CDs, and I, and I learn from them how, how to do what I'm doing. And, and I tell people all the time I might not be in a class, but I'm always studying. I'm always studying. I study human behavior where, wherever I am. Most of the characters that I've gotten that I've put in my shows are people that I saw for five minutes on the bus that, that I heard them say a sentence that made my ear perk up, and I wondered who they were. And I built a whole character around them based on the five minutes that I was studying them. I usually have to go to class, you know, for dance and for voice 'cause I'm not that disciplined to do it at home by myself. But other than that, I'm studying every day of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99532 Speaker 1: Now you performed in Russia and in Senegal-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --among other places, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and recently in Ghana. I went to Senegal for the first time that--I was dancing with Najwa Dance Corps. And she was going to--it's a Senegalese company, and they took a company trip to Senegal about every other year. When I was in the company, they were planning a trip. And I had busted something, my knee or my foot or something, and I, and I wasn't dancing. But Najwa asked me if I wanted to just go her. And I said sure, go to Senegal? Sure, sure, sure, I'll go. And we went, and that was quite a life changing experience for me in a, in a number of ways. But I ended up performing as a fluke. We're at this hotel. The band is singing. Najwa goes up to the bandleader and says hey, Crystal's a singer, and she'll sing. I'm like what? I don't--not even singing in English (laughter). What do you--what do you mean? (Unclear)--I don't know what they're even singing. So the band, when it comes up--you sing? Well, yes, I sing, but--come on up with us. Oh, well, what do you know? What do you know? Do you know any Nancy Wilson? No, I don't know any Nancy? Do you know any Billie Holiday? No, I don't know any Billie Ha--do you know any--do you know any--do you know any--do you any--he finally goes Roberta Flack, do you know Roberta Flack? Yes, I guess I know Robert Flack, "Killing Me Softly." Come on, "Killing Me Softly." This is Crystal performing (laughter)--(unclear)--and, and I had never sung that song, and I'm winging it. I'm, I think it goes, yeah--[singing]--I heard he sang a good--that, that is how it goes--and whole song, just before it, it's coming out of my mouth, I'm going, and I think then she says, and I think then she says, and I think--but it was--and we had a phenomenal time. And they sung this other that I didn't know, and I was just kind of riffin' with them. And he said you know, come back any time. You're in the band now. So that was, that was great. I got the call the summer after I finished doing the show. My agent called and said you wanna go to Russia? I go yes, yes, what is it? Yes, yes (laughter), what is it? She said they're doing this play. It was the Russian Ministry of Culture has this kind of exchange program with, with the Eugene O'Neill Theatrical Center here in the States. And every year or every other year, for at least a couple of years, they were sending an, an American director to direct a show as part of their, their, their theatrical festival that they, that they do in Moscow [Russia]. And this year they decided to send a company of actors with the director and to do a split production, to do an American and a Russian production of the same show. The director was Oscott (ph.), and the playwright, God rest his soul, was John Henry Redwood. And his play was "The Old Settler." And we went to Moscow. We were there all, all told a month. We were in Moscow a week. Then we went to Shchyolkovo [Russia], which is where they have this, this, the main part of the festival. For two weeks we back to Moscow for a week, and it was so extraordinary. It, it was the, the kind of thing that actors love to do, I mean theater actors, at any rate, to do a show, not just in a foreign country, but this, I mean actors more than anything else are communicators. And that's why I like to dance, and that's why I like to sing, and that's why I, I liked performing mime; because with mime, with dance, with singing, you don't have to know what I'm saying; you know, you don't have to, to, to know, speak the language of the singer, if you know, she can communicate, he can communicate even when you don't know the language. That's how I got up and sang French or whatever I was (laughter) singing in, in Dakar [Senegal]. But we did this one (unclear), and we had these two companies. And we kind of observe them, and they kind of observed us, and Os was directing them both. And we had this one day that, that I'll never forget because he broke us up. It was a, a four-person show. It's a, "The Old Settler" is about these two sisters who are older, and they live in Harlem [New York City, New York] in the, in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] or something. And they've taken in this roomer, a young fancy man. And his highfalutin girlfriend comes to collect him (laughter), or, or--no, she's come up to New York, and he's followed her to, to get her back down and to the South where, where she can behave herself. I played the young floozy of course. And in that production, Jeffrey Sams played the, the young man, my boyfriend. Lorraine Toussaint [HM] and CCH Pounder played the, the sisters. And we did this thing where he split us up. The Russian actors were speaking in Russian; we were speaking in English, and we did scenes together. And it was phenomenal because you, you couldn't wait for a cue. You had to just focus on what this human being's emotion was telling you. And it was an extraordinary experience. I'll never forget it. Story_ID: 99256 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer this time is Iris Parker, and-- Speaker 2: And I'm T'Keyah Crystal Keymah. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And it's-- Speaker 1: And today is? Speaker 2: Today is February 23rd, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in the historic building of The HistoryMakers, 19th and Michigan, in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. Speaker 2: Finally home, had to end up at home, that's what it was. That's we--I was just-- Speaker 1: We've been all over-- Speaker 2: --faking you out, running around (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, been a thousand mile to do this (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, this is true. Speaker 1: Right, we've gone thousands of miles. Speaker 2: This is true. Story_ID: 99257 Speaker 1: Tell us, now, you were telling us an interesting story before we, we resume where we were. We, we--tell us the story about-- Speaker 2: Which, and which reminded another, another story that--well, I was telling the story of my grandmother when we were talking about people who were older who met historic figures that we didn't get a chance to meet. And my grandmother told me this story years ago about how when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois], and when, when was that, '58 [1958]? Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty--was that '65 [1965]? Sixty-five [1965]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that he was on Grand Boulevard doing something--I don't know--and there were people, you know, a crowd gathering. And there were people shaking his hand, so she shuck--stuck--out her hand for the shake (laughter). He grabbed it and shook her hand, and she said hmm, that was a good-looking man (laughter). And you know, you don't think, you know, Martin Luther King fine, you know, (laughter) but my grandmother was thinking, hmm, this is a good-looking (laughter) man. And that reminded me of the story that my grandfather used to tell because in his youth he was a boxer. And he used to say, you know, if he shook somebody's hand, he would say this is the hand that shook the hand of the great Joe Louis, because he met Joe Louis and shook his hand. And that was so proud a day to him that he remembered it every time he shook somebody's hand. Story_ID: 99258 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we're gonna pick up, I think, after the "In Living Color" show. So you're gonna tell us-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --like the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know-- Speaker 1: --projects you've been involved in. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't think about it until I get another show, but unfortunately in my not too long career in television, fifteen going on sixteen years in television, it's--well, I guess sixteen going on seventeen years in television, I've done six series. And most people don't get one series let alone two, three, four, five, six. And some of them only lasted a season, but they count to me. After "In Living Color," I did what was actually my favorite show. It was a show on ABC called "On Our Own." And it starred the whole Smollett family. Jurnee [Smolett-Bell], who I think most people know now, because she starred in a film called "Eve's Bayou," and she played the little girl, Eve. And all of her real life siblings were in this show. And Ralph Harris played their oldest sibling who tried to keep the family together after their parents were gone. And they brought me in at the middle of the season 'cause they didn't have enough ratings from men (laughter). And then so they, they thought we need somebody young and cute (laughter)--(unclear). And they brought me in, and I played a contractor who came to repair the house and then stayed, moved in, because it's, you know, a television show. And it was the, the cutest show. It was just my favorite. It was a Miller-Boyett show, and I think I've never been treated as well as I was treated on that show. And it was, especially coming from "In Living Color," where the censors kind of lived with us, you know, afraid, you know, biting their tongues--what are they gonna say this week? Oh, Lord, are we gonna lose our license--to something that was so incredibly wholesome and family-oriented. And that was kind of the, the theme of that whole night. It was on--ABC had a thing called TGIF of the Friday night lineup was all family shows. And it was just so wonderful to be a part of that and to say finally to my siblings, okay, this is something that the nieces and nephews can watch, it's okay. So that was probably my favorite show. It only lasted that one season. The next season I was on a show called "The Show." Speaker 1: Now what was the name of that, the previous one again, just to-- Speaker 2: It was called "On Our Own." Speaker 1: --bracket it--"On Our Own," okay, all right. Speaker 2: "On Our Own" was on ABC. Speaker 1: And that following season I was on a show called "The Show." And it, and that would one me back to Fox. And John Bowman was the creator of that show. I knew him because he was a writer, writer/producer on "In Living Color." And the show was kind of loosely based on his perception of his life on "In Living Color." And I remember them talking me into coming. And the finally got me to do the show through trickery (laughter), because I thought no, no, no. I don't even remember why I didn't want to do the show, but my, my agent or maybe it was John, maybe it was John Bowman that finally said oh, gosh, everybody's disappointed. You know, we've got Stan Lathan to direct. He's gonna be disappointed. I said I'm, I'm sorry, did you say Stan Lathan is directing? You know, I don't think I'm doing anything (laughter). I'll come, I'll come down there. Because Stan Lathan had directed me in "Roc." I did an episode of "Roc" live. Actually it was live when I did the show, a wonderful, wonderful show that didn't last nearly as long. And I thought sure, sure, sure I'm wanna be attached to something that Stan Lathan is attached to. And that ended up being the most fun show that I've ever done. It only lasted a season. It was about the head writer of this black sketch variety show, and I played one of the writers on the show. And Denise Everett was my character's name, and Scotti Decker was my character from "On Our Own," the contractor. And people still--when I went to France, I turned the TV and what was on? "On Our Own." So there are people, I think, that have seen all of the show, even if we only got them a year here. But on this show, the show, Chris Spencer and a lot of--Mystro Clark, a lot of young comedians that were cool, and my age, and fun without the pressure of "In Living Color"--I mean "In Living Color" was like a boiler room where I can't even describe the, the, the anxiety that was on that set. But the show was just really fun. It was, you know, we, we hung out, the people that were on that show. And so it was the first time I was like--you know, 'cause "On Our Own" was like, what are y'all doing? Drinking milk and going to bed, okay (laughter), so see you tomorrow, so. But the show, we could, we could go and hang out after work, and even with my bashful self, sometimes I even went to hang out with them. Story_ID: 99259 Speaker 1: And then the year after that, and I, I may have mentioned this before, but the year right after we wrapped the show, I got a call from my agent to do a play in Russia. And I did this play called "The Old Settler." And it was such a wonderful experience, because we went to Moscow [Russia]. We started out in Moscow. We were in Moscow a week, and then we went to this little, tiny country town the size of, you know, maybe this building (laughter)--I'm exaggerating--called Shchyolkovo. And we workshopped the play. And we--it was a collaborative effort between the Eugene O'Neill Playwriting Center here in states and the Moscow Ministry of Culture. And they had been bringing plays over, American plays over, for I think maybe three or four years before our company. But that was the first year a company of actors went, so it was a very, very big deal. The name of the play was "The Old Settler." And CCH Pounder, and Lorraine Toussaint [HM], and Jeffrey Sams were the other actors in the play, and myself. Speaker 2: What was it about? Speaker 1: It's, "The Old Settler" is about these two--it's set in the 1930s, and it's about these two sisters in Harlem [New York City, New York] that are kind of spinster sisters. And they take in a roomer, and one of them kind of falls for the roomer, who is this young man who, you know, quite younger than she, that, that creates a rift for the sisters until his girlfriend, you know, (laughter) comes to collect him, and then kind of all heck breaks loose. But it's, it's truly about the relationship between these two sisters and what love and the lack of love does to them, and their relationship, and how they survive and hold each other up. It's quite a beautiful play. John Henry Redwood, the late, great playwright, who was with us on that trip wrote and, and had input into the effort. And Oscott (ph.) was the director. And I think, I think he's a history maker as well. But what they did that was the most fun, they had a, a Russian cast and an American cast for the play. And at one point, Os took us all out to wherever we were rehearsing, and he split us up. And he took the American husband, which was a, a character in the play with the Russian Charmaine and the American Quilly with the, you know. So, I'm doing the scene with this Russian guy who is speaking Cyrillic. They spoke no English. And, and we rehearsed like that for an afternoon. And so it was the most intense thing I had ever done because you can't even wait till they stop talking. You have to read the emotions on this other actor's face to know when it's your time to come in. And it was just, it was just extraordinary. It was an extraordinary time. And while we were there, CC, and Lorraine, and I were joking about: oh, yeah, we're having a high time in Russia. We're gonna go, go home jobless. And I said well, you never know. You know, it's, it's the start of the new season. They're taping shows for the fall, and shows don't always work out. You know, we might come home and get somebody else's job. Story_ID: 99260 Speaker 1: And sure enough, (laughter) when I came home, they were reshooting the pilot for "Cosby." And when they were first shooting the pilot for "Cosby," I was doing the show and was unavailable. Not like they called or anything, but I would have been unavailable had they called. And so suddenly they're interested in seeing me, and next thing I know is Bill Cosby wants to talk to you before you go in. (Laughter) Give me some heart medication. Bill Cosby wants to talk to me on the phone. Oh, I don't think I, I don't think--here's a number to call Bill Cosby. Hello (laughter), I'm--and you know, I, I--my life from there on became, you know, before and after that call, so to speak. And I think really he made the decision in that call when I talked to him that he was gonna hire me. And they went through the perfunctory auditions and all of that. And I think maybe one week after I first auditioned in LA [Los Angeles, California] I had moved and was living in New York and working on the show, so everything changed drastically and fast. Speaker 2: And about what year is this? Now where are we now, at the end-- Speaker 1: This was 1996, I believe, six, seven, eight, nine-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, this was '96 [1996] when I started on "Cosby" and my wonderful, wonderful life in New York. And it's funny-- Speaker 2: Now that's the CBS "Cosby" show-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --then, right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, "Cosby." Speaker 2: "Cosby," right. Speaker 1: And you know, people always say, oh, I think back on that time, and that was the best time of my life. And I wish I'd have known it then. I knew when I was living in New York that I was living well and lucky. And I was so grateful to know that at the time. And the job, you know, it, it wasn't my favorite show. It wasn't my, my best experience in television, because they didn't, they didn't flush out the character. They, they, they, they did, kind of did flush out--they didn't flush her (laughter) out. They just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't--it seems as though she, you know-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --it was hard for me to get a fix on who she was. Speaker 1: --they-- Speaker 2: --thinking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --they just, they patterned, the show was patterned after a British show called "One Foot in the Grave," and which was a, a wonderful show. I'd, I'd seen it, and I was a fan of the show. But British hume--humor is very different from American humor. And the way the, the lead actor in that show is perceived is not the way America wants to see Bill Cosby, as kind of a, a dowdy, grumpy, fussbudgety guy with one foot in the grave, and he knows it, and he acts like it. And so they realized right up at the top that something wasn't working with that, that as its pattern. And I think that's one of the reasons they revamped the show. And thank goodness I didn't know who had played the character that I played until after I got it, and, and was on the set, and they made the mistake of showing a clip from something that they already shot. And I saw this woman who I didn't know, and I thought well, one, she's drop dead gorgeous, and two, she sings like, like Kathleen Battle or something. What were they thinking? (Laughter) Why am I here? Why--and I, and I, and I said number one, you cannot show that tape again; number two (laughter), somebody just pat me on the back or something (laughter) 'cause I may go home. What's going on here? And then I said okay, I gotta let that go because obviously there was divine intervention. And it turned out that this woman was Audra McDonald, who, I don't know why she thought she left the show, but I think she left the show to go get four Tonys (laughter). And you know, it just, it, it makes me look (laughter) good that anybody thought I could do a better job at something than she. (Laughter) But for me, that show, more than anything else--I mean I, I was talking about the character. They, when they revamped the show, I think they, they knew who they wanted Hilton and Ruth to be, the parents on the show, the couple on the show. And then they wanted them to have a daughter, and that's as much thought as they gave to it. And so they--other than the obvious, that I started out a lawyer turned flight attendant, then lawyer, then pastry chef, then (laughter), then substitute schoolteacher, then housewife, other than that, they just didn't know quite who she was. And every week they would write something, and I would attach something to it. And they would do something (unclear)--she did this last week. Do you think she would do this? Oh, it doesn't matter. Oh, okay, (laughter), so, okay, you give up; I give up too. I decided that I was there to, to see what it was like to have a dad. And for four years, I, I had to pass Bill Cosby's room to get to mine, and that was just the best, best time for me in my life. And I was so grateful for it then, that, that I, I--it's, it's a wonderful thing to have even one segment of your life where, where there's no regrets, where you don't even say I wish I'd have appreciated that when I had it. I appre--I (laughter)--(unclear)--hi, how are you? I, I just--it was a really, really, really great time. And living in Manhattan, which you can only do if you're working on television (laughter), not at the-- Speaker 2: Let me ask you-- Speaker 1: --corner store (laughter). Story_ID: 99261 Speaker 1: Let me get out of the chronology for one second and ask you about Bill Cosby. He, he's, he's been, over the past month, that we've been doing this, has been catching all kinds of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: --hell, so-- Speaker 2: I was just telling somebody. They'd better leave my TV daddy alone (laughter). Speaker 1: With--well, beginning with his remarks about poor people and--or, or black folks in general, that people have assessed as, as his bashing poor people for not doing-- Speaker 2: Well, you know-- Speaker 1: I think Michael Eric Dyson's writing a whole book about him right now, based on this, and really froze the book last week to, to-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --include these other new chapters and stuff. Speaker 2: I guess I won't have any comment on that. Everybody needs to eat, I'll, I'll say that. But, I mean, he's an elder. Bill Cosby is an elder. And I remember growing up, you know, we would come in and do whatever we did when we, you know, came in from school. And my grandmother would come home from work and say you come in, you sit down, and you half do. And we'd say no, no, no, we did this, we did--but whatever we did, it wasn't to her standard. And she was the elder in the house, so she got to say what, what you're doing now, it's not good enough. And he's the elder, and he gets to say what you're doing now, it's not good enough. And we should respond yes, sir, period. Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting take on it, 'cause there's so many people take umbrage to it, and they have (unclear), you know, they had a big discussion here in Chicago [Illinois]. I think, I'm trying to think was it the PUSH--yeah, the PUSH convention last summer, a big discussion about it. And I think C-SPAN ran it. And--yeah, but there, there's--it seems as though people don't think that way anymore, that, that, that, that--I was just a 105 year-old man, and somebody asked me what he said. I said well he say whatever he wanna say, really, and nobody--everybody listened. And fortunately, a lot of what he said made, made sense. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I, I'm not, I'm not--I mean I--that doesn't sound like a bad approach to it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean if, if--you know, I support this, this thing in Los Angeles [California], Black Bank Day or Black Bank Month it is now. And when I started, the statistics were 97 percent of the money that black people have in banks is in nonblack banks. And that statistic was correlated with Asian Americans. And 97 percent of the money Asian Americans have is in Asian-owned banks. My, my book is in black bookstores, and I have yet--I mean of the--let's say 200 people that have said can I find your book at blank store? Perhaps four of them have said can I find book at Afrocentric? Can I find your book at Afri-Ware? Can I find your book at African American Images? Most people, black people, do not think, how can I buy your black book about black people? Can I find it by going other than to a black bookstore? That's, that's where we are. We, we own next to nothing. We have next to no power. If we were fine, if we, if we were, by anybody's, any--take any other group; take the group of people who got here last month. If we were doing as well as them, then slap Bill Cosby on the hand and say man, you'd better sit down. You don't know what you're talking about. We're fine. Leave us alone. We're doing just fine. But we're not, and we need to listen to somebody. Story_ID: 99262 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, you sound a lot like Mr. Gaten (ph.) did earlier today (laughter). But, as we--well, let's, let's get back with the chronology. And so af-- Speaker 2: So, "Cosby"-- Speaker 1: --the "Cosby"--yeah. Speaker 2: "Cosby" ran four seasons. We-- Speaker 1: It wasn't as popular as the other show. Speaker 2: Well, the thing--it, it was an odd thing because "The Cosby Show" was very, very popular, very, very popular show, and sometimes that makes a tough act to follow. And the, a number of things worked against "Cosby." Unfortunately, one of the good things, the, the, the re-pairing of Phylicia Rashd and Bill Cosby, because it made a lot of people think that it was the same show later, and that I was Rudy, and to the point where, you know, I wanted to walk around day and night with a shirt that said I'm really not Rudy. And no one, CBS, nor Carsey-Werner put the money behind the show that would have been required to say this is a different show. The bulk of the advertising showed the two of them. They didn't even include Madeline Kahn, which would have made a big, big difference, would have said right away this is a different show. And in addition to that, I mean CBS is a very different--I had never worked for CBS. I had worked on, on audiences with a really young, shows with really young audience, children shows to teenagers, young adult shows on Fox and ABC, very different networks. So, I mean to, to really generalize and stereotype, there were little old white ladies watching CBS, and they had no idea who I was. And so, CBS should have recognized that. And Doug E. Doug, I think his audience was very much younger than, than Bill Cosby and that, "The Cosby Show"--mean the viewers of "The Cosby Show" had grown up and were, weren't, you know, seventeen anymore; they weren't children anymore and, which, which was fine for CBS, but they should have pulled our audiences because I had quite a, a following then. And people in New York would stop me every day who recognized me and say, in New York, so what are you doing (laughter) now? Okay, I'm on this show called "Cosby." It's on this network called CBS. You might also know it as Channel 2. Oh, yeah, try it, try it (laughter). It's on your TV (laughter). So, so many people didn't know about the show, and, and then when the show debuted it got the second highest rating of all time in television, second only to "The Cosby Show." But people that saw that show saw it and said mm, what is it? It's, that's, is that, is that them? That's not--I'm confused. And no one--there was no marketing campaign to follow it up. They, in my opinion--and I guess I'm still holding a little grudge with Carsey-Werner and with CBS that they didn't put the money where their mouth was to support the show. I mean it's a great show, and it has a huge following now that it's in syndication of people who never saw it when it was on CBS because they didn't know about it. But it's, I mean on its own, with, without the, the, the assumed parent that was "The Cosby Show," it was a fine show and, and very funny and timely and, and all that with I think five really great regular performers. And then my goodness, I was telling my brother, Vince, just today, I'd had another interview, and I mentioned some people that I knew in the business. And he was saying how lucky I am that I have worked with so many, you know, really big people and really popular people. And I said well, half of them I met through some, some way through "In Living Color" and a good 40 percent through "Cosby," because he, in addition to the--I mean we had the best guest stars, my goodness. I mean it's like every week I wonder who's gonna (unclear). My God, it's Anthony Quinn. Oh, my God, it's William Shatner. Oh, my God, it's Tim Conway. It's Ruby Dee [HM] and Ossie Davis [HM]. I mean every week there was some phenomenal person. And in addition, he would just invite people up to the set in the--they would be like Toni Morrison and Sonia Sanchez [HM] (laughter). So, it, it was just a, a whole--I mean, I like I said, other than my job, it was just this whole other phenomenal experience where I got to see life lived well and lived honorably that, that I'll, I'll always be grateful for. Speaker 1: Okay, so that ends in 2000 I guess. Speaker 2: In, in 2000. Story_ID: 99263 Speaker 1: In 2000, and it's interesting because that was such a powerful year for me. I was really, really worn out, even though I wanted that show to go one more season. And, and it could easily have gone, but by then, I think Dr. [Bill] Cosby felt that, you know, there wasn't anybody supporting the show. CBS wasn't supporting, Carsey-Werner wasn't supporting. I don't think he wanted to drag it around. And we had done almost a hundred shows. I think we did ninety-seven episodes of that show, and anyone else would have gone to a hundred, but you know, there wasn't, there was no love for the show at CBS. (Unclear)--Oh, I'm dogging 'em, aren't I? Ah, they deserve it. So at any rate, that show ended. And I thought, you know, I've, I need a break. I need a break. I'm gonna take a year off, and clean my house, and regroup, and get myself together, right after this play. Because I had, I had contracted to do a play here in Chicago, "A Raisin in the Sun," and I was great, great, greatly looking forward to that. I think I had one week after "Cosby." And, and the whole time I was on "Cosby," I was moving back and forth from New York to LA [Los Angeles, California]. I would literally move to New York, get an apartment, stay there for the nine months that we shot, and then moved back to Los Angeles. So I, in a week, after we wrapped "Cosby," I had to pack up, move back to California, and then pack and move, or to pack for Chicago [Illinois] to--because I was here for a few months to do the play. And that was so wonderful because Irma P. Hall played mama; Celeste Williams played Ruth; my dear, dear friend, Harry Lennix, played Walter Lee. And Harry and I have known each other since before we were born but never had been on stage together. And so, and he's like a brother to me, so every time I came on stage, you know, T'Keyah would go, hey, there's Harry (laughter). And then Beneatha would go, I'm (unclear)--(laughter). So, I had to really fight to stay in character the whole run of that play because it was just so much fun to work with him on stage for the first time. And another dear friend, Dwayne Perry (ph.), played one of the suitors. And the whole cast was wonderful, but it was just a special one for me because so many of my friends and people that I admire were in the production, and it brought me home. The, the down side of it is I hadn't been at home a lot before then. I'd be home for a weekend for an event just for a minute. And my grandmother, you know, talking to her on the phone it's like oh, she repeats the same story; oh, she's blah, blah, blah. But it was that visit that I saw, hey, something is wrong with grandmother that's really--oh, this needs to be addressed. I was coming over at three in the afternoon, and she was in bed. I was coming over at two in the afternoon, and her pills that she was supposed to take were on the dining room table, and she couldn't tell me if she'd taken them or not. And so the year off that I thought I was gonna have began the first year of me taking care of my grandmother, who has Alzheimer's. Story_ID: 99264 Speaker 1: All right, so you were doing "[A] Raisin in the Sun," and was that the Goodman Theatre? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --the Goodman's production, one of the last productions, the second to last production they did in the, the old space on Monroe. So that was another historic thing. They, they should have made us the last production, because they sold out, and there were people clambering for tickets, and they had the, the other show in there... They didn't know how good it was gonna be. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what, what next? Now, you, you were in Chicago [Illinois] there for the longest spell you'd been in Chicago since you left, right? Speaker 2: And, and a lot longer than I thought because what happened, when I got ready to go, was the first time I had a lot of time to spend with my grandmother because I was just, I would come to visit her in the evening when we were at, in rehearsal and then during the day once, once the show was up. And you know, I could see that she needed some help. And I thought okay, well, she's, she--the house has gotten away from her. Let me just clean up the house for her, then that'll, you know, get her--(unclear). And I cleaned up the house, and she was still a little--so I said well, well, I'll organize everything for her, got her file cabinets and organ--you know, hanging all this stuff, desks, just the whole--I made an office in her house, and I--okay, now you're organized, now you'll be fine. And she was still--I was like, hmm, well, what's--you know, it's a lot of broken things in here. I'll make a deal with you. We'll get rid of--everything that's broken, I'll get you a new whatever. And then--(unclear)--(unclear)--(laughter) and I'll give you--so, I thought, you know, she's depressed because she has, her stuff is broken. And so I got her a new set of dishes and you know, some other things. And I thought--'cause I, you know, I'm the kind of person that I wanna fix things, and I just, I wanted to fix her, and I didn't, I had, I had no idea what was wrong. I, I mean I couldn't have believed it at the time, actually. And so I knew that something was wrong, and I just kept trying to fix it with little things that did I think a lot more for me than her. And from there, once the show was over, I would come over and you know, spend the day with her. And then I just, I stayed with her for a while. And every time I said okay, well, I'm gonna go, she would start clinging like, you know, a child. And it, it was--the first--I mean that we had just gotten to the point not too many years before then when we were friends, you know, because she was my grandmother (laughter) up until then and someone to be feared (laughter) and obey and that's kind of it. And we'd just gotten to the point where we genuinely enjoyed each other's company. And I thought at first, oh, you know, she just loves me so much, she doesn't want me to leave (laughter). Oh, grandma, I gotta go though; I gotta go home and do this, and this, and this. She, okay, do you have to go now? I can stay another day. I can stay another week, a day, a week, a month. And then it's like no, I really have to go. I have to pay my bills; I have to blah, blah; I have to--and then every time, and finally it's like well, grandma, you know, I gotta go work so we can keep living (laughter)--(unclear)--oh, okay. And I knew that it wasn't really okay. And so I came home, got my house in order, and came right back. And a long four-year story as short as I can make it, I first got hourly help in for her, and I saw that, that wasn't enough. Then I enlisted her in an adult daycare facility, and that wasn't enough. And then I started taking her around to the doctors. I dismissed her doctors shortly enough and began what I found was the, the awful realization that there are doctors of gerontology, but there really aren't a lot of doctors who have any respect at all for elders. And most of the doctors that I encountered were completely dismissive, completely dismissive. And eventually she was diagnosed with dementia, most likely Alzheimer's. And I was told time and time again it'll get worse and then she'll die; it'll get worse and then she'll die. And I thought, this is not what I want to hear. I'm gonna keep going until someone says something that I want to hear. Eventually, I took her to California. First, I had somebody come to stay at her house until she got combative (laughter), and then I took her to California. And she stayed at a facility where one of her friends was living at the time and, till she got combative, and then I brought her home with me. And that lasted not long, more than a month, because at the time I was producing a tour, and she was staying up nights. She was napping during the day and staying up nights, so I was up all day and all night. And after about a month and a half of not finding a caregiver for her, of taking care of her myself, my sister says okay, you're gonna kill yourself, your gonna kill her. We gotta come get her, and we gotta put her in a facility, because she was at the point where she didn't recognize her house anymore. She was leaving. My brother who lived on the same block with her had to go and rescue her a number of times. I mean thank goodness we had such great neighbors that she would say, they would call him and say Mrs. Carter is down at the wherever, you know, go and get her. And so we put her in a facility, and that--if it didn't break her heart, it certainly, certainly broke mine. And it, it just, was the hardest thing in my life to, to experience, to suffer really. And every time I went there, and it was, you know, lovely facility for what they are. In my opinion, there should be no facility called independent living for Alzheimer's patients because they are like infants who cannot be left alone, even when they seem like they can, because the can be fine one second, the next second need, needing help. Story_ID: 99265 Speaker 1: And I digress except to say that about a year into that, I decided I, I couldn't take it any longer, and I moved back home, in with my sister. We remodeled her, her home so that my grandmother could move in with us. And I, I think about a month after she moved in, I get the call that the show that I'd started was picked up. Well, ah-- Speaker 2: Now what show was this? This is-- Speaker 1: This, this show is, is a show that, was, is, was the oddest experience (laughter) of my life. It was during this whole tour that I was trying to launch when my grandmother was with me in 2001. Now this was an ambitious tour to say the least, because I was producing it myself, and it was practically a one-woman show. It's called "T'Keyah Live!: Mostly a True Variety Show." And in addition to having my grandmother there, who really needed round-the-care attention, September came, and September 11th came, and all of my sponsors went away. And the tour became, let's keep the show in Chicago [Illinois]. Let's try Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter), and maybe Memphis [Tennessee]. And in the midst of that madness, I'm auditioning, I'm auditioning for television. And I auditioned--I remember when I got the call. They want you to come in for this show. It's a family show, and the daughter is psychic, and they want you to play the mother. I said the mother (laughter)? They want me to play the mother? I don't play the mother. I play the daughter. I play the hot, sexy friend (laughter). I don't play the mother (laughter). Whose mother? And they said it's Raven Symone. And I thought oh, that little pretty baby from "The Cosby Show." Hmm, now how old would she be? Wait a minute (laughter). They want me to play her mama? They want me to play her mama? And I thought, what's God trying to do to me now? And it, it was really one of those moments where you have to grow up and deal with yourself. Speaker 2: Well, that's a--but it does seem--I've seen the show, you know, I think, think since we interviewed you the first time. I don't have cable at home. I don't have little kids at home. Speaker 1: Me either, either (laughter). Speaker 2: And so I didn't see it, but I, but I started looking for it on road. You know, on cable I looked for it, or if I'm at my mother's house in Dayton [Ohio] I look for it, when they would have the other grand, grandkids around and stuff like that and find it. And, and I've seen a--it does, it seems like an odd choice in a way for a mother of the show. You still-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --have that kind of young kind of-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --persona. But there are a lot of parents that are-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --young-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --(unclear)--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well, and the truth of the matter is I'm quite old enough to be her mom in, in real life. I just was not accustomed to playing that role. Because, in my opinion, and I knew it then when I first got the call, you don't go back. You only go forward. You know, once people see you as somebody's mom, then they're not gonna see you as the hot, sexy girlfriend anymore. They're gonna see you as somebody else's mom and then somebody's grandma (laughter), so, you know, that's how it goes. So I, I had a, I had a good little moment there before I ever went into, to see them. And what I decided was that the best thing about "Cosby" was that it gave me parents, and that, that was such a wonderful aspect of that, that part of my life. And I thought well, my goodness, this show would give me children, wouldn't it? I thought, I, I think I would like to have some children, you know, on television for pretend (laughter). And that's why I went in. I went in thinking I want that kind--I mean I, I, I doubt that I'll ever have children in this life. I mean I don't have that. There's no clock ticking anywhere (laughter) near that, that other women have. Oh, I better hurry up (laughter) jump in with somebody. I don't have such a calling. And I love children. I just, you know, I don't see that as happening in my house. Who, who knows? But I thought this would, this would make it happen with the magic wand of television. And, and sure enough, that is what happened-- Story_ID: 99266 Speaker 1: --and to the point where I, I, I can't describe it. I remember--and what was odd about the show, we--I, I, I wasn't really keen on any other aspect of the show. I took the job because I was supposed to be playing a doctor, and I thought oh, that's cool. I never played a doctor before. The show was supposed to start immediately. They were supposed to--we, we started shooting in November of 2001, and it was supposed to start airing in January of 2002. And I thought, I've been gone from television, like making new shows for almost a year, which is like a hundred years in television, so it'll put me right back on the air. I thought oh, that's good. And they said the contract is only three years. I thought okay, that's good, in and out, in and out, that's fine. I can be in Siberia for three years, no, no problem. And we ["That's So Raven"] started shooting, and January came and went, February, March, April, May, June. And we shot a whole season with no word at all when the show was gonna start. And now this is my fifth series on camera. I know what that means. That means you all chickened out, that, that you're not gonna do the show, that you're gonna finish the season, try to sell it foreign, and, and that's it. And so when I moved back to Chicago [Illinois], I'm, you know, I've [air kiss], goodbye LA [Los Angeles, California]. I'll work at Sears or something, (unclear) (ph.). I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm done with this for now until my grandmother's fine, you know. I'm, I'm done with this life. And so it was a sha--and it was months, months, and months before we ever heard anything from them. And so when they say okay, we're, we're gearing up to go, it's like who are you? Who, I did what? Oh, oh, no, honey, I moved. My sister has remodeled her whole house. You don't understand. And we couldn't find a good caregiver for my grandmother here, and so I, I couldn't see leaving her again in the, in the hands of somebody who might work out. And, and I think the week before I went back, we'd found a caregiver that we thought was pretty good. But it's like, hmm, I don't think I'm leaving her with you. I've known you a week (laugher), and I don't think so. So I said you know, pack the bags. She's gotta go with me. And it was such a leap of faith, because when she was there before I never found a caregiver. But I didn't see any other option. And so, in my mind, I have to go back 'cause it's a job, and they have me on contract, and we're gon' need the money. And I cannot separate from her, because I did before, and that's not gonna happen again. And I can't, you know, I, I--it would be too much of a burden to my sister to maybe find somebody. So, I have to go back; she has to come back with me; and we just have to find somebody, and so we just will, we just will. And so we went back, and I think I had a week, maybe two weeks before we started shooting. And I just called every agency in the book and on the Internet. I, I'm, I don't know how many calls I made until I found someone that, you know, I think started maybe not, not a whole week before we started shooting, maybe three days before we started shooting. And I remember, the night before our first day back to work, my grandmother fell. And she was fine, but she couldn't tell me she was fine because she had declined to the point where she wasn't very verbal. And I said well, we gotta take her to the hospital. And I remember thinking, it was like 2:30 that morning and thinking well, I have to be at work in about seven hours. I wonder if I'll make it. Yeah, but we'll see. This is--they--I told them when I'm coming back, I'm coming with a little old lady. There's gon' be some days (laughter). And you know, it worked out fine. She was fine. We made it home in time for me to get to work. And through the grace of God, you know, I kept a caregiver for her most of the time, until almost the end of I guess that would have been the second season, when all of a sudden, you know, all heck broke loose, and there wasn't a granny nanny to be found. I went through I think five or six in a week. The last one actually hit the, the door on her behind as she left out, me screaming. And this woman about eight times my size. I exaggerate just a bit. But I, I don't, I don't tolerate any sort of mistreatment of my grandmother. And I'd come home and whatever wasn't done, and I asked her about it. And she referred to her as well, that old lady won't--(laughter)--cut to--and stay out! (laughter). And of course, later that week (laughter), as I'm caring for her myself (laughter), Karen, what have I done? I can't handle it (laughter). And my sister is like okay, all right, it's all right, it's all right, come home. You want me to come there? (Unclear) Let's get Vincent on the phone (laughter)--(unclear). So I--cut to--you know, it's been, it's been quite an experience. Story_ID: 99267 Speaker 1: It, it's been a, a wonderful experience. I mean, my grandmother took me in when I wasn't very verbal, and when I could not take care of myself, and when I was mourning my mother. And when I took her in, she was mourning her mother because she thought she just died the night before every day, every day. And she, when I first--when she first came to my house, she was walking, she was in her, her own room, and she would walk down my hallway, up my stairs, and be standing at the foot of my bed. And I would wake up in the night and say, are you okay? And, and she, mm-hmm, mm-hmm. And I said do you want to get in with me? And, and just like I, at two, having climbed out of my crib, down a flight a steps, down a hallway and found her in the night, and she opened her sheets and said you want to get in? She, she was saying mm-hmm, and she would get in bed with me. So it's, you know, people say, you know, wow, you're really great. You take care of your grandmother, you, you know. And I, I told my Uncle Carneil last week, she can't live long enough for me to repay the favor; it's, it's not possible. And I'm just grateful for every day that I have to, to pay her back in this little, tiny way that I do. It's, it's the most incredible thing I've experienced. And I just try not to wonder what she's thinking, 'cause I know the universe will tell me (laughter) in a way that I don't want to know. But that is my life now. And I mentioned earlier, I came here to accept an award at the DuSable Museum, and Friday was her birthday, her 92nd birthday. And so I brought her home so the family could see her, and I stayed long enough for her to regroup from the trip, 'cause traveling is, is something with her. But it's, it's quite a, a wonderful life. And I, I must have wondered as a child what she was going through taking care of me, taking care of us, and now I know a little, little bit about that, and I'm grateful, I'm grateful to know. Story_ID: 99268 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, now, the character you play on this show, "That's So Raven," now you, though you're young, you seem to have the most gravity of anybody on the--I mean you, you--'cause it's a why--it's kind of a wild cast of, of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of characters. Speaker 2: Someone was asking me recently, I think since our last interview, must be--directed an episode of "That's So Raven," and I--it was such a wonderful experience, I have been campaigning I think on this show all three years and on "Cosby" I think all four years (unclear)--everybody no, no, no, heck no, you want us to go further (laughter). So they finally said yes, and it was such a great experience, 'cause you know, it, it's, it's a child's set. And, and pretty much I was the voice of reason (laughter) on the show, like unfortunately I am on a lot of shows that--can we just behave for them for five seconds (laughter) so we can get something done? And I thought oh, they're gonna clown me. They are gonna show their behinds, but they, they didn't. They were really, really wonderful. And it was a special episode because it was Kyle [Massey]'s, the, the little boy who plays my son, Corey, it was Corey's first kiss on the show, and Kyle was nervous as all get-out, as was the little adorable girl that played his little girlfriend. And I think it helped him a lot that his TV mom was there to say hey, honey, you--we can get through this. We're just gonna do it like this, and like this, and I got your back. You know I'm not gonna clown you, it's okay. And just the whole cast and crew was great, and now I'm just, I'm itchin' to direct something again. I, it was really, really wonderful experience, finally. Story_ID: 99269 Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what are some of your future plans? Now you have probably--I hate to--well, I don't know how to, to boil it down other than to say you're one of the, the blackest actresses in Hollywood, in terms of your thinking and, and everything, you really are, so-- Speaker 2: Isn't that something? Speaker 1: How are you--what are your plans? What do you want to do? I know you're not satisfied with everything that you've been in or have seen done. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What, what would you like to see done, and how would-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what role would you wanna play in those-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --projects? Speaker 2: --and, and not only that, and I get, I mean I guess it's okay to mention here 'cause this is for archival purposes, that I've already left "That's So Raven." And to, you know, I'm trying to, to stand back and say it as if it were--you know, I, I watched this Black History Month little interstitial clip last night about John Amos and "Good Times" and how he left the show because he didn't think it was a good portrayal of, of a black father, and how brave of him that was. And I actually left "That So Raven," not, not so much because it wasn't a good portrayal of a black mother, although there were many times, too many times where I had to say mm-mm, no, baby, no, we don't do this. We don't this; they do--they don't do this, and honey, take that out your hand, and don't, mm--mm, don't take, mm, we, say it again, honey, and don't, you know. And it's, it's a little weighty being the voice of blackness, culture, refinery, commonsense, to be, to have the ghetto eraser in my hand all the time. But there, there were certain things on the show that, you know, I called to their attention. And as--and it's not just them. It's every--it's most shows I'll say they're oblivious to--oh, really? Ah, Corey only likes little blond white girls, that's a negative thing? We never noticed it, but really, all of them? Yes, all of them, honey, every single one, Chelsea and then all the other white girls. And Chelsea never is mooning over no black boy, but Raven is, half the time she's mooning over a white boy. Did, did, didn't you, you, you know, you don't see that? Just me? I'm the only one that sees that? So, that got to be a little much, because they would, you know, oh, yeah, now our eyes are open. (Laughter) But other than that, we just weren't treated well, you know. And in addition to me saying, you know, at this point in my life I need to be treated well, obviously I don't need to be paid a lot, or I wouldn't have taken the job. But I need to be treated with respect. I need to be honored. I need to know that I have some value on this show, and more than that, I need to show these people, who are like children to me, that they need to demand their own respect. And when I told them when I left, what I told the cast is: one, now they can't say they don't have any more money, 'cause they have mine, and make sure you get it; and two, they can't afford to lose someone else, so make them treat you better. And I think that, you know, although--I mean the mother was never on every show. So people say well, what's, where's they mother now? I said she's upstairs. She's wherever she was (laughter) on every episode where it, it was--I mean it was never important to the show that the mother be there for every episode. Speaker 1: So as far as you know, they-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --they won't even replace the character or-- Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think it's important to them to have that mother image in the show. I don't think it ever was, and which was one of our points of contention, you know, that-- Story_ID: 99270 Speaker 1: --Well, not to make this a whole diatribe about, about Disney, but--did I say that with a little--Disney-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But you know the history of Disney-- Speaker 1: Yes, I do (laughter) I know. Speaker 2: The history of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean Bambi's mother gets killed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Every character in Disney, their mother gets killed-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --or their, or their father gets killed. "Lion King," his father gets killed-- Speaker 1: But not only that-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --I mean so many, I mean and not necessarily to single Disney out, but to be the, the proprietor of children's images in this country, I mean to have the only studi--studio with, with name, with rame--name--recognition that's, that's parallel to, to image correlation, you'd think chil--it's okay for children when you say Disney. That's who they are. You, you don't say I'm gonna make a Scorsese film. I gonna make an MGM film. What does that mean? Hmm, it's gonna have a musical number? Not anymore. It's, when you say I'm gonna be in a Disney project, you know it's for children. It should, it should be safe for any child to watch, but they are the most historically racist company ever in existence. You take any one, you name me, you name me one, and I'll write a paper about where the racism is. You mentioned-- Speaker 2: Well, people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --"The Lion King--" Speaker 2: --they raise questions, yeah. Speaker 1: --all of the negative characters had, except one, had voices of color. Speaker 2: Right, you're right. Speaker 1: Whoopi Goldberg and Cheech Marin played the hyenas. It's in, just in every single-- Speaker 2: With "Tarzan" there were no black-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --people in Africa-- Speaker 1: And I don't think you need to-- Speaker 2: --just, just animals. Speaker 1: --say anything beside the word Tarzan. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --(laughter)--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: But there were no, no black-- Speaker 1: You could stop there. Speaker 2: --people whatsoever. They, they were not even in the--yeah. Speaker 1: Un, until "Mulan," who was, I think she was a princess, she was the first princess of color. Speaker 2: She, she wasn't a princess, but she was-- Speaker 1: Was, was she even a princess? So, so there, so, so there is yet--I mean all of the princesses are white with blond hair. That, that's who gets the guys. That's who my niece when she was three says when I grow up I want to be white. And as I recover from my (laughter), my cardiac event, I say why? And she says because I want to be pretty, because her bedspread had white princesses on it with blond hair, and her videos that every single girl that got the guy was white with blond hair. And it's not Disney's responsibility to show the beauty of black girls. It's our responsibility not to buy the ugliness of black girls when Disney's selling it. So, so all that to say that I didn't want the young people who I've grown so--oh, my God, I'm in love with those children. I remember when the show first started, before it aired, the children from show had done some kind of New Year special. And I was over a relative's house, and I almost forgot about the show 'cause there had been that time. And they were on, and I screamed those are my children! (laughter). My nieces, like, you had some (unclear)--who is (laughter)--(unclear). Oh no, no, from the TV, from the TV show. I did a--anyway, that's them. I mean, I, it, it's, it's very, very cool that, that those are my children because of Raven[-Symone], and she's so hot. Oh, my goodness, everyone loves me because I touched her. (Laughter) And, and Kyle [Massey] is just the best. I mean he's such, he's a little boy, you know, who brings you dirty things to show you (laughter). So, I, I love, I love being a mom, e--even a TV mom. Story_ID: 99830 Speaker 1: You were asking me earlier about being, being conscious, being, being a black person. And you know, I was telling someone not long ago about my struggle with Disney and, and images and all of that and how I always tend to be, or usually tend to be the voice on the show saying we shouldn't do this; we can't do this; we can do this, but this is what it means. This is what it means to black people; this is what it means to little black girls, little black boys, little white, you know, boys and girls, so let's be more responsible than this. We can be funny and responsible at the same time. And I think people, the people who even listen, who bothered to listen (laughter) say boy, she's on our nerves. (Laughter) And there are a lot of people who probably wouldn't work with me again. Speaker 2: Now who, who were the, were, were the writers of the show black or? Speaker 1: Of that, no show has black writers. Some shows that are black, some shows that are black have some black writers, but-- Speaker 2: Not, not even "The Cosby Show?" The-- Speaker 1: I've never seen a black head writer. Speaker 2: Never? Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: "In Living Color" you-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: We, we thought-- Speaker 1: Nope, nope. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: Nope, nope, nope. John Bowman, the show "The Show," maybe you thought he was white. John Bowman's white, he's white. "In Living Color" at some point had three executive producers. Pam Veasey was one of the three, and she's black. But I've, I've never seen a black head writer on any show, and I've done five on camera and guest spotted on a lot of others, and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: What about Dave Chappelle's show ["Chappelle's Show"], was he the head guy on his show, do you think? I mean just, you might not know, but-- Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: But you would be-- Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: --surprised from what you're saying, that if he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that if he actually was. Speaker 1: And you know, for all I know, I mean Ali might have been the head writer on Chris's show. I mean I know he's Chris's like number one writer now, but I don't know, and I've never asked him, Ali LeRoi on Chris Rock's show. But I don't know that for a fact. I've never seen a black head writer on any show that I've been on. Speaker 2: Oh, that explains a lot. Speaker 1: It does explain a lot. And then and the sad things is time and time again when I got to producers when I can't take it anymore, and I'm trying to not be the troublemaker and not be the agitator, just be on the show, be a girl, not be, you know, Angela Davis [HM], when I finally, you know, huh, okay, I gotta do something (laughter), I get: well, so and so, you know, was in the room when we came up with this. This was so and so's pitch. This was so and so's script. And you know, I want to not, you know, out the writers, but I want to say they wrote what they knew you would like. They wrote what they knew could get on based on your feelings about us. They can't, they cannot--or you picked them to be on the show because this is the way they write. I'm not a writer on the show for a reason (laughter). I wouldn't have pitched this. I wouldn't have approved this. I wouldn't have sat still while this was going on. I wouldn't have written this. And so, you know, it's, yeah, sure, they can always say black people were in the room when we did that. Yeah, what, what black people? What black people were in the room? Speaker 2: So not the ones who are in-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --control of anything. Speaker 1: Not the ones that were in control, not the ones who think like I do, so, so sure. I mean, and, and you ask about "Cosby." I don't remember, I think we had three different head writers. None of them were black. And even they, I mean, almost every week would come up with some stuff, and you'd be like [in-breath]. And Dr. Cosby would say all right. (Laughter) And they'd rewrite it, and he'd say, and they'd rewrite, you know. So, yeah, it's--what I was gonna say earlier is, try as I might, I end up being the agitator on every show. I ended up, I end up being the person who calls to the attention of the higher-ups what I think is inappropriate as a woman, as a black person. And I know a lot of people who wouldn't work with me again, because it's easier to work with someone who just agrees with whatever you do than it is for someone who makes you stop and think and maybe even rewrite something, maybe even rethink something. And I was telling someone that there might be a, a time when I, when I run out of people (laughter), when, when, you know, word gets to everyone or I've actually worked with everyone, and then no one will work with me again. Speaker 2: But-- Story_ID: 99831 Speaker 1: You come out of tra--of a tradition of people doing that though. And I, I was reading one of Donald Bogle's [HM] latest books. I can't think of the name of it, but he was talking about Paul Robeson's role in doing that. He's, he made like one movie, "Sanders of the River" that he apologized for that was so degrading. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But he thought it was like, he would get his foot in the door. But, but when that, when that was done, he, he was like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on top of it. Then, then--well, "Emperor Jones" had some problems too, but-- Speaker 2: I, I say that all the time, peep-- Speaker 1: --but Leigh Whipper, there were other, even Butterfly McQueen say hey, stop slapping me on this set, you know. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --people have to speak out sooner or later, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who would you, and I guess as long as you're in this situation you'll be face with these crises where you have-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --to say something. Speaker 2: You know, I, I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --say all the time people say well, you know, I don't, I don't necessarily want to play five whores. I just want to get my foot in the door. And I think you can get in the door to the wrong room, and then they shut it and lock it, and then what? Then what do you do? I don't, I don't want to be in the wrong room. I mean it's too late for me. And I, I, I, I, it would be foolish of me to try to do some, you know, really, really horrible stuff, 'cause I couldn't apologize for it. People would say no, you knew what you're--I missed that opportunity. When I first went to LA [Los Angeles, California], I could have done all kind of silly, you know, madness and gotten away with it, and say oh, I was young and foolish and (laughter). Now I'm a big star, (laughter) it doesn't matter. But I think that, that it's just, it doesn't ever--well, sometimes it does pay off. Sometimes you, you do something horrible, and you get a big name, and then you can do something and never look back. But I wouldn't count on that. I, I never have counted on that. And if I do something horrible now, you will know that granny ran out of diapers (laughter), and that's why. That's why I'm doing this (laughter), 'cause I will do something horrible to keep granny in diapers (laughter), I'll say that right now. But to me, I mean, I, I feel lucky, because they're some people who just work for themselves. And I'm an artist. And I think I said it before, I, you know, I, I would love to play a tree, and a grasshopper, and a hooker, and a doctor, and whatever the heck I want. But my life has been such that, like it or not, there's a voice in my head that says what would, what would grandmother think about that though. Even now that she can't tell you, what would she have thought about that? And I think one of the reasons why I still cry every time I see a picture of Ossie Davis [HM], and I, you know, was standing just out in the hallway just now is because when I heard, I thought who will take his place? Who, who will step up? It's too, the step's too high. Who will step up to that? Who, who, who would, who will step up to that, you know? And, and, and what I do, you know, that I don't, you know, I, I, I'm on a show like "In Living Color," but, but I also say while I'm on that show, let's not go through this route; let's not go this far. But, but who, who will be Ossie Davis? I, I don't know who, who will be that. I, I hope someone will be that. And I'm, I'm, I'm glad that there's that voice in my head. I don't want a hundred years from now to have some coon show rep, you know, retrospective of my work. I, I'm, I, I'd rather have a tenth the work of someone who will take anything. I'm, I'm okay with that. Story_ID: 99832 Speaker 1: But what do you, do you--what is your vision for what you would like to do? If you could just do anything you wanted to do, had the means and the resources, what would you-- Speaker 2: It-- Speaker 1: --what would be the world that you would make? Speaker 2: That, I think a great deal of me still is the child who liked singing and dancing and, and not telling jokes, but making people laugh. I, I would love to have my own variety show on television. I would love to use that kind of show to introduce to the world the very, very interesting and talented people that I know that nobody else knows because they didn't tough it out, or they, they wouldn't compromise, or they're just in a little town or a big town with, you know, not, not a fast enough train that, that think America should see. I, I would love to, to have that, to be the helm of a show like that, that could be nice and entertaining, you know, because people--I like--I love to do drama. I love to, you know, play heroic characters. But life is hard, and sometimes people just need to not be in their life for a half an hour or an hour and just smile, or laugh, or be entertained, and I, I would love to do that. In addition to that, I, I hope that when I'm 105, I'll still be doing voiceover work because it's so not judgmental. It doesn't matter how you look. You walk in there with your hair undone and your clothes mismatched, and as long as you get that voice right, that's all that matters. And I can come in there dressed as a woman and do a little boy, and an old man, and a witch, and, (laugher), and a tree, and radio static. (Laughter) So that's, that's fun to me. But I, I really would like to do films. I, I was saying to someone else earlier that I do a lot of things, and I love them all. I love--and maybe I mentioned this before in this interview that I love the stage because you rehearse it until it's the way the director wants, and then it's a different show every night because the audience is different, or the weather is different, or you're different. And it's a wonderful thing, doing a show that you know and have, and have brought to your perfection, and then let it be different every night. I love television because you do a whole movie in a week. And it's like magic that you get this script, and you don't know what it says, and then five days later it's done forever more. And I love film because in film there's the, the possibility of perfection that, that, if you have money (laugher), you could keep doing it until you get it, maybe not what somebody else would think is perfect, but what you think is perfect. And I would like to bring to the screen all of the black people that, that are. Because we've seen it, about seven of them so far, over and over and over and over, and there's a million. And they didn't, they didn't come into existence on a plantation, you know, and they didn't die by a, a water hose and a Southern cop's baton. They're in a million places in all of time. They were here before anyone else and will be here long after the others have gone. And I would like to bring some of them to, to the big screen to be immortalized. Speaker 1: Okay, any specific people, or you're talking about just a lot of these untold stories that are out here? Speaker 2: A, a million, I, I mean I would like to, to do histories, and comedies, and tragedies. I was talking at the DuSable [Museum] event to my stage mom, Irma P. Hall, and she said that she would like to do the story of Mary McLeod Bethune, who she met when she was eight. And I thought how wonderful would that be, when so many people have no idea who that phenomenal woman was? I mean we, we do--it seems like--well, I won't digress. But the others do stories about people that they made up, because their history does not allow them to do too many true stories of epic proportion when, when the most common of our stories are of epic proportion. And we don't value it enough to put it on screen, so yeah, the Mary McLeod Bethunes, and the Ida B. Wells, and the Harriet Tubmans, and the Frederick Douglasses, and love stories about real people. You know when "The Cosby Show" came on, a lot of, they got a lot of flack because it was a doctor and a lawyer married to each other (laughter). I thought, I actually know a doctor and a lawyer married to each other. Why is that odd? Why is that odd? I think--what was on? They had one--no one thought Wonder Woman was odd; no one thought Grays--no one thought Spiderman was odd. They thought a black doctor married to a black lawyer was odd and unrealistic. Speaker 1: Or that nobody in the family as on dope, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. We need to make that commonplace. We need to, we need to say another story about a successful black family. We, we need to--so my brother was saying that he showed someone a picture of our great, our great-grandfather. And, and he's in a chair looking very stately in his suit, and, and his wife is beside him. And the baby is very--held in the arms. And he showed the picture, and the friend was astounded because the man was in a suit. And he said your, your great-grandparents wore suits. Like yeah (laughter). And he said the friend say I, I, I don't think my grandparents had suits. In fact, my father didn't (laughter) didn't wear too many suits. And so we, we see this one, one group of us when there are a thousand groups of us, and there's nothing wrong with any group. Let's just show more; let's just show more of the family. That, that's what I would like to do, show more of the family. Story_ID: 99833 Speaker 1: Okay. Now we always ask this question. This is our wrap-up series of questions here. Speaker 2: Did we talk about the book ["Natural Woman/Natural Hair: A Hair Journey"]? Speaker 1: Oh, not yet, oh, your-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --publications. Now this book, this isn't the only book, right? Speaker 2: No, I didn't bring the other one. Speaker 1: Hold it up, if you want, if you like. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You got it? Speaker 1: This is the hair book. This is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --"Natural Woman/Natural Hair, A Hair Journey." And all, all of the sisters that talk about natural hair catch a lot of hell usually. So tell us about (laughter) how you conceived of this and-- Speaker 2: Well, when I, I, I don't, I, I try to think back and back and back and back, and like most of the black girls of my generation, I sat at the stove and hot comb and getting my ear burned and my hair burnt. And I thought that, that's what was supposed to happen, and I thought that was my avenue to beauty and acceptability, because God forbid I should try to take a picture with nappy hair. That was not allowed. There, there, there are no pictures of me with nappy hair as a child. You would think my hair was straight, because the day before picture day, day before a funeral, day before a wedding our hair was pressed hard. And like all the other black girls, I grew up thinking that what, whatever it is I am, it's got to be the opposite of pretty, 'cause I don't get pretty until my hair gets straight. And I don't remember when it started bothering me. It wasn't when my brother would make fun of us - I smell it burning. You're burning it up, baby (laughter). We would defend it - so what, 'cause we gon' be cute (laughter), you know. I don't, I don't remember. Perhaps, you know, I tell myself in retrospect it was my first trip to Africa when I had a garment made, and I'm fighting with the seamstress who spoke Wolof. And I don't know, you know, I--all I knew how to say was hello and sit down, and that did not effectively tell her she was measuring wrong. And she made this outfit to African specifications, not American, and so it fit wonderfully as it was supposed to because she knew what she was doing. And we had this final dinner where everybody wore their outfits that they had gotten made. And Najwa, whose, whose, in whose dance company I worked for years, had gone with me, had really taken me on this trip to Senegal, which was my first trip to Africa, and she wire wrapped my hair. And at this dinner I felt so beautiful, and I had never felt beautiful like that before. And I had been a pageant queen by then. I was Miss Black Illinois and had been photographed for all the world to see in a crown, and banner, and a flowing gown with little a wind machine that made it blow (laughter). But I had never felt beautiful like that before, like, like a beauty that belonged to me. And when I came home, I suddenly felt uncomfortable in my clothes. And when I took the wire wrap down, I suddenly felt uncomfortable in my hair. And I thought, for the first time, I'm, I'm, I don't think I wanna do this anymore. And I had gone through the perm stuff twice, growing up, always pressed. And I didn't get a perm until right before I went to college for the first time, didn't really get it, didn't really understand what was involved. My hair grows fast, and I needed a touchup while I was at school. And I said no, no, no, Mrs. Lee does my hair. I can't have somebody else in my hair before I go home. And once it was explained to me that I had to do that, I said I can't have a perm 'cause I'll be away from Mrs. Lee too long, you know, two periods of time. And so I cut it out, and by the time I got home I had cut my hair. And that was the first time I wore my hair naturally, a freshman in college, and I got used to it. A couple of, the years later, when I pledged a sorority, I thought well, I'd better perm it 'cause my hair is a little [out-breath], and I don't think they gon' go for that. I wanna have some control over it. And I got a perm again, which didn't offer any control, by the way, but I kept that going until right after the pageant, right after the Miss Black Illinois Pageant. And that's when I started feeling again like mm, mm, but it was that trip to Africa. And after that I said this is, this, I gotta, I gotta get rid of that. Story_ID: 99834 Speaker 1: And I was modeling in Chicago [Illinois] at the time, among everything else, singing, singing, dancing, every, everything. I think I mentioned I danced with Najwa. I danced with the Bill Cote (ph.) dancers; I sang with this band called Quest; I modeled; I was in Chocolate Chips Theatre Company; I was in Wavelength Improv Company and whatever else was going on. And I was wearing my hair naturally, and I guess pressing it sometimes. And I got a commercial for this product called relaxed look, which I, I though relaxed look. That means it's not relaxed; it just looks relaxed. So I started spending the money in my mind, and when they started talking about: and we're gonna have you go to the salon and blah, blah, blah, blah, and if it takes, well, it's like takes, takes, takes? That's a word associated with some sort of chemical product. I have spent this money in my mind already, hmm. Oh, dear, I think I have a decision to make, oh, oh. How much again did you say it was? Oh, well, it can't be that bad, relaxed look. Well, not only was it a chemical, it was a curl. And a curl is so much worse than a perm, oh, my God (laughter). When it started breaking off, my hair looked like this. This is the new growth. This is what was left, well, maybe, maybe (laughter) like this of my hair. And that's when I got "In Living Color." So (laughter), I braided it, put a little braid here and a little braid here (unclear) connect this one and braid--'cause I looked like who did it to the child and ran. And braid this one to this, and, and it was smack on my head. And I thought, please let me just get through this, which introduced the concept of one, me doing my own hair on the show and me wearing wigs. And fortunately or unfortunately, the only sketches I did for that pilot were my own sketch, "Black World," the little girl, Chrissy. And that's how I wore my hair, and "Go On Girl," and I wore a head wrap for that. And when I came home from shooting the pilot of "In Living Color," I went straight to a barbershop and said cut off everything that ain't (unclear). It's gotta go. And that was, that was the last time I put a chemical in my hair. Over the course of all of that, "In Living Color" and all the other shows, I would always get mail, how do you do your hair? How do, how you--can I do my hair like that? I wish I could do my hair like that. And when I first started in "In Living Color," there was, there was no book to tell me; there was no book to tell them, and no one knew what to do with it. It was the older I get, actually, the thinner it gets. And, and it's, it's not thin now. It's a little thick, but you know sixteen years ago it just was short 'cause I had just cut the, the perm off not, not long before that, and I was wearing it in twists. And everyone that saw it said oh, you've got great hair. So, do you wanna blow it dry? Do you wanna run a come through it, just run a comb through it? No, no, this is, this is it. Oh, well, we're giving the fly girls a little touch up. Mm-mm, mm-mm, mm-hmm (laughter), and so I would do my own hair, because no one else knew what to do with it. And after I don't know how many years, I thought I should write a book 'cause people are asking me, and no one else seems to know what to do with it. And I didn't have time, and I kind of put it off, put it off, put it off. And I guess it was when I was on "Cosby" that I said okay, I'm doing this book; I'm doing it, I'm doing it, I'm doing it. And I went out to see what was out, and by then there were a number of books on the market. And at first I thought well, you know, it's been said, now I don't, I don't have to, to do that. But I was still getting letters all the time, and people were stopping me on the street all the time, oh, your hair, how do I do--and it, you know, I would say there are books out. How do you do your--I thought oh, okay, people want to hear about me. That's that whole celebrity thing that I still, I understand it, I get it, but it still fascinates me that people want what you're doing. I want to go see your house (laughter). I wanna--how do you do your hair? And so I looked at the other books that were out, and I said okay, what can I bring to the table? And I decided that the other books were, were good, and I, and I like a lot of the books. In fact, I mentioned most of the books that were out when I finished my book in my book because they say a lot of things that I don't say. But I decided that books cost a lot of money, and that's probably why most of the books are in black and white. And pictures a lot of money, and that's why most of the books don't have a lot of pictures. And I thought well, I want my book to, one, be special, and one, be memorable, and one (that's three ones) (laughter), be more than the other books. I want people to be able to pick up my book and really get it. Because, in addition to the people, the choir to which I'm preaching, they're the people who say I have no idea what to do, and your hair is ugly; you need to run a comb through it (laughter). And so, I wanted to show step by step by step by step by step, and then for the final looks I wanted to show a full color picture that looked beautiful because I wanted to show how beautiful we are in our natural glory. And so that's what I did with the book, and it cost me a fortune. And-- Story_ID: 99835 Speaker 1: My manager said be prepared to lose your shirt (laughter). Said I just want to do it. I don't care if I sell five copies, because I had another book based on my first--well, not my first, but my first big one-woman show, "Some of My Best Friends." And it's a series of monologues. And actors were coming up to me saying can I get a copy of this monologue? Can I get a copy of this? And so I had that printed in book form. And I was working at CBS, who I badmouth earlier, (laugher) and the wonderful, wonderful photo department kind of took it over for me. They shot the pictures. I came in this little studio that was about twice the size of this chair, and they shot all, they shot me as all of the characters in the book. And the photo person talked to my printer, and so I don't even know what she said. I had no idea how much work was involved. So when it came to this book, I really had no idea what I was getting into. The software alone that I needed for the book costs more than a thousand dollars, so I mean this book was tremendously expensive. And I was prepared to sell the seven copies and look at the rest of them in my closet because I didn't want there not to be this book if someone came to look for it. And I wanted to say to all the little girls who say, you know, wow, I wonder if my hair in--who's pretty, me or the blond? (Laughter) I wanted something for them, to say it's you. She's okay too, but it's you, you're, you're, you're pretty; you can get the guy; you can wear the crown; you can whatever, and as fate would have it, independently produced, independently distributed, mostly through black bookstores. I broke even this month. Speaker 2: That's no mean feat (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm joyous. Story_ID: 99277 Speaker 1: So, you know, I've gotten tremendous response from the book and more, so many things that I didn't anticipate from people saying I started wearing my hair naturally because of you, and I--my daughter now wears her hair naturally because of you that I didn't even consider. I, I mean it just, it's, it's mind boggling to, to know that you have--it's like when people say I named my daughter after. It's like, wow (laughter), that's really, that's really cool. But I think that there's also been--and not as much. I, I actually anticipated more of the negative response. But the negative response troubles me more than the positive response pleases me because it's so indicative of our condition as black people. And among the, the criticisms, the, the voice against wearing your hair naturally, people with pressed hair, permed hair, whatever say, you know, it's whatever. It's 2005. I, I can do whatever I want to. You can't tell me that I have to wear my hair naturally. I can be blond; I can be, you know, blue; I can be straight; I can be whatever I want to. And that's fine. If you want to change your hair every day to match your shirt, I--go on, girl, do it. If it's fashion, if it's fun, I don't have a problem with you at all. But if you believe that the way you are by nature is such that you can only be acceptable or attractive in your opposite state, something is wrong, and I am worried about you, and your relationship with your mother, and your relationship with your daughter, and I think you need to think about it. Story_ID: 99278 Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is one of our standard questions as we, wrap-up questions now. And this one is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: I have endless hopes and concerns for the African-American community. I wanna see 99.9 percent of our money in black banks. I want our commerce and culture to be international. I want us to recognize that Haitian people are black people, and Ghanaian people are black people, and that there's no difference. There's no difference between us, that, that we have something in common that is much, much greater than our differences. I want us to relinquish the idea of minority mindset in, in any of its capacities. I would like us to love ourselves first, because you can't, you can't--and I've been using this analogy since I think I was a child. You know, there's this concept that we've come through the civil rights and now everybody's fine, and we can, we can be in the same game as everyone else. And-- Speaker 1: The end of race, right (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's like the other children are at our door or pretending to be saying come and play with us, and we have a gash in our head, and, and it's bleeding. And we're outside woozy trying to play, and, and we can't; we simply can't play. We, we must, we must heal ourselves first, and then we can play. I think the others want us to play while we're woozy because that's the only chance they have of beating us. And when we recognize that, we, there won't be any games 'cause we, we don't play games like that. Who we are will be obvious, and the world will get in order. That, that, that's what I want; that's what I dream for black people. Story_ID: 99279 Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you're actually older than you look, and you-- Speaker 2: Much. Speaker 1: And I was surprised. Then when I saw your birthday, you're actually not, you're not, you're, well, you're not much (unclear)--but you, you-- Speaker 2: My grandmother used to say-- Speaker 1: --you don't look--yeah. Speaker 2: --I was born in the wrong time, and I'm much, much older (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you're like a-- Speaker 2: --than I am. Speaker 1: --Dick Clark or something or how they say he's supposed to be. But is there anything that you would do, any major thing you would do differently, you know, if you had to look back on what you've done to this point? Speaker 2: You know, I was in a pageant once, and they asked, one, the, the final questions was: if you could be any age you, you, you know, and whatever, what age would you be and why? And I was twenty-two at the time, and my answer was if I could be any age, I would be twenty-two because that's the age I am now. And I don't want to go back in time, and I don't want to miss anything, so I, I want to live every moment that I'm living. And I'm twenty-two right now so that's what I want to be. I wouldn't go back and do anything differently. I wouldn't--I mean certainly, I think that I would like for things in my life, circumstances, events, experiences to have been different, but they weren't. And so, so I don't want them to be. I don't want to go back and fix anything, correct anything, make people present who were missing because my life as it has been was what led me to this chair right here. And I, I must believe that I'm supposed to be in this chair right now, or why did I get up this morning? So no, I, I--there are things that I, I hate I had to experience, I hate I had to suffer, I hate I had to know, but I, I must believe that my life is divine and in divine order. And that every car crash, every funeral was of mandatory attendance. Story_ID: 99280 Speaker 1: Okay, now you probably don't think about this very often, but what at this juncture in your life would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: You know, I mentioned a moment ago that, that--and, and I have met quite a number of people who've said that they named their child after me. And the first time I heard it, I remember I was at a, in a store. And somebody said oh, hey, aren't you T'Keyah from whatever? I said, yes. And the guy said, I named my daughter after you. And I thought oh, where is the baby (laughter)? And this little grown looking girl came up. I said, oh, huh, nice to meet you. Oh, my God, am I that old? And I thought, what have I done in my life? Because it kind is like oh, T'Keyah, that's an unusual name. They thought oh, that's a pretty name. But the guy went on to say, I really like the work that you do, and it was--he'd wat--he was a fan of "In Living Color," and he said you seem different from the other people on the show. It seemed like you were thinking more about what you were doing, and I like the roles that you were playing. And you seem more like--whatever he said at the time. And I thought wow, that's really, really cool. And I, I hope that thus far my legacy is that I do take my grandmother with me when I work, and, and my grandfather, and my parents, and my siblings. And I would like, for the most part, for them to be able to say that's my sister without being embarrassed, you know, that's my daughter, that's my granddaughter, that, that and, and, and, and that my work reflects that. And I hope that in fifty years, if I'm still around, my work will continue to reflect that and maybe my, my grandchildren, if they're ever, or Raven-[Symone]'s grandchildren (laughter), or my, my great-grand nieces and nephews will say that's my great-aunt, and they'll do it without being embarrassed. Story_ID: 99281 Speaker 1: Okay, now that leads to a question I always ask about family. Has your family's, what's been your family's reaction to this success and your neighbors'? I mean do you ever see any of the your, your, your neighbors or the people you grew up with in Chicago [Illinois], or-- Speaker 2: Gosh, it's, well, from the--you know, like I said, I, I don't remember when I wasn't performing. I, I, I, I remember, you know, performing at two. My siblings say, you know, I started out younger than that. What I do remember is that it was genuinely, all things creative were genuinely viewed as a waste of time by my grandmother and something that I would hopefully one day grow out of. And so, there was no encouragement of it, and yet she came to every show. I don't think--I, I think in the last three years is when she start missing shows that I did. So, there was this, this I really don't like what you're doing, but no, I'm gonna support you no matter what you do because I love you, who you are, you know, without saying it, the fact that she showed up. And so, I've always felt like there was a net for me in my family. My, my brother, Vince, I think was my first fan. I was in a show in high school, and after the show, I don't think he was ever the same (laughter). Because you know, everyone was like oh, it's something else that Crystal's doing. What's she in now? Oh, okay. And apparently, there was some boy who had seen the show before, and I was, I was coming singing this little sexy song down the aisle, and he, this boy was sitting up in the balcony. And apparently, he was breaking his neck to get down from the balcony to the first floor so he could be where I was singing. And my brother was like, you know, who over my baby sister, what, what (laughter), what is this? So I think from that point on, more than any else, my brother, Vince, was like my cheerleader. What else can you do? What else can you do? And I think one by one I won them all over, you know, at, at some point or another. I don't know when my sister really came into the fold, but I remember when, when it was time to go to high school I didn't have a say, as she picked the high school. And I found out when it was time for me to go that I had to go wherever she went. And I remember saying, you know, you know, why didn't this come up two years ago. I (laughter), if I'd known we had to go to the same place, I didn't get to, a vote. And I was just depressed about it, and I remember my sister saying they have a mime troupe. There's some people there that are like you (laughter). And I was like really? Mm-hmm, I think you'll be okay. And so I, I remember I really loved her saying that because even though she didn't quite get it, she recognized what I did, and who I was, and that, that there would be a place for me in that school, and of course, there was. I think that my brother, William, came in after the pageant, after the Illinois pageant. I mean because up until then, I mean I think he gave me the hardest time, other than my grandma. When you go grow out of that? That's, you know, yes. That's (laughter)--(unclear). And after the pageant he was like hey, we can do stuff with this. Let's do a publicity stunt. Miss Black Illinois saves tree out of cat. Miss Black Illinois (laughter). So, and I think that, that was probably, because I had been in a fraternity pageant in school and, and something that I didn't even take seriously. I got in the, the school's pageant because no one would get in it, and they, and they asked, some Alphas who were friends of mine asked us to get in it 'cause we were performers then. Just get in our pageant so there could be somebody in it. And I got in it and won, and then won the state, and then won the regional, and then won the national, which is why my brother, Vincent, said you're good at that sort of thing. Get in the Miss Black Illinois Pageant. And for the national pageant, for the Miss Black America Pageant, oh, my goodness, half my family drove. My Uncle, Carneil, I don't know if it was his van or he rented something, but I couldn't believe how many of them drove to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to see me in this pageant. And I, whenever--because there have been a lot of times where I've been on my own, and certainly in Los Angeles [California], which was a, a frightening place for me many times. I've always kept that image of looking out in to the audience and seeing the people who love me, and they're always there with me. I, I fill empty, empty chairs with them when I'm on stage and when I'm on a sound stage, and so I never feel alone. They, I, I, I can't imagine them being much more supportive than they've been, once they came around. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99282 Speaker 1: Well, before I ask the last question, I always give people a chance to say something that I have not asked about or--and I, I don't--is there anything that I haven't asked about, or is something that you want to mention that we haven't covered? Speaker 2: I don't know. I, I hope that before I'm in the ground, I will have gotten a lot of my projects that are, have been on the backburner to, to the front burner and, and into the world. I have a, a big project called "In Black World," based on a character, Chrissy, that I do. And Chrissy, and I think we talked about Chrissy earlier, but she's this six-year-old, you know, who, who just, um, thinks that everything, um, for black people should, should be good and, and better, and that, um, black people should have money and stuff and feel, um, um good about themselves and not be scared of the white people, 'cause why would you be scared of some white people. So, I want, I want the world to know Chrissy. I want bring Chrissy out. I want Chrissy to kick Barbie's butt and to have little black girls know that they're okay. Story_ID: 99283 Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who recognized the value of family and elders in a time where neither had a whole lot of respect. I would like to be recognized as the person who brought Chrissy to the world and the empowerment of black people through the eyes of a, a little black girl. And I would like to be remembered as a person who wasn't afraid to risk career, success, bank account to speak up for her, her, her larger family. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you..