 Story_ID: 372699 Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers, I will be the interviewer today. And this is Neculai Burghelea the videographer, he will be the videographer today (laughter). Speaker 2: Hey, how about that (laughter). Hi. Speaker 1: So, I will just have you state your name and spell it out for me? Speaker 2: Okay, I'm-- Speaker 1: Your full name? Speaker 2: Yes, Marjorie Ann Moon [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon], M-A-R-J-O-R-I-E, Ann is A-N-N, Moon, M-O-O-N. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: Five, fourteen, forty-six [May 14, 1946]. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Kokomo, Indiana. Speaker 1: Kokomo, who do you spell Kokomo? Speaker 2: K-O-K-O-M-O, Indiana. Speaker 1: Kokomo, gotcha. Speaker 2: Right, Aretha Franklin's (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And your--today's date? Speaker 2: Is January 25th, 2007. Speaker 1: The address of this interview? Speaker 2: At Billie Holiday Theatre in Restoration Plaza [Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Plaza, New York, New York], that's 1368 Fulton Street. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: And the--your occupation? What do you consider yourself (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a theater producer. That's what I am. Speaker 1: A theater producer. Speaker 2: A theater producer, director. Yeah. Story_ID: 372700 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you five People magazine type questions. And simple short answers. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: The color purple? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbeque chicken. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Peace, wherever I can find it. Seriously. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring, spring, where everything is growing and in bloom. Oh yeah, spring. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You can do it. Speaker 1: Do you hear yourself saying that often? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I have to say it. And we say it, we--my sister [Joyce Moon Howard] and I say it to my mother [Ruth Black Moon]. And we just reinforcing what we know she's about and what she can do. So you can do it. Story_ID: 372701 Speaker 1: What's your mother's full name? Speaker 2: Ruth Naomi Black Moon [Ruth Black Moon]. Speaker 1: And her place of birth? Speaker 2: Kokomo, Indiana. Speaker 1: And do you know her date of birth? Speaker 2: Sure, December 20th, 1919. Interesting, she didn't know until she turned sixty-one that she was actually turning sixty-two. She (laughter) didn't know her--you know, it was amazing, but we--we got it straight now. Speaker 1: So, she grew up then in Kokomo? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you any stories about growing up in the 1920s in Kokomo? Speaker 2: Yeah, they--one that I remember is that their house was quarantined. She had three sisters older than she, a mother and father [Frank Black], and their house was quarantined because they had typhoid fever. You know, they didn't have all the vaccinations that they do now. And diphtheria of the throat, the swelling of the throat. The horrible pictures I saw. And so I remember that. And their father had been at work and so he was outside of the quarantine, and he would just come and slip things through an open window that they would leave for food and that sort of--it was a horrible time so it seemed. But they made it through, each of them made it through. Speaker 1: Now did they live--was Kokomo divided like most towns in the country as far as race in black section and white section? Speaker 2: I would think so, although the whole racial situation, I didn't hear a lot about that. They belonged to a church that was just down the street. They went to school. Their mother was ill most of my mother's memory. They're not sure what she had, but my mother's mother passed when my mom was eighteen. So she remembers growing up and seeing her mother bedridden. I heard a lot about that. And, but they were--they were taught the Bible and they, all sisters were biblical names. Speaker 1: What are the sister's names? Speaker 2: Martha [Martha Black], Mary [Mary Black], Esther [Esther Black] and Ruth. And so they--they lived a good life. They had a beautiful backyard. They had--it was fairly sizeable. And they had grape vineyards, and--and just kind of a magical backyard for the girls to have in the back. That's what my grandfather made for them. So it was a nice time. They remember it as really quite beautiful and--and wonderful. And--and mother after her mother, Edna [Edna Black], passed, my mother's oldest sister, Martha, brought up my mother during her teen years. And she--my mother's aunt--my Aunt Martha is ninety-five now, she's still living, and my mother's eighty-seven, so there's not that much difference in their age. But back then when they were teenagers, it--it was a difference and--and my Aunt Martha really raised her and that's how she remembers it. Good times. Story_ID: 372702 Speaker 1: And what about your father? Speaker 2: My father was born and raised in the house that he lived in for years. And we're trying to sell that house right now as a matter of fact (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that in Kokomo [Indiana] also? Speaker 2: No, it was in Cleveland. My father was in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Cleveland, Ohio? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cleveland, Ohio. Yeah, there's not just one Cleveland is there. Speaker 1: So your father's full name? Speaker 2: William Moon. Speaker 1: And his date of birth do you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was December the 23rd, three days apart they thought in the same year, 1920. Yeah, so my mother's [Ruth Black Moon] 1919 and my father's 1920. Speaker 1: And what did your father say about having grown up in Cleveland during the '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: He would say well, the Italians lived down the street on the (laughter) corner and whether they were nice or not to him. I mean he seems to--my father, and we'd tease him about this, but he identifies people in terms of what their nationalities (laughter) are. And he sold papers when he was a young kid and he remembers that his friend that sold papers with him was an Italian kid and the--his friend could come over to my father's house, but he couldn't go over to their house. And for whatever reasons, at one point, it slipped and he was over in their house. And--and my father talks about how they were talking Italian and the little--his little friend and the father and the father was really, really angry. He realized that he wasn't that welcome there. But he remembers being kind of alone. He has an older sister [Gladys Moon] who's still living, she's ninety-three. Speaker 1: Wow, so there's longevity in the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have a lot of incredible longevity in our family. And so, he took violin lessons. He remembers taking music lessons. And he remembers not getting a lot of good input from his parents [Anna Moon and William Moon]. I mean, they weren't terribly encouraging of music, which he really seemed to be interested in and, and the arts. And they weren't terribly encouraging of that. And his father, I guess rightly so back then said, "How you're gonna make a living? How you're gonna make a living? What do you do with a (laughter) violin?" You know, so. Speaker 1: Just gotta put food on the table. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: So, how far back can you trace your family's history or have you traced your family's history? Speaker 2: We--we have not. We know that the Daniels, my grandmother's maiden name was Daniels and of course my grandfather-- Speaker 1: This is your mother's parents? Speaker 2: That's my father's side. And my father's father was also from Atlanta, Georgia. So, we--we haven't traced it. It--it seems as though and it's unfortunate, but there wasn't a lot of communication with my father and his grandfather and so forth, and he said back then you just really weren't supposed to ask questions. And my mother being the youngest, even though her--two of her sisters are still, of the three, are still living, does not have a great deal of information about her side either. So, it's not something that we've abandoned, but we haven't been pursuing it yet. But, but that's gonna come because I'm very much interested in it. Speaker 1: So, do you know any stories about legends within the family? Do you know whether or not there had been slaves in the family or? Speaker 2: Oh yeah and I--and I know that my father's grandfather was extremely tall, thin, they say mean and--and my father says I never saw him smile. And he only said one thing to me once, "You wanna copper, buddy?" (Laughter) And he gave it, you know, my father wasn't sure what a copper was, but he was talking to him and so he said yeah, and he flipped him a penny. And I guess it was something. But it--men didn't smile much back then and they didn't share embraces with their children back then. And--and I believe--or many stories, and I believe it's because of how the families were so pulled apart during slavery. And--and the lack of--of trust and you just couldn't allow yourself to feel those kind of feelings. So, in many ways I've tried through the theater to explore that on the stage because I think that that's a broken aspect of who we are as a people. And I believe that that's what keeps--that holds us back. But we can talk about that later. But that--that has that seed there and--and--and a--and I've been exploring it most of my life. Story_ID: 372703 Speaker 1: So you were born in 1946. Prior to that, at some point, do your parents [Ruth Black Moon and William Moon] move to New York [New York] or you--I mean, were you raised in New York or were you raised in Kokomo [Indiana]? Speaker 2: I was raised in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: In Cleveland, okay. Speaker 2: Ohio. Yeah, I was just eight months. My father was stationed near Kokomo, Indiana in World War II [WWII] for the [U.S.] Navy Band. He was in the first all-black Navy Band. Speaker 1: So, then he did become a musician? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah he did, I didn't think of it like-- Speaker 1: What did he play in the band? Speaker 2: Trombone. Speaker 1: Trombone, okay. Speaker 2: And then he taught music, so he did get to--I didn't think of it quite like that. But you're hearing it that way allows you to feed it back to me that way. That's wonderful. Yeah, he did become a musician, trombone, left the violin alone. And they met, my father met my mom, and really through friends of her older sisters in Kokomo. And they met, they got married there, and I was born there. And then they came to Cleveland eight months after I was born. Speaker 1: So, tell me what stories you know about your father being in the Navy's band and it being the first black or African American division of that band or one of the first (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--well I can say that he made life-long friends. He made friends that he worked with in the Cleveland public school system. He worked with at a community theater called Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] when he had a band there. And one of the people in the band, Rufus [ph.] is his first name, I don't remember, he's passed now. But he spoke at my parents' fiftieth wedding anniversary. And so I'm talking about life-long friends, you know. They, they banded together. Of course they had to eat and sleep together. They--they could not be outside of their (laughter) barracks as it were. And traveling back and forth coming to see my mother was--was not easy. You really had to walk 'cause you didn't have any mode of transportation, you had to be careful walking. But it was worth it to see Ruth Naomi Black (laughter). So, those are some of the stories and just a-- Speaker 1: Who taught him to play the trombone? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, you know, I don't know. I--I never--I never really--I never asked him who taught him to play the trombone. I think it was--I don't know, that's--that's--that's amazing, that's--that's amazing. Speaker 1: But he was able to go on and make a living? Speaker 2: I will ask him, I'm able to still ask him. Speaker 1: Yeah, able to still ask. And so he was able to go on and make a career in the music industry? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he-- Speaker 1: And by that I mean being in the Navy Band, being able to play music for a living and then do--so, go ahead you-- Speaker 2: He became a teacher in the Cleveland public school system, much later. Speaker 1: Did he teach music? Speaker 2: Yeah, and had a marching band, yeah. He had many jobs in the interim. Speaker 1: Okay, and then he was the--the band director also of the marching band? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, that--it--it--it was really, really wonderful. I'm gonna have to ask him who taught him how to play the trombone, thank you for that. I cannot believe that I didn't ask him that. It--it's amazing, you know. Speaker 1: So, then he be--when he was the band director he was at one of the local high schools or junior high schools? Speaker 2: He was--he was junior high and high school, and there was a gap between getting married and coming to Cleveland with his first child and having three more subsequently. He worked at the post office. You know, he--he joined the National Guard. He--he had at least three jobs at the same time. Then he went to school. He earned his bachelor's [degree] and two master's [degrees]. Speaker 1: Was he the first to go to college in the family? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Story_ID: 372704 Speaker 1: His [Moon's father, William Moon] sister, my aunt [Gladys Moon], went to Meharry Medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. She became an aunt--she became a nurse (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Doctor--or nurse, okay. Speaker 1: Nurse, she became a nurse and she was head of one of the first black nursing associations in Cleveland, Ohio. And she lives with us now. She--we have one of her early nursing hats from the 1930s and it's up on the hutch so she can look at it. She's very proud of that. She was a psychiatric nurse for a while, and worked in the post office. And she has been a nurse, in fact, she worked at a nursing home for more than twenty years during her whole career which must've spanned fifty years and--in nursing. And she, in the last two years before moving to New York, she became a resident of the nursing home that she was at (laughter) for twenty years. It's amazing. I just told her, I said, "It's a good thing you treated those people nicely," (laughter) you know. Speaker 2: Does she ever talk about and have any stories about going to Meharry in Tennessee or? Speaker 1: Yeah, she loved it of course. It seems like they--they were sponges for knowledge and they believed in education and they couldn't get enough. And very sheltered and--and--and lived very lady-like lives. She lived--she lived in a boarding house and I'm sure that only blacks were there. And she wanted to date this doctor, you know, this--this med school student who was getting ready to be a doctor. And the boarding lady said, "No you can't do that. You--you just cannot do that, young ladies don't do that." And as she tells it, it was years later she found out that this doctor was either so smitten or thought so highly of her that he put money in a trust fund for her. That she found out about, this was in the '40s [1940s] and she found out about it in the '90s [1990s]. It was worth a good deal. And I tease her something terrible. I said, "Are you sure you didn't go--get to go (laughter) out with him or." I said, "I don't know of any man who would do that." Of course she denies it profusely, but that--that's a wonderful story. That's an incredible story, you know. Speaker 2: Wow. So, she got to reap the benefits of that trust sitting there for forty years. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, someone that, you know, she just saw in passing, would see at the library or--or whatever. It was--was a very different world then, very different life then, you know. Story_ID: 372705 Speaker 1: So, you were telling me that your father [William Moon] got his bachelor's [degree]. What did he get his bachelor's degree in? Speaker 2: In education. And a master's [degree] in education and music. Speaker 1: So you're from a long line of educators? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, my mother [Ruth Black Moon] also after having all four of her children, she went back to college because she interrupted her schooling. She went back to college at forty-nine, got her bachelor's and her master's in early childhood education. So it's-- Speaker 1: And what did she do after that? Speaker 2: She began teaching in the public schools and she developed the program, along with some other individuals called Words in Color. Teaching people how to read through color and association. Well, it's done in music, you know. But it was really quite successful in Cleveland [Ohio], and she was really pleased about it. And--but to be able to start back at forty-nine, especially back then and--and go through. It was really wonderful. But they would be typing--my mother would be typing my father's papers and they would be helping each other, it was really wonderful. And I--and I think it was a time when they were really flourishing because they still had their youth and vigor, and they were learning. Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about what had been their challenges? Speaker 2: Their challenges were raising four kids. Speaker 1: Now list the four kids in the order that they came? Speaker 2: Okay, Marjorie [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon]-- Speaker 1: You're the oldest? Speaker 2: Yes, and then there's Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard] and my brother, William [William Moon] who passed in '98 [1998], and my sister Madonna [Madonna Moon]. Yeah, four of us. And so they were raising four children. My father working at least two jobs and going to Kent State [Kent State University] in Kent State, Ohio [sic. Kent, Ohio]. You know, that's where the massacre was. And-- Speaker 1: Was he there during--during that time, no? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no he wasn't. He preceded that, you know, time. That was in the '70s [1970s], yeah I think so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But he went back in? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, he--but-- Speaker 1: He was going back and forth? Speaker 2: I mean understand, he's eighty-six years old (laughter). So, so, to go back after you got married and had some kids, it's--it's still just in the '50s [1950s] and (laughter) '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Right, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: It just is. It just is. Story_ID: 372706 Speaker 1: So, what are your earliest memories of growing up in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Being in my grandmother's [Anna Moon] backyard. She lived about, this is my father's mother. She lived about a block and a half from us in the house where she had my father and his sister [Gladys Moon], the nurse. And--and being back there--'cause it was a big yard and she bought us swings. And so we loved to be there. My sister and I, we're just two and a half years apart. So we got to play a lot together and--and it was wonderful times. And we just--my grandmother truly favored me and would take me shopping, and so I enjoyed it. I got to a point wherein I felt well, gee my sister needs to share in some of this and so I said, well gee I don't wanna go unless Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard] can go and she can get something too. So, we--we would go together. It was just--it was good times, it was good times (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go where, where would you go? Speaker 2: We would go up Superior [Avenue], which was just about three blocks away. Speaker 1: Was Superior the black main strip? Speaker 2: In that section, yes. Yeah, and we would go shopping. And we would--my sister tells me that we couldn't eat at the counter. Speaker 1: Then it wasn't the black section of town. Speaker 2: It, oh it was the black section, yeah. I mean, well it was a black section, but the store owners were not black. And they conducted in a certain way. Speaker 1: And you couldn't eat at the counter? Speaker 2: No. And it's interesting because I--it--it didn't affect me the way it seemed to affect her because I was getting the hamburger, she was getting the hot dog (laughter). And it didn't seem to have the same effect on me, 'cause I didn't remember initially not being able to, to do that. And it's interesting. I mean we're talking about, I'm seven and she's four and a half, five and in that period of time, you know. And I just I guess it kind of went off my back. My--my grandmother didn't seem to make a big thing of it, she would be the one taking us. And kept us kind of protected. But my sister has that haunting memory of it and that impression of it, wh- which I don't have. And that's--that--that's interesting. I--it's kind of the way I deal with almost anything that's negative. Speaker 1: Which is? Speaker 2: Which is to try to flip it off of my back and not dwell on it. That's good and bad, I've come to learn. But it's--it's kept me, yeah. Speaker 1: It's kept you? Speaker 2: Yeah, it--it's kept me from ulcers and internal anger that eats up at you, and it--it's allowed me to proceed sometimes bullheadedly no matter what. Speaker 1: Because I'm sure you must've encountered it much later in building this theater? I mean, we'll get to that when it comes. Story_ID: 372707 Speaker 1: We'll go back to describing the block that you lived on [in Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. I remember in growing up there was--there was--it was a narrow block and we had to go upstairs. It was a small house that we lived in. We had to put out the sofa for--which was a sofa bed for my sister [Joyce Moon Howard] and I to sleep on. And my parents [Ruth Black Moon and William Moon] had a one bedroom, one bathroom right off of the kitchen. And we had nice neighbors and I remember having very nice neighbors across the street. We would always say hello to them and wave at them. They didn't have children, but they were very, very nice neighbors. And then right next door, there was a little storefront church. And my mother made us go there. It had issues. It--there was a dirt floor which was damp and wet, and smelled (laughter). But my mother felt compassion for these two women that ran the church and she make us go. And oh, we've talked about it recently. It was really quite (laughter) grueling and, so, I remember that. Speaker 1: Did she go to church? Speaker 2: She didn't go to church there. We went to our regular church, but this was like in the evenings and this was like Sunday late afternoon and-- Speaker 1: Well, talk to me about the regular church? Where was that located? Speaker 2: Oh, that was Werner Church [Werner United Methodist Church, Cleveland, Ohio]. That was about ten blocks away. And--and it was interesting. It was all--it was a young church back then. It was--it was fairly new, Werner United Methodist Church. And all the couples seemed to be young and with young children, and--and that was nice. And our--our pastor was wonderful, Reverend Brooks [ph.]. And we enjoyed it. We had to clean up the church on Saturday afternoons, after we cleaned up our house. My parents had gone grocery shopping. We were then to go clean up the church. The church was cold and we'd have to go up to the second floor where they had the bible studies and it was cold. And we didn't wanna go, but they made us go and, you know, it's a good thing to do, we're giving back to God and this place has to be cleaned. And I couldn't figure out though why they always had to beg for coal, you know, to heat the church. The church, the paint was crumbling and I couldn't understand how God's house could be in that kind of condition. So, I had real problems, real issues with it. But that's what I remember. You know, our Saturdays, you know, we really wanted to play or do other things, but we had to go clean the church. But, but it was good because you remember it and you remember that there was structure. There--you know, you had a schedule. Story_ID: 372708 Speaker 1: What were holidays like in the household? Speaker 2: Oh wonderful, wonderful. I just felt guilty after I found out about Santa Claus, which my sister under me, Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard], told me about when I was eight. So there, she's five and a half, six, she knows. She's telling me and I'm angry at her because-- Speaker 1: That there is no Santa Claus? Speaker 2: That there's no Santa Claus. And why, because then I mean I knew the circumstances to an extent of what our family was in, and-- Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, if it's your parents who are buying the gifts, you can't really want gifts in all consciousness if you know they're buying it and they really can't afford to. So that's why I was really upset. But there was one Christmas before I knew that it was like magic land. We went and--and it just--it--they had decorated it so beautifully. And I had my favorite doll that I had really wanted I'd seen in the store and I had everything I could want. I think my brother [William Moon] had a bicycle and maybe it was a tricycle, yes it was tricycle. And it was wonderful, it was like magic. And I was just so happy. And my parents [Ruth Black Moon and William Moon], my mother in particular remembers that, because we just went on and on about it and we were so happy. So looking back, I know she must've--they must've got a lot out of that moment because we really, I know I was yelling all over the place. It--it was really quite wonderful. Speaker 1: Do you remember the doll you got? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah I do remember that doll. I do remember that doll. Speaker 1: Was she black or white? Speaker 2: She was white. She was white. I loved her nonetheless. And if I'm not mistaken the way I remember it now, my father sat on that doll (laughter). My father sa- and I shrieked and of course he was, "What's wrong?" I mean (laughter). I, so, yeah he sat on the doll. Of course if your father sits and when your father's big--if your father sits on the doll, the doll's dead. And so the doll couldn't live anymore for me. Isn't that amazing? And of course I remember that very well. I think it's my ability to enable inanimate objects to have life as kids do and understand what that is. I think that, you know, bodes well for my creativity and going into the theater, because my sister couldn't do those kind of things. My sister could not pretend and imagine in that kind of way. And--and to this day, you know, she really, really doesn't. She understands what it was, but it--it's just amazing how you can grow up in the same household and--and you can take on these different kinds of personalities and aspect of you. Story_ID: 372709 Speaker 1: My sister, we were in my [paternal] grandmother's [Anna Moon] backyard, my sister Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard], and I guess I was five and a half, closing in on six and so she had to be about four. And we were having a tea party (laughter). And of course we had to have the little cookies and the cookies were made from what was in the backyard (laughter). Speaker 2: Mud cakes. Speaker 1: Mud cakes. So I'm enticing her, you know, I mean, you know, we know we don't really have tea but we're pretending like we're drinking tea. And so I'm (sound) with the--with the cookies. And, "Oh you should have some of this Joyce, it's so good, isn't this good, it's even better." She ate it. And as and just (laughter) told, I said we were playing, we were playing. But she--it's either real or it's not real with my sister Joyce. And she now, she's at Columbia University [New York, New York], associate professor and also a researcher. Serious, serious. Speaker 2: It's all real. Speaker 1: It's all real, yeah. It's all real (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, tell me about-- Story_ID: 372710 Speaker 1: --It's all real (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, tell me about Easters, Easter Sunday? Speaker 1: Easter-- Speaker 2: Or--and then leading up to Easter Sunday, did you have a Easter speech, do you know what an Easter speech is? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you didn't have to ask about that. I don't know what was wrong with me back then, but I didn't like performing with my sister Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard] and William [William Moon], my brother. I just didn't think they were good enough, (laughter), can you believe that. Can you believe it? My mother [Ruth Black Moon] made me perform with them. And--and I just--I was really devastated. I'm not sure where I got that attitude from. I really, I really don't know to this day, but I remember being just--just, just so embarrassed and just so humiliated and just (laughter). And they knew it, but they wanted to do it and they were trying to please me and we just, so yes I know about the Easter speech and I know about the Christmas pageant and all of those, and the mock wedding, the little Tom Thumb weddings. I know. Speaker 2: Tell me about the mock wedding, the Tom Thumb wedding. Speaker 1: It was done in church. I'm not even sure why except that the adults thought it would be a cute thing to do. And--and I just thought it was ridiculous (laughter). Speaker 2: Because, you know, I've seen those pictures of like little black kids look in these wedding dress, looking like, but I didn't know that it was a part of church and it was called a Tom Thumb wedding. Speaker 1: Oh you didn't know it was Tom Thumb, huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, thank you. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I--it--it--I have--I never saw no purpose for it. No purpose whatsoever. Speaker 2: Do you remember any of the speeches you had to recite on Easter Sunday? Speaker 1: No. No, I really don't. I just--and I'm not sure why I had that attitude. I'm gonna talk to my sister and see if she has any conclusion other than the fact that I didn't think they were up to snuff. Speaker 2: What about the clothes, did you get a new Easter dress, Easter dress (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, and you just prayed of course that it would be a beautiful sunny day, because you wouldn't be allowed to wear your patent leather shoes if it rained. You'd have to wear an old pair of shoes. And of course, you know, and you couldn't wear your hat, and you know, you just looked forward to that. Dress up was wonderful. Hanging hairdos with a little hat and you know, that--that was just--that's just what it was. Speaker 2: So, let's talk about like July 4th, was that a big holiday in and--did you do a big barbeque or? Speaker 1: No. Unh-uh. Speaker 2: What about family reunions, were there--when you were a child were there any? Speaker 1: They--not when I was a child. But as a teenager, you know, my paren- my mother and her sisters decided we're gonna have family reunions. Speaker 2: And we'll get to that. Story_ID: 372711 Speaker 1: So, we'll go back a little bit 'cause I wanna talk about early, your early schooling, education. Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: Rosedale Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio], which--which was wonderful because there I met an incredible talent. Her name was Thom- is Thomasina Davis [ph.], piano play--pianist, drama teacher. My love for acting and theater really blossomed there. Speaker 1: Was she African American? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Thomasina Davis. Speaker 1: How do you spell Thomasina. Speaker 2: T-H-O--it's Thomas-ina. Speaker 1: Sina, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And--and she was wonderful, she was brilliant. And we formed or she formed with us a--a little singing group and we would tour community centers, senior citizen centers sometimes in the evening after school and I loved it. We did six-part harmony and one of the girls who was in the group became, later became a member of The Shirelles. I mean we thought we were hot. I mean, we were just 11 years old, 10, 11, 12 years old. And, and so I guess that's what made us special. We went around and Miss Davis would, would get us back home or get one of the parents to get us back home. One time I was sent home in a cab and it was about 11:30 at night. And my mother [Ruth Black Moon] said, that's it, that's it. I cried and I, oh. And Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio], Karamu House is the oldest African American performing arts center in the United States formed by the Jelliffes [Russell Jelliffe and Rowena Jelliffe] who were, I don't know what their nationality was, they weren't African American, in 1915. And so, it--it is a wonderful center. Minnie Gentry, Ron O'Neal who played Super Fly [Youngblood Priest] was there. The guy who played Benson, why can't I remember his name right now, [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume was there. I saw him in 'Guys and Dolls' in Cleveland [Ohio] on Karamu Houses' stage. And then when I came to New York [New York] in the '70s [1970s] I saw him in 'Guys and Dolls' on Broadway. I mean it was--it was wonderful, incredible talent, I mean a sense of belonging. Langston Hughes' first plays 'cause he lived about two blocks away. All of his first plays, his simple plays, oh that 'Tambourines to Glory' [Langston Hughes] was done at Karamu House before it was done anyplace else and it was really wonderful. And I was there, I was part of their drama department. Thomasina Davis was there. And I-- Speaker 1: How did you get into that drama department at Karamu (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, because of the school. Because of elementary school, Rosedale. Speaker 1: Rosedale, was it somehow attached to it? Speaker 2: Well, not attached to it. She, Thomasina Davis, was there as my teacher and so she plucked us and said come, you know, we'll perform more. So I was part of a children's theater there and it was wonderful, wonderful, wonderful. Speaker 1: So that was the breeding ground for you becoming-- Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure it was. Although at five I knew because I saw a performance in our school, at Rosedale. Speaker 1: The first performance you saw? Speaker 2: It was of marionettes. It was marionettes. We were in kindergarten sitting on the floor watching these marionettes, and it was like magic. Speaker 1: Where did it take you? Speaker 2: I mean, I was--I was high, I was literally high. I was euphoric. I couldn't believe it. And I remember looking around for just a moment to--to see if any of the kids were feeling what I was feeling. But then I wanted to look right back at what was on stage then because it was--it was so fascinating. I was trying to look at how they were moving and whether they were really talking, you see I thought they were talking, you know. And it was rea- I'd never seen anything like it. I know how important it is for young kids to be able to experience theater and the magic of it, because it is transforming. It does take you to a place that nothing else can. And when you can get it young, you can remember that and, and it helps to help you evolve and go further. It's so important. So, that happened at Rosedale, that's why I smile when I say Rosedale. Speaker 1: So, at Rosedale you were introduced to Karamu House? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And through there you developed within this community theater, were there any other African American, you know, like you mentioned some of them who took you under their wing during that time to help develop you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was really Thomasina Davis-- Speaker 1: Thomasina Davis. Speaker 2: And--and, yeah it was, and it--it was so short lived. It might have been because I was developing. It's a curse for girls back (laughter) back then in--in the '50s [1950s]. And my parents, because we had no transportation and because it was across town, I mean way across town, they took me out. They took me out. Story_ID: 372712 Speaker 1: So, what sights, sounds or smells remind you of that era, that time in your life? Speaker 2: I guess it's peppermint (laughter). It's just being tremendously alive and--and hopeful, and excited about living. I was aware of my entire being. I mean from the bottom of my feet to top of my head, everything was just so, so on. It was--it was just a lot of colors. And I remember not being able to make friends somehow, and I wanted to make friends. I even got in trouble telling my mother [Ruth Black Moon], oh I didn't do well in--in English, I've gotta stay after school and I was really going over to another girl's house, you know, just to play, just--just to try to be a part of it. There didn't seem to be time to make friends. And--and in a way we were kind of kept, my sister [Joyce Moon Howard] and I, kind of kept isolated. It was for our protection. Parents didn't know any better. Story_ID: 372713 Speaker 1: Before we move on to your high school years [at Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], can you tell me when it was that you remember either being told or becoming aware that you were black, in a sense that, you know, you're black (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I know exactly when, I was six years old at Rosedale [Rosedale Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]. I had two friends, Rhonda [ph.] and Kenneth [ph.]. And every May 23rd, I'll wake up and say, "Oh Happy Birthday Rhonda and Kenneth." And--and they were white. And, so one day we were walking home from school. They lived two blocks from where I lived and so we could walk the same way. And about six really big guys, I think they were high schoolers. You know, when you're six years old, you don't have to be but so old to be bigger than what we were at the time. And they surrounded us. They surrounded us and it looked like they had a gun. I--I really didn't know what a real gun looked like, so. "Ah, okay. We'll keep the nigger, let's let these other two go. We'll keep the nigger." I got so happy, I got so happy, "Oh my name's Margie [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon], I'm not nigger. My name's Margie. You got the wrong person." You know, and it was the oddest thing, and I was convinced they had the wrong person until they left. I mean, they--in other words I guess it was no fun for them because I was not intimidated, scared by what they were saying, because I thought they had the wrong person, you know. And then, Rhonda and Kenneth said to me as we were walking, as they left us and we walked on--continued to walk on, "You know, Margie we don't think of you as any different. You know, you--you've always been our friend, we don't--." I'm thinking, what are they talking about? And so I went home, "Mommy [Ruth Black Moon] what is a nigger?" Six years old. And the shame. I mean, my friends knew something about me that I didn't know. And--and mother also knew something about it and I'm--I'm not--I'm saying, my goodness, it--it makes you feel extremely insecure because there--there's something that--there's something about you and somehow you feel like it's just you when you're that young too, you know. And--and there's something about you. And the other thing that was really kind of--kind of horrible was that, my mother is very fair. And my father [William Moon] is a little browner then myself and oh, more, yeah browner than me. And so, then I began to get into the color thing. Just instantaneously, all of that began to seem to happen and I became aware of it. And it--it--it really is, it's unfortunate. It's a very negative thing. Speaker 1: How did you become over the color thing, what--explain it to me? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: That she was lighter, so she was better than he was because he was darker? Speaker 2: Well, at least she was getting closer to the, to the color of choice obviously where that was favored. I mean, you know, what did I know? I mean, I'm trying to understand this and I'm not sure why she's like that and my father's different, you know. And--and my mother, in her family too, she has a--her older sister and she look alike, and then she has two very ebony other sisters. And so, I--I began to--to wonder what that was about. And her father [Frank Black] was very fair and had--when I see him he'd have this gray beard and this gray hair, and I thought he was Santa Claus. I mean, you know, I mean in other words he just--because he looked almost white. So, those things, you know, kids, it's amazing what they can think and, and starts germinating. That's why we gotta work with them when they are young and--and try to bring out questions they might have, because you never know what they're thinking and how they can be thinking wrong. But that was a real turning point, which obviously I remember it because there--there was, you know, there was that fear factor that was in there when they first surrounded us as children. And then I'm thinking, what do they mean, they don't see me as different because I had never seen myself as different. It's amazing that perception, that gets in your head and it can really do some damage. Yeah. So, yeah, I--I remember (laughter). Story_ID: 372714 Speaker 1: So you moved into high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], was there a big transition from moving from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I needed to kind of go to junior high school. Speaker 1: Junior high, yeah, I'm saying was there a big transition from elementary [Rosedale Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] to junior high to high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, because-- Speaker 1: Now you've become a woman. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I don't know, I guess so. But in junior high school I started playing the double bass. The double bass in which got me a scholarship, a four-year scholarship in college [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. So, junior high school-- Speaker 1: Now, double bass, is that clarinet? Speaker 2: No it's (demonstrates playing a bass). Speaker 1: Double bass, oh you mean upright. Speaker 2: The string bass. Speaker 1: The string bass, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I--of course, music was in our lives. We had to play an instrument. And I played vio-- Speaker 1: Now, why was that so? Speaker 2: My father [William Moon]-- Speaker 1: Because he was the band director. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was a musician himself. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So you had to. Speaker 1: So we--I mean we grew up with that also. (Laughter) And it seems to be a common thing among, you know, certain generation of African Americans is that you had to play an instrument. Speaker 2: Yeah, isn't that something (laughter). And later on, when I began dating, if a guy came to the door, what instrument do you play? Can you believe that, I mean they had to play instruments too? It was just bizarre. Speaker 1: So how did you select the upright bass? Speaker 2: It kind of selected me. I was playing the violin which I didn't like, but my father said, "That's the instrument we have and that's what you're gonna play." I really wanna play the piano. But that's what we got, that's what you play. And I'm--I've always been large and I have large hands, and the junior high school band teacher said, you know, he needed some double bass players. And so, you know, he's looking at my hands and he said, "You could probably do well on that. Why don't you try it?" I looked at the double bass and (laughter)--I just told my father this recently, I mean recently, probably within the last year and he was mortified. I said, "I started the double bass to get attention." I said, "It was very different, there weren't any other girls playing it and the boys helped me carry it." He couldn't believe I said that. But I did. And it's, it's really true, I'm really glad, I enjoyed it immensely. And went on to do better than I even thought, you know, because it wasn't the most important thing, theater was really the thing. Speaker 1: And were you--were you still involved in theater in junior high school when you started the double bass. Speaker 2: No, no, I was snatched out. Speaker 1: And that 11:30 cab ride was the thing that snatched you out of theater and singing? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're playing the up- the double bass when you're in junior high school. Who were the teachers that inspired you during this period in junior high school? Speaker 2: Well, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because I'm assuming Thomasina [Thomasina Davis (ph.)] was out of the picture? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she was out of the picture. Story_ID: 372715 Speaker 1: So, I was playing the bass and I was studying with someone from the Cleveland Orchestra. At--at that time, Cleveland was one of the top five orchestras in the country. And-- Speaker 2: Who were you studying with? Speaker 1: Mr. Barnoff, Harry Barnoff. And he was very good and I became good. And at fifteen years old, I became the youngest person in the Cleveland Women's Orchestra. The Cleveland Women's Orchestra was made up of a lot of women who were wives to the men in the Cleveland Orchestra, but they didn't allow women in the Cleveland Orchestra. So, it was really pretty good. Speaker 2: So, that was called the Cleveland--? Speaker 1: Women's Orchestra. And--and I really enjoyed it because we got to play some--some wonderful symphonies by Tchaikovsky [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] and Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and Brahms [Johannes Brahms], and Sibelius [Jean Sibelius], I'd never heard of Sibelius. And--and I loved it. It--it--it was empowering. And I mean to--to hear the French horns and the trombones and all those violins, I mean I'm thinking of the Sibelius number now and it--it--I really, really enjoyed it. We got to wear gowns when we did our concerts at Severance Hall [Cleveland, Ohio], which is a major hall in the country. Not like Carnegie [Carnegie Hall, New York, New York], but it's, the comparable Carnegie Hall in Cleveland, Ohio. And so, that--that--that was really--that was nice. Story_ID: 372716 Speaker 1: So, you transitioned into high school relatively easy from junior high school did you--? Speaker 2: I went to--I went to Collinwood High School [Cleveland, Ohio], which was kind of racist. Speaker 1: Now was that because of the '54 [1954] ruling and schools were integrated and they bused you to Collinwood? Speaker 2: We weren't bused. We weren't bused. But I did go on a bus, but we were not bused, all the kids together. I went to Collinwood, fast thing that I was. I went there because of the music emphasis, but I just loved this guy (laughter). And he was going to Collinwood, because he was very smart. And they had major work there and all that, but that's really why I went. And--and I was good at the bass, but that was not my emphasis. Speaker 1: You said the school was very racist? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they were. And I was kicked down the stairs. You know, the stairs were crowded, you know, in high school, all these, you know, you go up the stairs going to classes and all like that. And I say kicked, I was really tripped and you know, it was denied and you know, they didn't make anything of it. I didn't even know who it was. I was just falling down the stairs. But I made it okay. I mean it, it-- Speaker 1: How many black students were at Collinwood? Sizeable number? Speaker 2: No, no, no. You were either there for major work, you know, accelerated class study, which I was not there for or music, and I was there for the music, and for Bruce [ph.] (laughter). It's crazy. Speaker 1: More Bruce than music or the music Bruce made you hear (laughter). Speaker 2: What can I say? It, it was part of who I was and--and so, I didn't really have friends or anything. I--I rehearsed. I went to White Castle and had lunch with Bruce and I went home. Story_ID: 372717 Speaker 1: Now, during this time you're a senior in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and graduation is approaching, are you thinking about which universities you're going to apply to and who's helping you with that decision? Speaker 2: I--her first name was Geraldine. No one was really helping me with the decision according to my father [William Moon] who really thought it was astounding. In the guidance counselor office and--Geraldine Harpo [ph.] was the guidance counselor, and it was posted up there, music scholarships, auditions. I told my father about it. I said, "I'm gonna audition for a music scholarship at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]." I knew that I needed to get the scholarship money. I knew that my--I was the oldest of the family, I didn't wanna put a financial burden on them. So, I got the--the scholarship. I mean, it was a whole big thing and going down to audition for the scholarship. But my father was amazed that I even--I pursued it. He said, "You pursued it." I said, "Oh really?" (Laughter) I mean, it didn't impress me that much. I just knew okay this is what I must do 'cause I'm not gonna stay home and--and maybe I can get into theater there, you know, because I understand they have a theater department. So, I'm thinking theater, but that's not my way in, music is the way in. You always gotta find a way in. So, it was on a Saturday and we took my little, my father's little Rambler, they don't even make them anymore (laughter). And we put the double bass in the car and my mother [Ruth Black Moon], father, and my sister Joyce [Joyce Moon Howard] and I stuffed in the back seat, sitting like this for 250 miles 'cause the bass was on my shoulder, the double bass, understand it's a big tall instrument. So, we go there and I'm waiting and I'm kind of rehearsing. My father plays the piano for me, you know. And we had been rehearsing and getting a little aria together, and some Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] aria. And my sister comes where we're rehearsing in a private room and says, you know, "They're asking people for the G major scale." We said, "How do you know it's the G major scale?" "It's the G major scale," she says. So I said okay, well it was the G major scale. I don't know, you know, it's unfortunate, I mean, I was the first, I kind of excelled. We didn't even know my sister took lessons and it's so unfair. She took lessons and she really did well too, but they didn't pay a lot of attention to what she was doing. And so she had developed this incredible ear (laughter), and she let us know. So they said, "Okay, one octave," and I played two or three octaves, I've forgotten. "Okay, it's enough, it's enough." And I had kind of told my father, I said okay, when we start playing the aria, you start playing real loud and--and--and he did. And they said can you tone down just a little bit. They stopped us, can you tone down just a little bit. He said okay. He still was too loud, softer, but too loud, and--and we started again. And they said, can you just leave out, you know, jus- just not play at all. And so, but I was okay then. I needed like a jump start, which my father had given me by our own design, and--and I did very well. I did very well, you know. Again, and it's unfortunate, I didn't appreciate it to the extent that my parents did, that obviously the professors did, because I had something else in mind. It was just a part of the design. Speaker 1: Well, what were you thinking you were going to become at this point? What career paths were you going to? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't, all I pursued was getting an education. Being where I could a good education and hoping that I could go to the theater department and audition for some plays. Story_ID: 372718 Speaker 1: Let's go back a little. What do you consider to be your first professional production of a play that you saw? Was it the marionettes? Like where you saw actors, people on the stage, and did those people look like you? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know that answer. I mean, I grew up in the generation where when we finally got a television, we'd say, "Hey, somebody black's on TV." I grew up in that (laughter) generation. And--and so, what--what was the first one. I--well, it was at Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio]. It, you know, I consider that to be professional, and it was at Karamu House. Speaker 1: How do you spell that house? Speaker 2: K-A-R-A-M-U. It was at Karamu House. And--and-- Speaker 1: And then they had black actors? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. It was interracial. Speaker 1: It was interracial. So you, although what was happening outside of the world, you know, in the broader world, United States in light of, you know, Karamu House was presenting something different for you to see. You saw a mix of people on stage? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And, and often it was--it was all black, but I mean it was like the directing staff, the design staff were white (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was black as well or no, white? Speaker 2: White primarily. Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: Sometimes costumes would be a black designer and wardrobe. And--but there were black actors on stage. Speaker 1: So-- Story_ID: 372719 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] was Collinwood [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and then you went to Ohio State? Speaker 2: Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Ohio University. Speaker 2: In Athens, Ohio on that four-year music scholarship. Speaker 1: So you were a music major? Speaker 2: Yeah, music therapy. Speaker 1: Music therapy? Speaker 2: In fact, I think it was the first year that they ever had the course, music therapy. I was very much interested in psychology and it's probably, in terms of what I was seeing with black families, and I wanted to understand what was happening. Speaker 1: Wh- what were you seeing with black families, because now you're only, you're what, eighteen? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, but I still--I still wondered. I mean, my mother's [Ruth Black Moon] family and my father's [William Moon] family seemed so different. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: My mother's family was gentle, soft spoken, got along. My father's family was loud and raucous and argumentative, and did the numbers, and you know, I saw--it was very, very different. And, and--but they were church people, that's for sure. My uncles, my, I should say my great uncle was high in the ushers association. He would always be going to Denver [Colorado] in terms of the church and for their conventions. And so, they were kind of, they were kind of amazing people. But I wondered why the seeming estrangement from my father's grandfather and--and those relationships, so I was just interested somehow and--and-- Speaker 1: Observant. Speaker 2: Yes, observant and wanting to know, and--and wanting to know more about the background. Story_ID: 372720 Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. But before we do, I just wanna mention the three Mississippi boys. Do you remember that or even further back, do you remember Emmett Till? Did that register with you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh Emmett Till, oh yes. I mean, cause his picture-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you were a child. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a child, I was about eight years old, eight, nine years old. And--and his picture was on my [paternal] grandmother's [Anna Moon] kitchen table and we were looking at it. And--and I just, oh it was devastating. It was in the Jet I believe. And it was horrible. And they couldn't answer any of the questions that I was asking. You know, wanting to know how could this--why did this happen--how did, you know. And they didn't seem to answer with the kind of awareness that we would've liked for them to. I mean, it was almost as though well, he should've known not to be, you know, whistling at, you know, this--whew. So, it sent some, and I'm sorry to be so emotional about it, but-- Speaker 1: Oh come on, be emotional, yeah. Speaker 2: I remember, I can really see it. I mean, I--I see the oil cloth on my grandmother--it was checked, white and red, and I saw this picture of this child, this kid. I mean, he was older than I a little bit, but he's still, I mean. You know, and his face was all swollen and I'm saying, you know, it's--but they had to put it in their context. They had to put it wherein it just wouldn't scald their emotions. And--and I do realize that. I'm disappointed that they didn't have another perspective, but I don't think that they emotionally could afford that in terms of where they were and how they were, and all of that. But it did have a terrible effect. Story_ID: 372721 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I would imagine the, so the three students didn't have as much of an effect on you, Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney], what were their names? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. I--I--I'm trying to and it's--it's terrible that--that--the memory. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was Schwerner, Chaney, Goodman [Andrew Goodman]. Goodman, Schwerner and Chaney, yeah. So, being a student yourself, did you ever have any--any--anything within you that wants, says okay I'm going, I wanna go and be a part of this movement, as a student did you feel that? Speaker 2: I didn't to the extent that many do. I--I decided because I was going up for roles that were stereotypical and I decided to have a protest about that. Hey, you know, and I-- Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that. You're at Ohio-- Speaker 2: University, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) University [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. You were telling me it's in the Appalachians [Appalachian Mountains]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. In--in the mountains, in Athens, Ohio, and it's--it's really kind of a hick town. And it really was. I didn't realize, I mean, it's where I got a scholarship. It's where money was available for me to--to pay my way and so that's really why I went there. I--I didn't realize how prejudiced it was. I saw the first hate stare that I was ever conscious of, and I didn't even know at first that it was that. I was in the bookstore, you know, looking at books and really enjoying myself. I was feeling good and I kept going around and I saw this lady, she worked in the bookstore and seemed like every time I looked up, she was looking at me. And I didn't know her, I'd never seen her before at all. So, didn't pay attention at first and then I'd go around still looking and I'd look up, and there she is again. And I'm saying, (laughter) she looks like she--like there's something wrong. Like there's--she looks mad. I don't know. I mean, I had never, I had never seen it before. It had to really kind of sink in. I said oh, oh, that's a hate stare (laughter). You know, it had to occur to me, I was--I was alone, so I wasn't with anybody. I went and paid for my books and was just as pleasant, you know, because it was really her problem. But I said, oh that's what they're talking about. Story_ID: 372722 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you told me before off camera that out of four thousand students-- Speaker 2: Out of fourteen thousand-- Speaker 1: Fourteen thousand. Speaker 2: --there were only five hundred black students at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. And OU was a vast campus, a east green, a west green, south green, and so we're kind of spread out. You know, I joined a sorority and tried to be a part of what they, you know, what the blacks were doing just to try (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which sorority? Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. And--and I joined it really to try to be a part, because as a musician or any other artist, I mean you--you work alone a lot in terms of the practicing, the practicing and practice, and the studying. Speaker 1: So, plus I became, you know, I had my tuition and books paid for, but I needed to eat and sleep. So I had to become a resident director. Well, first a resident assistant. Speaker 2: Well, let me just ask this and it may sound dumb, but were you allowed to live on campus at the time? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so they did have housing for black--the black students? Speaker 1: Yeah, they did, yeah. The housing was integrated, although we all did seem to be in the same quarters. But we were spread out over campus. But--but one thing that I wanted to talk about at that point, in 1968 in that April, I was a resident assistant. That was to pay my room and board, and essentially you keep track of and try to assist the other co-eds in your quarter. Maybe you have two or three quarters. And you're essentially responsible for them. Any problems that they may have being accountable for them and whatever. And so I was told by another resident assistant, who happened to be very blonde and I have nothing against blonde, but there was an attitude about her. I mean, obviously she was white and she came and she told me that Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been shot and killed that night. And that as resident assistants, we were expected to, you know, try to calm any kind of potential uprising. And I looked at her and I said, "Who's gonna calm me?" And I mean, you know, and then I just walked off. I--and I said, "How dare they. What is it about me that they think that I'm gonna be the one that is gonna calm some other black kids after this horrific thing happened?" And I was--I was so upset that she had told me. I mean, I was upset about the whole thing, but there was something--it's--it's just one of those-- Speaker 2: What happened, what ended up happening? Speaker 1: Well, I met with some of my sorors and sisters, I mean we just came together and--and I, you know, I left the dorm, you know, I wasn't gonna be a part of that. But I was kind of a rebel in that way anyway, because I just was. But, no, I wasn't gonna be a part of that. Story_ID: 372723 Speaker 1: And you said you also fought your own quiet fight to break the stereotypes of the roles that you were being given within the drama department [at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. Were you the only black student in the drama department? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). And so I--I said, you know, "I can't do this, I won't do this." And they said, "You may not graduate," and I said, "Well then I may not graduate, but I'll tell you there's gonna be a whole lot of people knowing that." And I mean, it was the only way to--to protest the fight and I was insulted and I was--and, you know, I--I appeared before a panel and--and--and put forth my point. I wasn't in the play, I wasn't cast, and I didn't perform in the play. Speaker 1: What role did they want you to play? Speaker 2: It was a maid, you know, and I just--I've forgotten the play now. Speaker 1: Right, but they didn't--there were no other options that they were extending to you, only the maid? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's correct. Now that's correct, and there could've been. I mean there was a family, I understood that I couldn't be in that family. But there were a couple other roles as I--as I recall that were outside of the nucleus family. So, and I should've been give those, as far as I was concerned. And so, they bought my argument, or at least decided not to counter it and I did graduate. But I, at that point, I really didn't care. I was really angry and I didn't care, and--and my whole point was that I have to take a stand where I am, in--in the situation where I am, and that's--tha- that's what I--that's what I did. Story_ID: 372724 Speaker 1: And then you graduated in '68 [1968] from OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Our acting coach, Arthur--Dr. Arthur Wagner, was going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. We started--I started graduate school at OU, but then we went on to Temple [Temple University] in Philadelphia with him because he's just so brilliant and outstanding. And so there were about eight of us that went with him, again, I was the only black, to continue our studies with him at Temple. Speaker 1: And then you got your master's [degree] at Temple? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: With Dr.? Speaker 2: Wagner, yeah. Speaker 1: Wagner. Okay. So, then the undergrad was in music therapy? Speaker 2: Music therapy and applied music. And so I had a lot of catching up to do, in terms of design elements, you know, technical aspects of the theater that I would've taken if I had studied it as undergrad, you know. But I was willing to 'cause I wanted to so badly. Speaker 1: Well, what did you wanna do? Did you want to become an actress, did you want to (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought I did, I thought I really, really did. I thought I did and I thought I wanted to direct plays also, you know, later. Speaker 1: Oh let me ask you, who then would--were your role models for--for, I mean Hattie McDaniel had come long before and she'd only been given roles-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee-- Speaker 1: Ruby Dee. Speaker 2: --and certainly Sidney Poitier and I mean tho- those were role models, the people that I saw at--at Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] too, you know. Little did I know that [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume was gonna, you know, do as well as he did. But I felt really good about them and--and, you know, granted you didn't have a lot of role models, but this was what we're supposed to do. And--and I thought I'd conduct workshops and--and direct plays and--and act, I really did think I was gonna act. Story_ID: 372725 Speaker 1: When I came to New York [New York], and I'm skipping over the fact that I taught at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about that. So you graduated from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in what year? Speaker 1: Well, I--I-- Speaker 2: You started there in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] because of the one year? Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969] really, because yeah. It--it--my degree says '71 [1971] because that's when they, you know, released the degree, but I--I actually left in 1970 (laughter). I had finished the course work and I just didn't have the commencement services. So, and that's important because of when I went to--to Hampton, you know, and I was there from '70 [1970] to '73 [1973]. And-- Speaker 2: Now, how did you get that job? Speaker 1: Someone was from the theater department came to, came to Temple looking for people, looking for candidates. And I said, "That might be interesting" and of course when I told my parents [Ruth Black Moon and William Moon] that, "Yes you've gotta take it (laughter). Of course you've gotta take it." So I thought well I'll make them happy. They--they were not happy that I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from Ohio University [Athens, Ohio]. You know, I mean, Philly is a bigger city, more cosmopolitan, trouble. Speaker 2: You're leaving home. Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm out of the state now. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, you are. Speaker 1: And so, I said okay. I mean, this was a sure job. Speaker 2: Was it only supposed to be for three years? Speaker 1: No, I mean, they kept renewing the contract. Speaker 2: Okay, so it's so supposed to be for one year? Speaker 1: Yeah, really I-- Speaker 2: So, you said it's a short job. Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't say it to--to them. Because I remember my aunt [Gladys Moon] saying you're a fool for leaving that. Well, I mean, in '73 [1973] I decided I'm going to New York. Speaker 2: Well, let's--before you get to New York, the experience as a teacher at Hampton? Speaker 1: It was wonderful. It was wonderful. Speaker 2: What programs did you develop, how did you teach, what methods did you come you with? Speaker 1: I knew you were gonna ask that and yet I'm surprised that you asked that. Well, we studied role development, you know, how to approach a role, which I really felt that I learned some wonderful skills with Dr. Wagner [Arthur Wagner]. And I developed a touring company at Hampton. Speaker 2: What was the name of the touring company? Speaker 1: Hampton University touring company. (Cough) Excuse me. And we came to Cleveland [Ohio], Karamu House. That was our first stop. Speaker 2: Doing what show? Speaker 1: 'Slave Ship' by LeRoi Jones, Amiri Baraka now, but LeRoi Jones at the time. It was really a powerful play and it was wonderful that the kids were there. They got a lot out of it. And so much happened then and I'm slowing down now because so much happened. And at that moment, it was very beneficial for the kids, the kids--the students. Story_ID: 372726 Speaker 1: While I was there, the body of my brother-in-law, my sister Joyce's [Joyce Moon Howard] husband, was found, discovered in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. He had been working with the Panthers [Black Panther Party] and they said a contract had been out on him. So, as I talk about the Hampton touring company [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and that--that first stop [at Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio], I can't help but of course remember that and 'cause it happened at that very time. My mother [Ruth Black Moon] went to my sister's side. Speaker 2: Can you tell me his name? Speaker 1: Joe Howard. Yeah, Joseph Howard [ph.]. And he had been a professor at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. He was a very, very intelligent man and they had only been married for two years. And we still don't know exactly what happened. But it was just a--it was-- Speaker 2: What was he doing with the Panthers, what? Speaker 1: He, I know, was--what I know is that he was helping with the breakfasts and the food for kids. Those kind of services that the, that the Panthers did. But he taught colonialism and just a very brilliant young man. So, but I had to stay because I had about twelve students who were eighteen and nineteen years old, and they were my responsibility. And I wanted to be with my sister, but my mother went and I had to stay. And that--that's another one of those times when you just push on. You really you have to push on. And I had to make sure that, you know, okay the programs went on, their housing, it was cool and they got back to their homes. So, it--it was a--it was tough. It was tough. But we got through it. We got through it and she's fine. She's grown and, you know, it's been many years ago because that was in 1972. Speaker 2: But I'm sure it's extremely tough during that time. Speaker 1: Oh of course (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because he was very young and a lot of promise. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Oh absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: And then the mystery of just finding a body in the Bay Area. I mean, no one was ever tried or convicted. Speaker 1: Any of that. Any of that. Speaker 2: Or was it even investigated? Speaker 1: So they say, you know. But you really find out who your friends are. So it was--it was--it was an incredible time for my sister and she was just twenty-two years old. And, but--but we grew and my brother [William Moon] moved out to California, the Bay Area, to be with my sister, you know, after my mother had been there for a while, but she had the--a young daughter, the youngest daughter, Madonna [Madonna Moon], my sister too to take care of. So, but we did pull together as a family, even though we had to, you know, be in different places. Story_ID: 372727 Speaker 1: But Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] was wonderful. Hampton was not only a beautiful campus, but I was with more black students then I'd ever been ever as a student, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In your whole life, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And--but it was--it was an incredible challenge for me 'cause I was very young. I was 24 years old, 24, 25, 26. Speaker 2: Do you remember, who was the president of the university at the time? Speaker 1: Holland [Jerome H. Holland]. Yeah, Holland. Dr. Holland. I don't remember his first name and he was president for some time. And--and the students identified with me because, I guess of my youth-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you're so young and energetic. Speaker 1: --and energy and they came to me with life problems. Like should I get an abortion and those kinds of things, and I have to tell you I was overwhelmed by it. Because I knew that they were listening to me. They were, you know, resting on every word and I didn't feel like I'd lived enough life to really be able to tell them. So I decided it's time for me to go to New York [New York] (laughter). I'm serious. Time for me to go to New York. And, and-- Speaker 2: Had you'd always dreamt of coming to New York? Was that part of a bigger plan (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had, but I was scared, I was scared. Then my parents [Ruth Black Moon and William Moon] were no help. They were terrified. And my aunt [Gladys Moon] and my--the aunt that lives with us now, my father's sister the nurse. She said, "You're a fool (laughter) for leaving a good teaching job," you know, and-- Speaker 2: Well, who could you tell? Who encouraged you to come to New York? Speaker 1: Nobody. Nobody. Speaker 2: You knew no one in New York? Speaker 1: I did. I had met someone whose home was in Hampton and had, you know, been in Hampton and he was in New York. Weldon Irvine, and he wrote 'To Be Young, Gifted and Black.' Nina Simone wrote the music and he wrote the lyrics. And I met him, I was directing a play at Hampton and his music was playing. And he walked in the auditorium and was trying to speak to me and I said, you know, "I'm directing a (laughter) play." You know, so, we have been life-long friends until he passed about four years ago. And he--he helped me. He helped me find a place to live. He said, "Look Marjorie [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon], I, you know, I just go this RCA [RCA Corporation] contract and I'm really, really busy and I, but I know some friends, we can get you a place to live. Don't expect me to show you (laughter) around." But he really helped. And tremendously. And I just, you know, started going around to auditions which were rough. Having been protected as much as I was, I guess, I--I really--I really didn't expect to get the kind of treatment. You know, and these are you know to be, people are black, people are white, whatever. I just, you know, it was just--I didn't like the way they made a woman feel and how they would come off. I just, I didn't like that at all. And what I have done in my tenure here and people have said it to me is that, "Thank you for the experience. Maybe I'm not right for this role, but you made the audition process a very pleasant one, and even an educational one." And that makes me feel good. They were glad they came. And they don't feel--because I sometimes I even try to tell them what might could help. I mean, maybe it's just the choice of piece that they brought to us or whatever. And that all roles are not for everybody. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's wonderful. If we can get to a point where we realize that we all have our gifts that--that we've been given, and then that's what we're supposed to nourish. Story_ID: 372728 Speaker 1: So, when you arrived in New York [New York], what did you seek out as far as the black theater scene? Was the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] running at the time? Speaker 2: The Negro Ensemble Company was yeah, it was running at the time. It was kind of closed. It felt closed. Speaker 1: Meaning? Speaker 2: Meaning that-- Speaker 1: A clique, you had to know? Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to know people. You had to kind of be on the inside of that and I wasn't. So, now I knew about [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer, because I'd been teaching about her. I'd been getting literature about what she was doing at National Black Theatre [New York, New York] and so I'd been teaching about her. I met Robert Macbeth who was at the New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York]. Wow this is some time. And--and-- Speaker 1: They were the Lafayette Players, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well the Lafayette Players-- Speaker 1: Had come before, long before. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, long before. So, they were the New Lafayette Theatre. And let--let's see, so I knew him. I hadn't met Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] yet. But there were--there were people who were in the theater and--and we just kind of gravitated to each other and we learned about auditions. I didn't go on very many. Speaker 1: Where did you hand out to learn about what was happening within the black acting scene? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it was just--where did I hang out? I went to New Lafayette Theatre and kind of sat around there and talked to some people, tried to get to know them. I never really felt like I fit in, to be honest with you. And then I said, well, you know, well I didn't quite know what to do, but I heard-- Speaker 1: What were you doing for work? Speaker 2: Temp (laughter). Speaker 1: But you heard? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were gonna tell me, but I had heard about-- Speaker 2: I've lost that thought all together. Speaker 1: Sorry. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Oh, I heard about some auditions and so I went on them. And, you know, I had to run a little picture resume that consisted of teaching and the education. But I really wasn't comfortable auditioning and so I said this really isn't for me. Story_ID: 372729 Speaker 1: So, for the very first time, for the very first time, I went and I said--I knocked on the door of one of the trustees of Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. He's gone now, but Judge Joseph Williams. I had met him at Hampton and I said, "I need some help." I'd never asked, I never done that before. You know, use somebody, use, but go to somebody that you kind of know and see, "I wanna be in the theater." Here he is a judge, a family court judge at that. I said, I really and I just I need a job. So, and he made some calls. He called [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, he called, I sat there right in his office while he made that call. He called Franklin A. Thomas who had been, who was at the time, the president of Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation [New York, New York], the parent company of the Billie Holiday Theatre [New York, New York]. And he said, and little did I know, here I was sitting on the brink of almost my entire future (laughter) at this point, half of my--more than half of my life's future sitting in this judge's office. And he said, "I think I've found the person you need to fill that spot." And so, so, I was sent here. Little did I know that I was really coming to replace someone that they'd already decided that they were gonna let go. Speaker 2: This was 1972? Speaker 1: This was 1973. Speaker 2: Three [1973]. Speaker 1: About October. I did not know that I was coming to replace somebody. And--'cause that's bad, that's bad. And then people, there were rumors. People said, "Well she's--the judge is her niece." 'Cause he was the chairman of the trustee board of this institution. I didn't know that. I didn't know, I mean I didn't know what his connections were, but I thought surely he had some. And so I came for the interview and I apparently--I had two interviews. Apparently I did well. And so I was hired and my first day was December 10th, 1973. And for four months I was not allowed to come to the theater, this theater that we're sitting in now or any of the offices. I was not allowed. And I was up there. I was told to write letters of thank you for the donors and James Garner, you know, Maverick [Bret Maverick], had donated and I think Frank Sinatra had donated. I'm saying, my goodness, they were on the donor list. And so I was writing these letters. Now months later, I found that they had already been written to, but I was given busy work while all of the work to let this other person go who had, who was the first director and the only other director at the Billie Holiday Theatre before myself. Speaker 2: And who was that? Speaker 1: His name, he's gone now, Herbert Scott-Gibson. And so there was a lot of turmoil and uncertainty surrounding with me being here and I didn't even know it. I just felt some of the fallout, but I kind of like, I brushed it off. There I go brushing it off again, because I was so happy to be here. I--the first time I saw--the first time I walked in this building, I said this is like Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio]. It was the exposed brick lobby and the theater, the seats were red then and Karamu House, course theater seats are often red, but the stage seemed to be about the same size. Man, I knew I was home. I just, you know, so no matter what, I figured if people had a misunderstanding about me, I'd get them to really understand somehow. When you're young like that, you do try for that 'cause you do wanna be liked. You wanna get along. But it was some wonderful, wonderful times. Speaker 2: So it was actually in 1973 you came here? Speaker 1: Yeah, in December. Speaker 2: December '73 [1973], December 10th as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Yep. Story_ID: 372730 Speaker 1: What do you consider to be the first, your directorial debut here [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: It was a workshop production because I did conduct workshop classes like I had wanted to do. Setup a whole workshop program. Speaker 1: Did they do that Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Oh yea, yeah, yeah, they had that at Karamu House. And so, it was a play called 'Sunshine Loving' by Beth Williams [Sandra Beth Williams]. And Weldon Irvine wrote the music, my friend. And so I was able to hire him, and we staged the play. It was, you know, young people who wanted to perform. Some quite talented, others, you know, just wanted to perform and they were given an opportunity. And it was--it was really wonderful. Story_ID: 372731 Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Sunshine Loving,' that was a musical. The book was by Sandra Beth Williams. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the music and lyrics was by Weldon Irvine, I-R-V-I-N-E. Yeah, and so, so that was really one--that was my first directorial (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well let me ask you this, what was your first Broadway, that you saw, actually Broadway production? What did you see on Broadway for the first time? Speaker 1: 'Your Arms Too Short to Box with God' [Vinnette Carroll]. Yeah, and--and of course loved it. Speaker 2: Who was in that production? Speaker 1: Oh, Hinton Battle, I believe if I'm not mistaken about that, but their--their names have just elude me, although I could-- Speaker 2: Was it--was it [HistoryMaker] Micki Grant? Speaker 1: Micki Grant was the lyricist I think, Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you know, wrote the music. Sometimes she performed. I don't recall if she were in the production or not. But she, yeah, she was major creative person on that production. Speaker 2: Well, when you arrived in New York [New York], what were--what was the presence of black people on Broadway? I'm talking about the early '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean 'cause when I first--well I came, you might as well say '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because it was December of '73 [1973]. 'The Wiz' wasn't quite there yet, I think it was another two years before it happened, 'The Wiz.' Speaker 2: But then, Melvin Van Peoples [sic. HistoryMaker Melvin Van Peebles] had written and directed so--a couple of plays that had gone to Broadway, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm--yeah I'm trying to think-- Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of the titles also. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, me too--me too, and that--that's terrible. His films, of course, I remember and I just-- Speaker 2: 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' [Melvin Van Peebles]. Speaker 1: '--a Natural Death' of course. Thank you. Yeah, yeah, how could I forget that? But there wasn't a lot yet. But 'The Wiz' really was combustible. And the thing that made it so important, which really helped even--even my thinking for a few years later was that when Stephanie Mills, who of course played the character Dorothy in 'The Wiz,' she got horrific reviews. It was more, even--it was really because the white media and press did not want 'The Wiz' the celebrated 'Wiz' which had been a white production and very much celebrated, they didn't want that taken away and made black. And of course, this was a very black production of 'The Wiz' and wonderful. And but her church, Cornerstone Baptist Church, right here in Brooklyn [New York], said they're not gonna treat our little girl like that. And they started buying up tickets and calling--and Cornerstone has to be five thousand strong or more as a congregation. And of course, all they have to do is tell their spouses and tell their co-workers and tell their extended families, and I mean, they saved 'The Wiz.' Oh, they saved 'The Wiz' and kept it going for a while. So I mean, that--that I think was one of the first times there was this economic black presence of money on Broadway. I mean and folks realized it. It was--it was wonderful, wonderful. That was like in '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 372732 Speaker 1: And by 1981, Billie Holiday Theatre [New York, New York] had done a show, here-- Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about how that show happened. The writer of it, it's called Indecent-- Speaker 1: Ah, ah, 'Inacent Black.' Speaker 2: 'Inacent Black.' Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Inacent Black and the Five Brothers' here. That was by A. Marcus Hemphill, who has since passed on. Incredible writer and he was also a bassist and had gone out on shows with Bill Cosby. And before he died, he even wrote a few episodes of 'The Cosby Show' which he was very thrilled to be able to be a part of. But Marcus, we all called him Marcus, wrote 'Inacent Black and the Five Brothers' and it was a powerful show, it was a powerful, powerful show. And it--it was like the next step where Broadway felt the economic impact of blacks. And, because-- Speaker 2: So how did you get to--how did the play get to you to begin with? Speaker 1: The theater's artistic director at the time, a former Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] student of mine, Michael Pinkney, read the play. He was reading all the plays. And he said, "Marjorie [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon], this is a wonderful play. This is a jewel of a play." And in fact it was. Because it dealt with a nuclear family-- Speaker 2: In 1980, was it 1980? Speaker 1: Well it was '79 [1979] when we have it here, when we had it. In fact, Samuel L. Jackson was in that play. And he was in several plays first here at the Billie Holiday Theatre in terms of the first theater he ever worked with in New York [New York]. People think it might be NEC [Negro Ensemble Company] or Negro--New Federal Theatre [New York, New York], but no it was the Billie Holiday Theatre. And we're--we're pleased about that. So 'Inacent Black,' getting back to that, I gotta tell you what it's about first. It was about a black family, the father had passed, but the mother always had her sons, her four sons, to toast the father at the beginning of the day and get instruction from him. Get, you know, just get the--I'm lost for the word now, but ju- just to get the motivation--I gotta cough, excuse me, to--for the day, for their work. They were in real estate. They lived in Old Westbury [New York] which is a very, very wealthy old money, I don't know quite how they, but they did live in Old Westbury. And so, the set for this show was just a mansion with oak paneling and a huge six-foot wide staircase, all on this stage. And a French doors that opened and closed, and--and a beautiful desk and leather wing back, high-back chairs. And it--it was an incredible set by Felix Cochren [Felix E. Cochren, Jr.], who had gotten his training at Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and couldn't break into the theater before he came to Billie Holiday. He tried NEC, Negro Ensemble Company, couldn't break in. I read his letter, saw his--a brief of his portfolio. I said, "Come on, yeah, come." So, (cough) excuse me, so 'Inacent Black.' They would toast their father every morning and get encouragement from the father and they seemed to have a connection with the father and that's something that was missing in many of the plays that I had read about blacks and what they think of the father and whether they, you know, just their perception of the role of the father. So, that--that was positive. They were wealthy, that and living large, that was very, very positive. The only thing that they didn't have was a sense of spirituality. They didn't know who God was in their family. So, you know, the fabric of that family was being eaten away, even though they didn't always see it. 'Inacent Black' is this ethereal person, being, who arrives in the Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] and is picked up by one of the brothers, Samuel L. Jackson's role, and he is enticed to bring her to his home in Old Westbury. And she proceeds to interact and touch each of their lives at their vulnerability from the mother to each of the sons, each point of their vulnerability and she really instills the spirituality that--that--that raises them up. And so it was very, very powerful. In other words, we must have God in our lives and from that, we can build and grown and continue. And we must revere the matriarch and the patriarch of the family. So that was the message. Story_ID: 372733 Speaker 1: People saw it ['Inacent Black and the Five Brothers,' A. Marcus Hemphill] here [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York], we kept it here for seven months. More people saw it in those seven months then they usually see it, then we usually have in an entire season. We said we wanted to go to Broadway, the parent company, Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation [New York, New York], was willing to set up a general partnership, you know, that's the legal term to take it to Broadway. And that shocked me because they seemed so conservative to me. That shocked me and 50 percent of blacks put up the financing for the Broadway run. That was shocking. That appeared in The Times [The New York Times] that 50 percent of the financing was from the black community. I have never tried to hoard publicity because I've been aware of how jealous people can be and they don't understand the whatever. I said that, I'm sorry that got in there. Conspiracy theory, whatever. I was sorry that--that was in there. I felt that there would be some goings on that would try to-- Speaker 2: Sabotage. Speaker 1: Sabotage, that's the word. So, the show opened on Broadway. The whole thing was, and what I haven't talked to you about, is that the theater has quite a following and groups invested in the play and we expected like the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], the Barrister's Wives [National Barristers' Wives Inc.], the Chums [Chums, Inc.], various sororities, churches, individuals and we felt that they would buy the tickets to protect their investment and to enjoy the show and their friends and family. We thought that was a very good way to--to market it, et cetera. And--but any rate, it opened kind of prematurely, it was near the end of the season and it--it opened and it opened to hideous reviews, hideous reviews. In fact, Clive Barnes of the New York Post, it was 'Inacent Black: A Heaven-Sent Comedy.' 'A Heaven-Sent Comedy' was the subtitle. Clive Barnes said it should go straight to hell. Now that had nothing to do with production values, acting, the sense of the script or any of that. That was just his editorializing and just wanting to be just mean spirited. So, it was that kind of thing that--that tore us up. We felt like that next morning after the reviews, you know, you sit up around the TV set and you watch the reviews and they were all bad. There wasn't one good review. Nobody's--and [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore starred in it and everybody still--the press still liked Melba Moore, but they said she was just in the wrong vehicle and it was really unfortunate. But worse than that is that folks lost their money. Now, the reason why they didn't buy up the tickets and all like that was, and some of it's on me, yeah, and I'm gonna admit it. We decided, okay it's near the end of the season, if we don't get a house now and go into it and start it, the prices are gonna go up. The expenses for the show are gonna go up if we wait 'til the fall. You don't start a show in the summer, it doesn't have a chance to build legs and things just go wishy-washy in the summer. So, we had to move. A theater became available. It was a very tight season in terms of theater availability. So, it was do you--do you go up now or do you wait to the fall. We knew that the equity contracts, the actors' contracts rate were gonna go up. Some of the design unions, you know, maybe the--the union people and the houses, you know, was gonna go up. And--and I had been one-on-one with a lot of the people who invested. I mean, there were a group of postal workers who bought an eighth of a unit. That was a thousand dollars for one-eighth of a unit and they got ten of their friends together, a hundred dollars each and bought one-eighth of a unit. Usually people don't wanna gather money quite like that, but we did for the involvement. So, I said and I learned about the SEC, security exchange commission [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], and how to do an offering and all those legalese and I said, and this is where my fault was, I said, "I don't think that our investors, our black investors are going to understand that their--that the portion that they have purchased is going to be devalued." In other words, instead of having an eighth of a unit, because the expenses will go up, their value, they'll only have a sixteenth say of a unit. I don't think they're gonna understand that. That was me not having enough faith that either I could explain it or that they would trust it. But as a community, there's not enough trust and we get funny about money and I--so that was me. We should've waited, gotten the theater in the fall, had time to build for our investors that are associated with groups to build those audiences and make that happen. But I--so, my vote and I was quite persuasive at the time, was not to do that. That--that our investors would be up in arms and not to have their investment percentage devaluated, be less than what they thought they were buying. So, so that's what happened, the show closed. Speaker 2: After? Speaker 1: After three weeks, yeah. It closed after three weeks. Story_ID: 372734 Speaker 1: I was in the hospital getting a hysterectomy at the time (laughter). And it's just so--things are just so crazy. I was trying to get ahold of Muhammad Ali, got his ca- I was trying to call people for money to keep the show ['Inacent Black and the Five Brothers,' A. Marcus Hemphill] going. And I wasn't talking clearly or anything because I was still--it was--I remember Ashton Springer, one of our--our partners, you know, associate producers, he said, "Marjorie [HistoryMaker Marjorie Moon], I have to close the show." And, you know, "I'm sorry, just want you to know that, you know, we--we gotta close the show." And so, and I was, so, "Please just give me another chance (laughter) just to see what," you know. So it was--it was bizarre. It was disappointing, but we really saw the power of theater. When you've got a message that connects and uplifts and raises up, it's powerful. Because when folks put money where their hearts are, that's amazing. So, we learned that. And I learned maybe to be more transparent, you know, give the--give those other people who were involved, even peripherally, you know, the opportunity to--to meet and make a decision. That I didn't do, I didn't trust them enough. It's quite a lesson. Speaker 2: So that was in 1981 that that happened? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: So what do you do after that, you come back to the theatre [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] and does that bruise your image or ego at the theatre and? Speaker 1: Well, I had to talk to a lot of people about, you know, telling them what happened and--and trying to explain it from my point of view. Some board members here felt that we were naive and we should've paid off the press. And I said, I think you're naive to think the press can be paid off, especially for a black production. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying (laughter). Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). It could be possible. Speaker 1: I mean, I guess so, but-- Speaker 2: Well, they had payola in the record industry, you know. You could pay off a deejay that put your music on. Speaker 1: That--that's true, that's true. Speaker 2: But I don't know if you could pay off the press. Speaker 1: Right. And at any rate, we did not try and it did not happen. And so, but was my ego bruised? I was just terrible disappointed, you know, in terms of what we did and I, and I was hoping that it would not hinder something like this from happening again. I learned a lot about Broadway economics that I mean a set. We had the same, basically the same set, not as wide here on this stage and it cost us so much less than putting it, you know, having it rebuilt in a union shop. Speaker 2: Right, and the union guys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And put on, yeah. Speaker 2: --putting the it--putting it on the stage and-- Speaker 1: All, all of that. It--it's just a different kind of economic game and so, I gained a lot of appreciation for touring in the Chitlin' Circuit or the non-- Speaker 2: The Chitlin' Circuit, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, the nonunion. Being on the road in communities like this. Speaker 2: So, which is what Tyler Perry has done so successfully. Speaker 1: Very successfully, yes he has. Yes he has-- Story_ID: 372735 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the community of theaters like this one [Billie Holiday Theatre], not only in New York [New York], but throughout the country, what light can you shine on other theaters like this one. I know in Manhattan [New York] you--we have, what was it and I don't if they're still around, the Castillo? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Castillo, what was it called? Speaker 2: Castillo? There is a Castillo Theatre company, I don't know if it's the one that you're thinking about. Speaker 1: They used to-- Speaker 2: But there is, of course, NEC, Negro Ensemble Company is a lot smaller now than it was because, you know, our director is not there anymore, [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward. And it went through, almost a demised, and it--it's such a shame. I used to say to others and myself, if anything happens to our NEC, then you know, we're all on very slippery slope. And that's kind of been true. I mean, they were the jewel of the New York scene, African American theater, and so many incredible people. Actors that you see every day, and you know, on series, on commercials, you know, in movies. And it fell by the wayside for a while and now it--it's getting a resurgence of some. Resurgence might be too strong of a word, but they are producing some. [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer at the National Black Theatre [New York, New York] is still working hard, and she has a whole block there on 125th Street and Fifth Avenue. New Federal Theatre [New York, New York], which is now renamed Woodie King, Jr.'s New Federal Theatre, he's [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] the founder for some thirty-seven years now. And he's doing remarkable things. And of course they don't produce theater, but Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop is a wonderful writers' workshop where plays are read and critiqued, and tweaked. And they come and read it again. And Frederick Douglass Writers' Workshop is another wonderful workshop also. Again, they don't produce plays, but they are doing an incredible service for our writers. And in Queens [New York], there's Black Spectrum Theatre [Black Spectrum Theatre Company, Inc.], Carl Clay, and--and he's just completed a renovation of his space and I think they seat 300, 350. We've done collaborations before. He does all kinds of theater and films, help films for kids, you know, anti-pregnancy films and gang, you know, violence. And so, we bring them here so that we can have, 'cause we're not trying to re-create anything, pay him to come here and present those films and have interaction with the young people and the kids and it's very important. Plus he also has some theater for young, young children also, and--and like the three, four and five year olds, that's difficult to produce. But he--he does it so well. The costumes are so well attended to that it--it's very believable. Some people don't do children's theater that well. I mean, well it's for kids. But they are some of our most important audience for the future. And--and--and the attitudes and--and what they feel growing up and how you attend to them. They--they pick that up, it's amazing. And so, that's Carl. We have a Paul Robeson Theatre in Brooklyn [New York], close to downtown Brooklyn. And--and they've been around for about, I think, twenty, maybe close to twenty-five years now-- Story_ID: 372736 Speaker 1: Is there ever a meeting of all these creative minds of all (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dear, in the last two years we've formed a coalition of theaters of color. And we have approached the New York City Council for us to--it's--it's a--it's a multinational, if you will, because it's Hispanic and Puerto Rican theaters involved in it as well as black theater. Speaker 1: And Asian I would imagine? Speaker 2: We don't have, we wish we did, but we don't have an Asian theater as a member yet. And we're looking to expand upstate, because we--we've been approaching the city for additional monies. I mean, and now we're gonna start approaching the state. We have lobbyists, which is one--it's unheard of. We're almost becoming politically savvy. Speaker 1: What's the name of the organization again? Speaker 2: It's called Coalition of Theaters of Color. Speaker 1: Coalition of Theaters of Color. Now, are you one of the founding members? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, because it's just two years old. And--and like I say, [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr. and Carl Clay, and Cathy [ph.], whose name I won't butcher, but she is administrative for Spanish Thalia Theatre [Thalia Spanish Theatre; Thalia Hispanic Theatre] in Queens [New York], and of course, [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer. Voza Rivers, New Heritage Theatre [New Heritage Theatre Group]. He took over Roger Thurman's [sic. Roger Furman] directorship and he kept that for many years, Roger Thurman. And also he's the director and founder of the Harlem Alliance [Harlem Arts Alliance, New York, New York], that's Voza Rivers, he's a member. So, we're working. We haven't worked this long and this intensely together-- Speaker 1: Since? Speaker 2: Since Black Theatre Alliance [Black Theatre Alliance of New York] in the early '70s [1970s], and it fell apart because we kind of fell apart. And weren't seeing eye-to-eye. Not to say we see eye-to-eye all the time now. I mean, we're individual artists and--and we do like work and then un-like work, and--and but we basically have the same mission. You know, to involve artists of color to give them an opportunity to--to be seen and work and to give our audience something that they can feel very good about themselves and actually see themselves on stage. So we all have that same kind of mission, stated a little differently. Sometimes the approach is a little different. But we now, I really believe this, we now know that we must work together in a very positive proactive way to be able to get funding. These theaters have been together--these theaters have been in operation as individual organizations minimally twenty-five years and maximally thirty-eight years. So, we're not babies. Story_ID: 372737 Speaker 1: And so many of the artists that you see on television and in movies now came from these theater experiences. Speaker 2: Who are some of the people that have come--that have come through here? Speaker 1: Well, I mentioned Samuel L. Jackson before. He came practically straight from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. You know, right here, this was his first opportunity. And Debbie Allen had already been on Broadway, but she was unemployed. So many black artists, artists of color might hit, you know, a star and then like she was on Broadway, but then unemployed for periods of time even though they're very talented and all that. It--that's the way it happened. Tichina Arnold who can now be seen playing Chris Rock's mother on 'Everybody Hates Chris,' was on our stage at eleven years old in our children's theater company, and--and she told me a few years back that this was her first theater experience and so of course she was in 'Martin' also. Vanessa Williams, the one that was on the TV series 'Soul Food,' was here and did several productions with us. And in the music world, of course we had Weldon Irvine, I spoke about him before. Marcus Miller who's an incredible bassist and composer, he was in our little pit orchestra and he's written Jump--Jump 'Jump To It' the Aretha Franklin's song, before Miles Davis passed, he was producer for Miles Davis. He was also producer for Luther Vandross for the longest time. And Marcus Miller, fifteen years old, in our little pit orchestra. And--and a brilliant bassist at the time. So, I'm sure there's many that I'm not mentioning that I missed, but it--it's wonderful and so many. Denzel Washington worked at New Federal Theatre [New York, New York] as well as, Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], you know. 'Chickens Come Home to Roost' ['When Chickens Come Home to Roost,' Laurence Holder], we all remember that one and he was brilliant in it. And he just it's a nurturing crowd (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was here? 'Chickens Come Home,' that was-- Speaker 1: No, that was at New Federal Theatre. Speaker 2: New Federal, okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, I'm just mentioning some of the people that--that have come out of our institution. Speaker 2: Through this, these institutions. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 372738 Speaker 1: So, what do you consider the role of this theater [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] to be for this community? Speaker 2: From almost day one to--to pick them up, to lift them up, to make them feel good about who they are, the work they do, and their--and the fact that they have a place in the community and they can have an impact on the community. When we did 'Inacent Black' ['Inacent Black and the Five Brother,' A. Marcus Hemphill] and granted, it was an awesome set. I would hear, 'cause I love to hear what the audiences say before the play, during the play, after the play. And they were knocked out by the set. They thought oh this is Broadway or this--they couldn't believe that they have it here. They couldn't get it in their head that they have it here. Those first few programs that I had, you know, I put it on glossy paper and they couldn't believe it was glo- I said my goodness, they had such low expectations of what could be done and what they could find in their own community that I said I must work hard to continue to feed and hold on to that expectation. Speaker 1: Are you able to still give them that same level of professional quality-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --in the sets and in the actors and in the--? Speaker 2: Absolutely. And I mean 'cause we found some more. I have disbanded the use of the glossy programs. It's just not as important. I'm very glad that it's not as important anymore. But yeah, we still--we have different kinds of sets. You know, I'm very careful, I don't pick all the plays in a season to be these huge monstrous sets because it's just too expensive even for us. You know, there--there's always a level of expense no matter where you are. Broadway, it's more expensive, maybe it's fifty thousand, but here it might be twelve thousand (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But there's a level, yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, and that's a lot of money. So, but we still--we--we have a design team that--that was trained by Felix [Felix E. Cochren, Jr.] who was our initial professional designer. And the wonderful thing about another thing that--that we've been able to do and I feel good about, is that they have worked here and like Felix is a member of the union, his protege, Patrice Davidson is now a member of the union, who designs sets. And so, they're able to grow here. And they keep working here. That's one of the ways that we're able to--to maintain the quality and I have a wonderful production stage manager, Avan [Avan Littles], who's had been here for more than twenty-five years. So, that's how we're able to maintain it. Story_ID: 372739 Speaker 1: And one thing that I think is important that you are like behind the scenes. Well, I mean, how does the reflection of okay now I'm--we're possibly seeing more African Americans on stage then we have before, but is that same thing happening behind the scenes? Are there more stage hands that are, you know, like prop masters and designers and lighting tech, you know, designers and technicians, is that happening? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. It most definitely is. You're talking commercially, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, even I'm here, I mean. Speaker 2: Oh here, it's always been the case. Speaker 1: It's always been the case, but do--see--on some level are you grooming them even to work in a broader society that they may not have an opportunity to work in? Speaker 2: Well, we certainly hope so. I mean, and that's been the case with--on the design level like Felix [Felix E. Cochren, Jr.] continued on. He became a member of the union. He designed for us, I guess, maybe twenty-three seasons wonderfully. But he was grooming a young man, Patrice Davidson, who has now taken over 'cause Felix has gone to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and he's now doing the university thing. He's done Broadway, he's done the Billie Holiday Theatre [New York, New York], Billie Holiday Theatre and Broadway in the mix. He went to Syracuse to get all those benefits and all that, he's teaching now and occasionally he will come out and design commercially again. But he was--he was getting ready, Patrice, who was his assistant for many years, and now he's our designer. And he, not that long ago, became a member of the union. And so he designs all over. The same thing is true with our costume designer. We've had quite a few costume designers, but under, you know, my tenure, Helen Simmons [Helen Simmons-Collen] became a member of the union and so she designs all over. Just opens up opportunities for them and they do wardrobe, and they network and they get to meet. And of course, our prop master, Jamie Durant, has been here for about eleven years. And during the summer, particularly, he tours. He does his--he takes his management skills as an assistant management--manager here and transfers them to on the road. Story_ID: 372740 Speaker 1: How long does a season last here [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: October to June, end of June, yeah, yeah. And we--we've always worked with artists and technicians of color to build them, to groom them, and we want them to stay as long as they can. And often times, I mean they have the flexibility to move to another venue and they come back, because this has a steadiness, a stability and it's got a home kind of feeling too. You know, I think, they tell me so anyway (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, what do you think when you think about what you're doing here? What do you think your purpose is, you're here because? Speaker 2: I'm here because the community still needs to be enlightened and entertained, educated about our culture. And as long as they're hungry for that, I wanna be able to feed them. I hope that I'm one of the resources for them to feed them and to expose them to as much as possible. Story_ID: 372741 Speaker 1: Well, what about the grants that you--well the one big one that has been written about the--in 2005, the nine hundred thousand dollar from the borough president (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now that is capital money. Which means that it's only used for refurbishment and reconstruction of the theatre [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York], which is wonderful because it's not been done in all these thirty-five years. I don't think I said the theatre is in its thirty-fifth season. And so actually that nine hundred thousand dollars that we got from the borough president, Marty Markowitz, in 2005 and we didn't get the money yet. I mean it was awarded, appropriated and you have to understand it's appropriated there to be drawn down. It's grown to 2.9 million [dollars] because the theater is--is going to be expanded. The stage is going to be expanded so that we can have wing space. We're gonna have fly space so that we can do--'cause there's no room to fly things out so that you can't see sets and all like that. What it means is that we can do a children's show with a complete, with a castle and with a forest and all like that in the daytime for the kids, and then at night we can do the play that takes place on the street or, you know, in a home or whatever, a completely different set and have it as prome- as professional as the daytime is. And the nighttime is as professional as the daytime and vice versa. We don't want to skimp on any of the productions, and right now it's just not physically possible to do. We don't have the room to or the time. If you've ever been to some, quote unquote amateur shows, you know, the blackouts of five minutes while they move the furniture (laughter) around. No, no, no, no, no, no, we don't wanna be and we're not gonna have to do that. And we're gonna be able to have a--a lot of diverse programming and that's--that's important. Story_ID: 372742 Speaker 1: So, do you know why they chose Billie Holiday as a name for this theatre [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I don't know why, but I have come to my own conclusions over the year. Billie Holiday was very talented. She had tremendous obstacles, you know, and some she fell into, but I think it was through some of the pain and the rejection that she faced. And we're providing a place here where our artists don't have to face that pain because they're able to be seen and they get exposure and they get work and they get paid, and so that's a very positive thing. She didn't have the outlets that some of the artists have today being here and the other theaters in New York [New York] for artists of color. Story_ID: 372743 Speaker 1: So, at this very moment, is there something going on in this theater [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] or are you rehearsing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We are in between productions. We're gonna be beginning rehearsal next week for 'Free the Peoples' [ph.]. It's a return engagement. It was just an incredible, and it's by Joyce Sylvester by the way. And 'Free the Peoples' is about the relationship between a new pastor in a church and his relationship to his deacons and trustees, and church is very big among our audiences and in this borough [Brooklyn, New York]. This is the borough of churches. So, it's funny, it's insightful, it's dynamic. Story_ID: 372744 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about, and I guess we should, sort of African American playwrights that you may have helped to cultivate their talents? I know you made--or you can just tell me some of the people you've worked with to help cultivate their talents. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, Joyce Sylvester. She--she's been around for about five years in terms as a playwright and we've done all of her plays, which have been wonderful. She has a unique pulse to the community which is what we're really looking for. Well before that, Samm-Art Williams who wrote 'Home' and even received a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nomination for 'Home.' Speaker 1: Right, and 'Home' was what got you back on your feet after the Broadway? Speaker 2: No, we didn't do 'Home' after that. Speaker 1: No? Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. We have not done 'Home' actually. But, we did two plays of his before he was even--we did his first productions period in New York [New York]. He hadn't been produced anywhere else before Billie Holiday Theatre [New York, New York]. So, and so, he went on, not only did he do 'Home' and got all of those awards and accolades, but he went on to Hollywood and became a television producer with 'Martin,' 'Hangin' with Mr. Cooper,' 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'] and just on and on and on. And he's--he's a prolific writer. We've done plays of his since, but we were the first to do his. Another one, John, who's left is John Henry Redwood, wrote 'Old Settler' ['The Old Settler], and that was done in the city and that was also done by HBO and Debbie Allen and Phylicia, her sister, [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad were the two older women in 'Old Settler.' And Debbie also directed it. Well, we did his very first play, which was 'Mark VIII:xxxvi' [John Henry Redwood] and we did that in 1986. He and his wife came to visit me and they said that they wanted to rent the theater [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York]. And I don't know there was something that caught me about them and I said, "Well, why don't you let me read the play?" And so I did and it was about switching babies at birth. Now this had not been in the news at all, and there was a white family and black family. The white family was a senator and his wife, and the black family was a poor family. It was really, it was quite dynamic. It really--you heard about it a lot now, but back then you really hadn't. And so, we did it. It was the first time it had ever been produced and I'm very proud of that. And we produced a couple of others of his since then. And he's passed a couple years ago, but he was a wonderful writer. Weldon Irvine, I must've done about fifteen of his plays, musicals, 'Over Forty.' The book was by Celeste Walker, but Weldon wrote the lyrics and the music, and we took that around the country for a little bit. It was--it was truly wonderful, about women fearing becoming forty years old. Speaker 1: It's called 'Over Forty' the title, yeah? Speaker 2: 'Over Forty,' yeah, yeah. And Cliff Roquemore, we did his 'Lotto' ['Lotto: Experience the Dream,' Cliff Roquemore] about a family in California winning ten thou- $10 million. A rags-to-riches story that the audience loved, course people love rags-to-riches stories all the time. Did a play that I was really proud to do and it was really quite poignant and dynamic, it's called 'Boochie' [Mari Evans], it was about child abuse. And it was about the--why a woman allowed her man to correct (air quotes), abuse her child. The psychological dynamics in that relationship that she felt that she was supporting him and she didn't wanna tear him down and she wanted to give him the authorization to be a constructive figure to her child in her child's life. And it was--it was dynamic. And--so, and we got to have discussions afterwards. It was a very important subject matter and I was very pleased to be able to do it. Story_ID: 372745 Speaker 1: Now, do you do any other sort of function within the community outside of just the plays [at the Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York]? I mean, do you do--continue to--go on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we have a speaker's bureau. I shouldn't call it a bureau, but they've come and spoken on different subject matters. [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] pro- law professor, came and talked about the Brown v Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and he was wonderful. [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni was featured, you know, reading her poetry. [HistoryMaker] Terrie Williams, the media mogul, mogulette, was--came and talked to us. So different subject matter and, you know. Then we've had people from the police precinct come and talk about to young people how they should interact with the police and how they're working to really be more responsive to the community and our needs and more sensitive. Speaker 1: Where--what have you not tackled as far as issues for the community that you would like to see a play address or take on? Speaker 2: HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. Speaker 1: HIV/AIDS. Speaker 2: We haven't done that and I now that that's very important to do. I've not done enough about domestic abuse among spouses or you know, those relationships like that. And wanna deal more with health issues also. I'd also, if I had a theater with different spaces, I'd like to do a mankind series that takes biblical scripture and enacts it and have discussion about it, and one on the level for children and one for adults. I'd like to be able to do that. But I need another space to do it, I feel. Who knows, when the--when all the construction is done we might be able to do that, we just might. But I have ideas like that, because theater is a communicator and so many ideas can--can be bridged by doing it in a theatrical way. It's non-confrontational with an audience many times and it's a way that subject matter can be disseminated, you know, in a way that--that sticks with you. Not all theater is non-confrontational we--we do know that (laughter), but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 372746 Speaker 1: Have you discovered, perhaps, the next August Wilson among the people you're currently working with [at the Billie Holiday Theatre], I mean as far as new playwrights, new things that you're developing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know what you mean. I don't know. Speaker 1: I mean with someone who's absolutely amazing writer that you think watch out for this one? Speaker 2: I did one play and I don't wanna mention his name, really, but he is a brilliant writer. He truly is and he--the subject matter dealt with a grieving couple and how they worked out and worked through the death of their young child, you know, who was in the company of the father and not the mother at the time. And just how they worked through that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did that play go to Broadway? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Because it's very similar to 'Rabbit Hole' that--but, isn't 'Rabbit Hole' an Edward Albee play [sic. David Lindsay-Abaire]? I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember that, I'm not familiar with that one, but--but this one was called, I might as well tell it, 'Otis and Zora' [T.R. Riggins], and it was very, very well written. The playwright, and he's not a young person, he's not old either, but he's not a young person, so he has kind of definitive ideas and I just--he is not confident enough about has writing to--to be able to let it go and--and even to make me really wanna say hey, come on, let--let's work. He-- Speaker 1: But August Wilson had a way of--I--he's my favorite of all because it was just so clear to me. I mean I understood every, you know, I knew exactly what he was talking about. I grew up in that, you know, family and that, you know, in a lot of those situations. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. So, of course we always want to discover someone new and exciting. Story_ID: 372747 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are your hopes for the theatre [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] in years to come? Speaker 2: Well, that we will be bigger and better, and be able to do more. When I say bigger, I mean literally, bigger stage, fac-- Speaker 1: How many seats are here now? Speaker 2: It's 200 now. Speaker 1: And how many do you want? Speaker 2: I'd like 450, 450. I think that that's--that's good. Saturday afternoons we have to turn away 250. So (laughter), I figured that's where we are, maybe I should think even bigger than that. But--but that's good 'cause it still maintains a certain amount of intimacy. Speaker 1: And you want to stay within the com- this community? Speaker 2: Oh I think so. Yeah, this is an exciting community and I was--you know, I didn't know, coming from Ohio, coming from Pennsylvania, you know, experiences those, Virginia. I didn't know anything about the boroughs and that people didn't wanna go from Brooklyn [New York] to Manhattan [New York] and Manhattan to Brooklyn. I mean, we've been able to change that. But there're enough people right here that want wonderful theater that if no one came, I want you to come, understand, but if no one came from Queens [New York] or Manhattan, we'd still have an incredible audience, we'd still have full seats. So, you know, I kind of lost my point there, but I love being here, because I know what this community is and know who they are, even though it's changing. Speaker 1: How so? What have been the most visible changes over the years? Speaker 2: Well, it's not over the years, it's in the last year and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe two. I mean, it's the whole gentrification that's come in. Speaker 1: Applebee's right on the corner. Speaker 2: Applebee's is right there. It's nice to have it. We wanted to have a sit-down restaurant for a long time for-- Speaker 1: People can go to and from, you know, before or after the show you have it right there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right and we've got a relationship wherein they get a discount if they got a ticket stub, which is wonderful. But--but Applebee's is there and that's not--that's not a bad thing, but it's--you see different--you see people riding bikes on the sidewalk. Now that is new. You see it in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], but you don't see it in beside Brooklyn. And there's a couple of coffee shops that--that are opening up that we might not have had before, and didn't have before. And, so, it's the culture, it's the taste. I'm not sure, it's not happening in such a magnanimous way that I feel like I've gotta change, you know, what we do. I'm hoping never to do that because I don't think, I don't believe that there's ever gonna be enough opportunities for people of color to have venues to perform. Not in my lifetime (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what do you think-- Story_ID: 372748 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you think about Broadway today? Current Broadway? And I mean and the opportunities that are there? Speaker 2: Well they're, I mean, talking to different actors, you know, they would still complain. But it's greater, it--it's more than it is now. And regional theaters, you know, we have our artists who are our black directors who are directing in regional theater. I mean, [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr. has directed in almost all the regional theaters in--in the country to include Cleveland Play House [Cleveland, Ohio] and Cleveland Play House didn't even have black people attending and you couldn't act on the stage. I mean, I we--I tried. And when I first hood Woodie was gonna direct there, I started crying because--and I've told him this, and because it's really, really wonderful. So the opportunities are opening up. It--it--it's not enough because we were so shut out for so long and there's more people who want to perform. But it is increasing. Speaker 1: Have you seen 'The Color Purple' on Broadway? Speaker 2: I have not seen that yet. I have not seen that, but I'm going to. Speaker 1: Any desire to see it? Speaker 2: Yes, because so many people have said it's just wonderful, it's phenomenal. And I really do wanna see how they treated such a subject matter, you know, in a way that--that really lifts you up, buoys one up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, do you consider yourself more of a producer or a director? Speaker 2: Well, I produce more than I direct 'cause I don't direct all that I produce. Speaker 1: Which do you enjoy more? Speaker 2: Well, I enjoy the directing, that one-on-one, that preparation, that in the moment. But in terms of the overall view, I know that the producer is needed for the continuity, for the sustainability, all that. Speaker 1: We--do you--the artistic director here [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York], is that? Speaker 2: That's me now. Speaker 1: That's you now, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he's [Michael Pinkney] moved on. He's at the University of Florida in Gainesville [Florida], and has been gone for some time. So, I'm wearing all those hats, producer, director. Speaker 1: Artistic director, so then-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 372749 Speaker 1: So, the play, the season that you're doing now, are these all plays that you've done before? Speaker 2: No. Just the one. Speaker 1: Okay, and then 'Steal Me'? Speaker 2: 'Steal Away' [Ramona King]. Speaker 1: 'Steal Away.' Speaker 2: 'Steal Away' was really an old play, which--which really felt fresh with this audience, because they just ate it up. It--it's about--took place in 1933 and it's about these five church ladies who have been raising money through bake sales and church dinners to send black girls to the black schools, and they've been doing pretty well. They wanna send one girl a year. But they try to go for a loan and they are turned down. And they decide to rob a bank. It's hysterical. And the audiences ate it up. They really, really ate it up. More than I even expected. I thought that they would have problems with the robbing the bank part, but-- Speaker 1: Do the audience--do they come enough to keep the theater [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] alive and well? Speaker 2: Not without funding. Because we keep our ticket prices modest so that the entire family can come. We have senior tickets for seniors and children's tickets, you know, they're twelve dollars. We just raised them from ten dollars that they were for years. And, so--and during the week, adults can--general admission price is fifteen dollars. So, and then we have group rates or--which are lower than that. So it's--we want them to still come, but we can't do it on ticket income alone. Story_ID: 372750 Speaker 1: So when you look back over the thirty-five years that you've been here [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-three I've been here (laughter). Speaker 1: Thirty-three, okay. You weren't here for the first two that they started, okay. Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct. Speaker 1: But thirty-three you've been here. What stands out for you as--as highlights, challenges? Speaker 2: Wow, so much. I mean, certainly the Broadway production stood out because it was just one of a kind. I've enjoyed the tours that--that we've been able to do to the broader audiences because that increases our earned revenue. And we need to do more of that. I guess the artists who have come here and who have done well. The reaction, I just--I just love being in the audience when they connect with what's happening on the stage. It--it is a high for me, and for them as well. And I know they're getting a great deal out of it. So, that connection that--that becomes the high. The--the fact that--that--that our parent company [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York] some years ago lost $11 million a year and they were giving us $230,000 for our productions and not charging us rent because we were a subsidiary of theirs, they lost that and so we lost it, and the money from them. And so that's been a big struggle. And I had to slice the staff and that's why I'm wearing several hats and it's tough. My biggest challenge now is really to find that successor that I can groom and groom soon. Because for me, the worst thing would be--would be not to have this be able to continue. Speaker 1: And what would prevent it from continuing? Do you think you run--you are the--you are it? Speaker 2: Well, that's a terrible thing to say. I mean, not to hear you say, but that would be a terrible reality. But, wow. That is--I don't wanna think that I am it. I don't know how many other people who are out there willing to make the kind of sacrifices that I've made, that I've asked of my family to make. Just the money that I've begged them to put in here. I don't know how many are willing to do that. It's not that maybe they can't, but I don't know many are willing. I'm hoping, praying, working toward getting the increased kind of funding that can enable us to really build the staff that can support what's happening and the programs that are happening. And, so, that's why the coalition has come together. That's why we've gotten lobbyists that we're paying for that--that we've never had before. And we're gonna make this happen. 'Cause I think we all see, I mean, we are all people of a certain age, I'm sixty. I'm not the--the youngest, but I'm not the oldest. Speaker 1: Not the oldest. Speaker 2: No. And it--it's time to get in that fresh talent that--that's gonna be committed and will do it. And I'm sure I'm gonna find it, haven't yet (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are you living your dreams? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I really am. I'm living my dreams. I didn't become the wife and mother that I thought I might've become. And for the middle section of my life, I really said oh I regretted that, but I don't now. (Cough) Excuse me. I'm surrounded by a lot of people who need the nurturing and I try to provide it, that my children would, and so I'm living my dreams. Story_ID: 372751 Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts on nontraditional casting, which was coming about just as I arrived in the city [New York, New York], there's talk about nontraditional casting? Gregory Mosher, I remember attending seminars about it, different people speaking about how they felt about it. Speaker 2: I have a question to ask you. What was it to you, what did it mean to you? Speaker 1: Nontraditional casting? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh well, for me it meant that I could--that I--that it would open a door for me that had been closed before that just because a role said this, you know, this guy's white and forty, that he would have to be white and forty, he could be black and forty. Speaker 2: Because we were working with black artists all along it was--it didn't have a meaning for me. You know what I'm saying? I was here, working with black artists. So, it really--I just said, "Hm, they're trying to integrate and you know, have a platform for that." So that's what I said, "And that can be a good thing for artists of color." That's all I thought about it. Story_ID: 372752 Speaker 1: So what should I expect from you in years to come in this theater [Billie Holiday Theatre, New York, New York], when we come back? Even, I mean, what do you want it to look like? You said you're gonna refurbish it, you're gonna spend some of that nine hundred thousand [dollars] or 2.9 million [dollars] to, you know, what can I expect? Speaker 2: You're gonna see a bigger stage, a deeper stage, a stage where set pieces will fly in and out. You're gonna be able to see two maybe three different productions in a day. That I like a lot. And if we're lucky, there'll be a fancy new box office. There may even be a place to have a light repast, a little cabaret type, and there'll be more seats in there. Speaker 1: A little coffee shop? Speaker 2: A little coffee shop, yeah, yeah. A little latte. Speaker 1: Yeah, a little latte. Well, thank you very much. It's been a pleasure. Speaker 2: Thank you so much Shawn [Shawn Wilson], thank you. Speaker 1: It's been wonderful. Speaker 2: Yeah..