 Story_ID: 54498 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm interviewing today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Paula, P-A-U-L-A, Madison, M-A-D-I-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Yeah but I don't use it. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Sure, my date of birth is August 24, 1952, New York City, New York. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well it's kind of hard to say but I will go for this. I'm retired from full time employment. I retired from NBC Universal and General Electric after twenty two years of working with them. Presently my title is I am CEO and owner of the Los Angeles Sparks, WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] team in Los Angeles [California]. I am an investor and a consultant to the Africa Channel. We're a cable network that my family is the majority investor in and I am the vice president of the Los Angeles Police Department police commission. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: November 19, 2013 Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Present time we are in Los Angeles at the Sparks office. Story_ID: 54499 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five light weight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they will only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: French fries Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, white. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, summer. Speaker 1: Alright, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, I have a tie; China and anywhere in Africa. Speaker 1: Okay the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. How do I say it without appearing--this is in response to when people tell me they work hard, my response is mules work hard, race horses work smartly. Story_ID: 54500 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's [Nell Williams] side of the family and your father's side but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Nell, N-E-L-L, Vera, V-E-R-A, Lowe, L-O-W-E, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 11/15/1918, Jamaica, West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side and what are the stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: Well we about seven years ago we conducted a DNA search analysis, my oldest brother, in order to get the X and Y chromosome. So from my mother's side we fell into pretty much the pool where the majority of Jamaicans would fall into in that the majority of Jamaicans are Ocond (ph.) or Ashanti in present day Ghana. So, on my mother's mother's side of the family, my grandmother we would be Ocond. On my mother's father's side of the family, I just completed a search for my grandfather's, my maternal grandfather's family. Our documented history goes back to more than 2500 B.C. My grandfather was Chinese from Xiang Gang province in China. The ancestral village's name is Lo Swi Hop (ph.). Lo being our families' ancestral name and I found my grandfather's family in August of 2012 and I have identified probably about maybe 350 of my Chinese relatives who are still alive. Many in China and sprinkled around the world, United States, Canada, Australia throughout the east and Jamaica for certain. Story_ID: 54501 Speaker 1: Any stories about what they were doing back then? Speaker 2: Sure, so I just completed a documentary about the search for my Chinese family and I am presently writing a book. I have a contract with the Amistad Imprint of Harper Collins. And my [maternal] grandfather migrated to Jamaica in 1905 when he was fifteen years old. When slavery was abolished in the--in Britain in the British Commonwealth in 1838, they had great difficulty getting the Africans to continue to cut sugar cane and they started importing indentured workers initially from China. They also ended up including India but they in the 1850s the first shipload of Chinese arrived in Jamaica and they certainly didn't experience the same hardships that the African slaves did, but they were probably just a couple of steps above. They lived in the same ram shackled types of quarters and they signed contracts for three years that made them indentured workers. At the conclusion of their contracts they could return to China, passage back to China, or they could take the equivalent sum in payment. Many of them stayed and overwhelmingly it was men; Chinese women weren't really allowed to immigrate to the Caribbean until probably the 1900s, the teens 1913, '14 [1914], '15 [1915]. Up until then it was all men and the men certainly lived there for--some for decades, some for the rest of their lives but while living there many of them had families and had children with the Jamaican women of African descent and so my mother [Nell Williams] was a product of one of those. My grandfather did not go to cut sugar cane; my grandfather went and opened a number of groceries. They are colloquially referred to in Jamaica as a Chinese shop for Chinese a diminutive of that. So my grandfather owned a number of those. My grandfather had children with two Jamaican women in succession and then his family sent a Chinese woman when Chinese were allowed--women were allowed to come. They sent a Chinese bride for him, they'd never met. He was twelve years her senior, they married and we--my uncle who is presently eighty eight years old in China. We concluded that my grandfather never told the rest of the family about my mother who was the first born child because as he did with the second wife, we know for a fact that he went to the second wife and said he would like his two children who were half Chinese, half Jamaican, he wanted to raise them as his own and the second wife gave him one of the children, the daughter not the son. We believe that what happened was when my mother was three years old my grandfather in 1920 would have asked my grandmother for his daughter and my grandmother refused probably out of anger that after all the grief she had taken from Jamaican men primarily, for being with a Chinese man and having a child with him that now he was going to marry a Chinese woman. So my mother when we were children told us that she was--her mother took her from her father when she was three years old and she never saw him again. That is the story we picked up when my mother was about fifteen years old and was old enough at that point to go seeking her father and she did find one of the shops that he ran, one of the groceries that he ran that was managed by his younger brother and his nephew. And when my mother told them who she was they were shocked would be good--a good word. Not that they didn't know she existed but she came walking into the shop and they embraced her and said to her that her father had been searching for her, her entire life. Never did find her and just months before he had returned to China for the final time with his wife and a total of seven children and was not coming back to Jamaica. So my mother never saw her father again. Those are the stories my brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] and I were raised on. Story_ID: 54502 Speaker 1: And when I retired from NBC Universal in 2011 is when I actively started pursuing an undertaking of search to find my family. I did probably--the active search probably took about six months and then I found them in China; and December of 2012 twenty of us in my family the Lo clan, the Nell Lo clan that's my mother's [Nell Williams] name, we went to China. We are black Chinese and were embraced by more than 300 of my [maternal] grandfather's direct descendants who had travelled from all over the world to meet us. They didn't know we existed and we didn't know they existed. So it was a happy and exciting and in many ways life changing meeting that we--reunion. So since then I've been back to China, I think three times. I've been to China three or four times before I met them and in January of 2014, so about a couple of months, there is about another thirty of us who are going again to China to hang out for lunar new year and just have a festive time and hang out with the family and spend some time in our ancestral village. Story_ID: 54503 Speaker 1: Now your story from what you've explained your family is not the only family with Chinese ancestry but how I imagine a very few of them get a chance to go back to China and actually make the connection. Speaker 2: Well, culturally the Chinese have very close family ties; so historically what's happened from the time the Chinese arrived in Jamaica generally speaking the sons, many of the boys who would have been full Chinese growing up in Jamaica, born in Jamaica or half Chinese born in Jamaica, historically, somewhere around the age of seven, eight, nine years old they are sent to china to be raised by their Chinese family members; to become Chinese. The principles of Confucius and some go so far as to adopt Buddhism but they are sent to China. My tribe is known as Hakka, H-A-K-K-A. The Hakka are a minority group in China. Today the Hakka number about 90 million people worldwide but the Hakka are people who originally came from northern china and were driven south by Ghangis Khan. They--the word Hakka means guest, g-u-e-s-t so that they were always moving from one community in China, one area to another. And building very distinctive villages that generally was surrounded by walls because they were in effect interlopers, they were not the indigenous native people of that particular location; sometimes they would come under attack. So the Hakka are known for a particular style of architecture, pounded earth which today ecologically speaking pounded earth architecture where you compress earth and then it naturally heats and warms. So you compress and you make the walls out of this pounded earth. These are people who have always believed in entrepreneurialship. The Hakka women are the only women historically in China during the era when women bound their feet, the Hakka women never bound their feet because they were always not only on the move but they were entrepreneurial. So whether farming or sales or weaving, Hakka women have always worked. They ultimately ended up in southern China not too far from Hong Kong. Many of the Chinese in Hong Kong are of Hakka descent. So these people were industrious in present day time they affectionately referred to themselves as the Jews of China, meaning that they would travel forever and ever in order to make money. There are Jamaicans who are of Chinese descent who do speak Hakka because they were sent back to China as young boys and in some instances some girls in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] would have been sent back. But for the most part that knowledge, that experience of spending the ten years or so growing up in China, growing up in Hakka Village there was a period where that was routine. Then remember by the time we start getting into cultural revolutions and we start getting to a political climate in China that did not encourage people to come in from the outside, you saw that stop. Story_ID: 54504 Speaker 1: There are a lot of people like me who when you look at us you would not tell, you could not--would not see that we are Chinese. My mother [Nell Williams] absolutely looked Chinese, and we grew up in Harlem with a mother who looked absolutely Chinese and we looked absolutely African American. We, born and raised in Harlem, we looked Black. There are a lot of us who are quarter Chinese would be my age, I'm sixty one. Then you have a next generation that is an eighth Chinese even further away from that Chinese ancestor who don't necessarily look Chinese, but there are some who do and I have encountered people who have heard that I've conducted this search to find my family, have found them and they've asked me how did you do it. For the most part a lot of the Chinese men who went to Jamaica did not spend a lot of time talking about their ancestral villages or the families that they left behind in China. Many of them had wives and children in China as they traveled to Jamaica in order to create a better life for themselves and they'd send money back home. Some returned home but a lot of them stayed. And remember when they were sending these young boys, seven, eight, nine and ten years old to China, they were sending them in some instances to their Chinese wives to be raised and to understand Chinese, to speak Chinese, to be a child of China as much as a child of Jamaica. So there is a generation that kind of does know but there are a lot of us who do not know and there are about, I'd say maybe forty names--forty Chinese names that are very common in Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Panama, Honduras. Those for the most part up until the late 1970s, early 1980s almost all of the Chinese who settled in the Caribbean, Latin and Central America, and even many of them who settled in California who--they came here to build a railroad, they are Hakka. They came from the same province Kwong Dong province. They come from a radius of maybe thirty five miles. Their villages are all near each other because as immigrants are one to do they travel to a place and then they send for relatives. They send for brothers and cousins and nephews, and then you have this group of people who have removed themselves from their familiar home and land and will come to another place and form their own society. They live together, they worship together, they go into business together. That's the path of immigrants. Those people from Kwong Dong province, those Hakka as I said there are about forty names that are common and what I learned was that if you know family's Chinese name, there are only a few villages in Kwong Dong province where you can be from. The villages remain, unless the government in terms of relocation, unless the government has taken those villages down, those villages are still there and you can go back and find, for example my ancestral last name is Lo, right. The British spelled it Lowe, Mandarin spells it Luo, Cantonese spells it Law but it's all Lo because Chinese is symbols, right it's just a symbol. It's not what we would use as Arabic or western letters. Opinion happened in the 1960, '70s [1970s] where Chinese symbols were converted to our alphabets. So the spelling of my [maternal] grandfather's last name, of my ancestor's last name, was made to be Lowe because when my grandfather boarded a ship in Hong Kong the ship's clerk was probably British and so wrote my grandfather's name as L-O-W-E. But Chang is a very common name, Lee, Lin Chin. Story_ID: 54505 Speaker 1: There are some names that are very common to the Hakka who travelled to the Caribbean in which case for the tens of thousands of black Chinese who are running around the United States and Canada who don't know how to find their Chinese family that's the key. If you just know the last name you're probably only going to have to search maybe two or three villages inside of Kwong Dong province. And the literate Chinese kept history books. Ancestral documents and the pronunciation of the book is jiapu. I guess the spelling would be J-I-A-P-U and my family's jiapu is computerized; it was digitized. My family's village is a three hundred room villa in present day Chang Zen because my [maternal] grandfather and some of our other, I guess my other ancestors were sending money back home they were able to build up the village. The Chinese government turned my ancestral village into the largest Hakka museum in China in 1996, and so my family's jiapu is computerized. So there is a computer screen that's probably I'd say, I don't know, four feet by three feet and you'd go into my village Lo Swi Hop (ph.). They have the--you know when you go to a museum and they have those recorded touring devices in various languages, but when you go there my family's family tree is actually on the wall in this museum, it's beautiful. And you would pass this computer screen, very large, and you'd wave your hand and it's actually a virtual book. And our family's documented history in that jiapu goes back to 1006 B.C. So some of my ancestors for example, in China they would have imperial exams that all the children had to take the imperial exams and I learned about a month ago that one of my ancestors during this particular time when the imperial exam was given, one of my ancestors was ranked sixth in the entire country in terms of the score that he achieved on the imperial exam. And one of my other ancestors was the supervisor of the testing for Kwong Dong province. That suggests that consistent with Hakka belief that education is very, very important. My family's I guess three word motto is education, family and prosperity which was stunning to me and my brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] when we went to our family village and it's written at the entrance to the village because my parents, that was all they cared about and especially my mother drove us hard to remain together as a family and to get great educations and my mother said she came to the United States for her children to be rich, that was it and she was not equivocating; she would have nothing less. So it was shocking but maybe not so much that my mother who had not interacted with Hakka since she was three years old when she no longer was living with her father and mother together that that's how we were raised. And we--the ancestral overlay and maybe there's something to what's in your DNA but that, you know if you ask most people who would know my family as a Black family here in the United States that's completely 100 percent what we stand for. Story_ID: 54506 Speaker 1: Now we have a couple of other people we've interviewed for anybody watching this of Chinese ancestry. One is Judge Russell Sugarman of Memphis [Tennessee] who is prominent in the Civil Rights Movement and Akio who is here in the Los Angeles [California] area; he was an actor and a musician, a disco musician and a record producer who starred as a Colonel in a Handway Hilton (ph.) movie where he played a Vietnamese. He was Trinidadian, he was born in Trinidad. Speaker 2: Hakka? Speaker 1: Yeah, years ago like watching Jimmy Cliffs (ph.) the harder they come I was surprised because I had never been in Jamaica to see their recording studios managed by a Chinese man. Speaker 2: Absolutely, so right now--. Speaker 1: That's Tough Kong studio. Speaker 2: Exactly that's the Bob Marley-that's the studio that Bob Marley was with also Patricia Chinn, her family and she's Chinese Jamaican. Her family has had a recording studio in Jamaica for more than forty, fifty years. Story_ID: 54507 Speaker 1: The development of a middle class--of a middle class of a middle class economy the Chinese in Jamaica as well as the other nations of the Caribbean where they had a real presence including Cuba but what you had was a buffer class. So if you were dealing primarily with the British colonies at the very top of a triangle would have been the white governor appointed by the King or Queen, the monarch of England would have appointed that governor. Just under that governor would have been the Chinese and the Indians and the Syrians and even they had a pecking order. So for example, some of the Indians who would have come to the Caribbean would have come from the class in India which would have been considered the untouchables. So you had this pecking order where this group of people who were indentured workers, in India they were relegated to frankly collecting sewage and removing sewage. When they came to the Caribbean, I'll speak specifically about Jamaica, not all of them but certainly they had a high representation not only in cutting sugar cane but in being the sewer collectors because they came from that class of untouchables where they were relegated by their own nation in a pecking order hierarchly and then once you come down this pyramid with the white colonialist at the top and then you had a buffer class of Asians and Syrians and Lebanese and many of them were Jewish then you finally came down to the Africans. And this buffer class as each group touched each other what you started to see was the intermarriage, the interrelationships between the Africans and the Chinese the Indians, the Syrians, etc. So you started having children of mixed race. When you went up another level on occasion you might see the people at the top of the pyramid, right, having relations with the middle class--that middle zone of the Asians and the Syrians, etc. and with the Africans, right. So consistent with slavery and consistent with that institution of slavery the person at the very top, the people at the very top had free access to wherever they wanted to be in society. But the people at the bottom could not go to the top, right, and the people in the middle could not go to the top. Not until those nations were afforded their independence. So when, 1962, when Jamaica became independent from England, you saw some of the--that administrative leadership class, the governors and the ambassadors and that whole governmental at the top of the pyramid, many of them left and returned to England or on to their next post and then what you saw were the Chinese and the Indians, etc. and the mixed race moved to the top. In Jamaica's case Michael Manley who was prime minister of Jamaica [1972-1980, 1989-192], the son of the second prime minister of Jamaica, Norman Manley [1955-1959], Michael Manley like his father was very, very fair skinned. They were very much mixed race and you could look at Michael Manley and some people could say he could have passed for white. Michael Manley, I think, turned Jamaican society on its head when he married a woman Beverly [Manley] who had an afro and who was coloring wise more like my color. Story_ID: 54508 Speaker 1: Alright go ahead. Speaker 2: So this, you know the merchant class ultimately began to rise to the top of this pyramid. We had Michael Manley who was prime minister who could have passed for white like his father Norman Manley who was the second prime minister of Jamaica. Michael Manley married a woman by the name of Beverly [Manley] a fellow Jamaican. She was about my color maybe a little darker. She had an afro and that was not done in Jamaica. Fair skinned men did not marry brown skinned or black women because Jamaica certainly had a color caste system as existed in the United States and in many places. But he did marry her and I remember being a young maybe I was in my teens--I was ten years old and I was thrilled, excited actually to see that while this fair skinned Jamaican married a brown skinned Jamaican; it's usually the reverse. The brown skinned, dark skinned man would marry the mixed race women as my father did with my mother with the intention frankly of having children who were fair skinned who had what one would call straightish hair. It didn't happen when my father [Elrick Williams] married my mother [Nell Williams], thankfully. I am who I am and it is--I am who I am. I resembled my ancestors; I guess in some cases I've seen where I probably resemble both sides. Story_ID: 54509 Speaker 1: Now tell me something about the Yoruba ancestry. Is there any stories about the Yoruba ancestry? I mean, I'm sorry, Hakka survivals in your family. Speaker 2: Oh sure. Well if I get to--when we did our--when we conducted our DNA search what it showed was on my father's [Elrick Williams] side he came from a tribe in northern Europe. Speaker 1: Now I just want to deal with your mother's [Nell Williams] side right now. Speaker 2: Right but I'm going to explain. So what you would see is that we couldn't zero in on my father's side anymore than to identify that my father, his DNA markers were from northern Europe. People would say oh my God that's interesting, like wow. That would have been the slave owner who would have raped the African slave who somewhere down the line was my ancestor. On my mother's side the Ocond people who are Ashanti. So the Ashanti are known for their warrior culture. The Ashanti are known for being fierce warriors. When those slaves were captured in what's today present day Ghana and were taken across the Atlantic and were taken to Jamaica in order to be broken in, the word they used was seasoned; they would season them. The slave owners would break their spirits and teach them how to be subservient or that was the goal, submissive. It didn't work so well in Jamaica. The Ashanti are actually the group that is the majority of the Jamaican population; more than 90% of Jamaicans are of Ocond or Ashanti descent. So you have a built in culture of warrior mentality; going to fight back. I am independent; you can't tell me what to do, which in many ways has played out even today in Jamaica. Now some of those Ocond warriors escaped and they escaped to the mountains and hills in Jamaica in a parish that today is Trelawny Parish. It's towards the interior of the island. The Ocond warriors became known as Maroons. The Maroons are the Jamaicans who still present day Jamaica Maroons exist and they historically were the slaves, the escaped slaves, the former slaves who would come down from the hills and the mountains and stage raids on the slave owners. They would kill the slave owners and their families and kill any slaves who did not join the Maroons. And my presumption is they figured ultimately they were going to be a problem. If you are going to stay and you want to remain a slave as opposed to joining us and being free then we're just going to take care of you now. The Maroons and that name Maroon is a variation of the Spanish word for wild ones, Cimarrones. At one point Jamaica was under the flag of Spain. So what you have in present day Jamaica around Accompong town and there is a city in Ghana, Akropong. In Jamaica it's Accompong town and there was--there's land that was awarded to a slave Kofi and his siblings and his family. He was the leader of the Maroons when the raids and the marauding was going on in the 1700s. They negotiated a treaty at the behest of the British monarch--monarchy and who told the governor of the island whose last name was Trelawney [Edward Trelawney], he said to him negotiate a peace with these escaped slaves and tell them that we will give them an X amount of land up in the mountains and hills, this is their land and they will be free from ever being prosecuted for killing British subjects as well as slaves. And they negotiated that treaty which is the Treaty of Trelawney [Treaty of Trelawney Town, 1738] and it lasted about a year before the Maroons started killing the slave owners again. Story_ID: 54510 Speaker 1: I smile because not often enough are we taught stories about rebellions, about slaves who would not live in slavery, they refused. We've heard stories about some slaves throwing themselves overboard in order to avoid what they knew was coming, but in many instances the stories that I have seen about slavery certainly do acknowledge that slaves rebelled and they fought and you would sometimes see pictures of them with hand cut off or can no longer speak because the tongue was cut out or blinded because that slave wanted to read. And it always ended up looking like this poor, unfortunate however brave soul but ultimately that person was broken. Well the Maroons not broken. Jamaica stopped bringing slaves to--the British stopped bringing slaves to Jamaica to break them in because the risk of having that entire process flipped and destroyed because the Maroons were getting bigger and bigger and bigger. So that today they still own that land, they still own those lands in Jamaica. They have an annual celebration that people travel from all over the world to go see and visit the Maroons. And some of the Maroons that African Americans would be more familiar with, those of contemporary times, would be Marcus Garvey and Bob Marley. They are descendants of Maroons. My grandfather [John Henry "Jack" Williams] on my father's [Elrick Williams] side came from the region where the Maroons lived and still have their lands. I don't know enough about my father's side of the family to know if my paternal grandfather was descendant from the Maroons but people tell me that it is highly likely that he was because of where he was born. Story_ID: 54511 Speaker 1: The Rasta culture is basically Maroon. Speaker 2: Well Rasta culture is and not so much. The Rastas followed a philosophy, a religion where they believed that Haile Selassie the former emperor of Ethiopia was the embodiment of God, of Ja; Maroons don't believe that. That's not a part--the Maroons are a people. It is not--being a Maroon is not tied to a religion. Rastas are people who could be Maroons but in Jamaica they can come from anywhere and everywhere in Jamaica and they believe in a religion that means that someday, someday they will be taken--they will go to their ancestral land which is present day Ethiopia. It's--they are not necessarily the same. Speaker 1: I understand what you're saying, but I think a lot of the early Rastas were Maroons in the beginning (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Absolutely Speaker 1: They talk about the man in the hills and all that. I know they weren't originally (simultaneous)(unclear). Speaker 2: It's--the similarity, I think, and I'm thrilled that I come from a history that includes such people. The similarity is that they espouse a doctrine, a belief that we are from Africa; we are from Africa make no mistake about it. But Maroons don't necessarily lock their hair. The Rastas believe that in the bible you're not to put a comb to your hair, and so for them it's not like what we wear in the United States where hair stylist make nice locks and they are all uniform size. True Rastas, it just grows. So sometimes that is why you would see it in a big clump and some of it is skinny and it's all different--because you just never cut it, you never comb it, it does what it does. Speaker 1: Right, several musicians do wear their hair like that with a tree branch sticking in it or anything. Speaker 2: You know certainly Bob Marley that was his hair and he was--his father was German and he was half, but I, again it is a Rastas--Rastafarianism is a religion and being a Maroon is a culture, it's a legacy, it's a people; it's you are Ocond, you're Ashanti. Story_ID: 54512 Speaker 1: Okay now let just ask questions about your mother [Nell Williams]. Now when your mother grew up you told the story that she basically looks Chinese and she was separated from her father years before. So what did she say about growing up and did she grow up in Jamaica, did the family move too? Speaker 2: No she grew up in Jamaica and she moved herself. She grew up in Jamaica with her grandmother. I have a picture of my mother. My mother looked Chinese, beautiful woman. She had a hard growing up. Her grandmother viewed her more with shame than anything else that this half child. My mother said the name that she was most often called when she was a child was a half-Chiney wretch. That suggests that she did not have a happy childhood and that she explained to us all the things that happened to her and were done to her. It was absolutely not a happy childhood and interestingly somewhere along the line someone taught my mother to sew. It may have been other Chinese, I don't know but one of the occupations that Hakka excel in is weaving and sewing. So my mother was an expert seamstress. She worked for some time at a school that was a private school for the daughters of the middle class. Many Chinese, some black Jamaicans, the Alpha School for Girls in Kingston, Jamaica, and my mother became one of the seamstresses there, where I learned in the past eighteen months she met my paternal grandmother and I guess from that that's how she met my father [Elrick Williams]. But my mother in 1945 she applied in 1944, I think was the year she applied for a visa to the United States under the Chinese immigration quota because her father was Chinese. She received a visa; at that point the United States limited the number of Chinese who were coming into the United States. It was a very small number; I think something like two hundred per year. As we all know the United States was much more interested in having western Europeans come into the United States. There came a point where it kind of switched to eastern Europeans but it was really never Africans nor-not until the era of science and technology were Asians sought after. So in the 1940s my mother was kind an anomaly and she--and I had been told that there was a group of her and some other Hakka Chinese in Jamaica who were friends and they got word that the United States was going to lift this quota and a bunch of them applied. Looking at it, I kind of suspect that what happened was because these were Chinese who were westernized, that the United States was more willing to bring them in from the Caribbean. So a slew of them came in one of whom was my mother who flew into Miami [Florida]. When she got to-- Speaker 1: Now your parents weren't married yet, or were they? Speaker 2: No but they knew each other. I by the way did not know that they actually were an item in Jamaica before and an item for a few years. I thought that my father had seen her, was smitten, they dated, she was heading over you know, she had relatives in New York in Harlem and I thought that's how it happened. My older cousins and my aunt and uncle, my father's brother and sister have disavowed me of the foolishness that I had in my head about my parents. So my mother flew to the United States to Miami. I'm assuming that she probably took a train up to New York to Harlem where she had two much older cousins a brother and sister who owned brownstones in Harlem. So she went to live with them. My father--so at that point I think my mother was twenty six years old. Story_ID: 54513 Speaker 1: You want to go to your father's [Elrick Williams] side and then we will put them together at that point? You want to do that? So we'll go to your father's side and can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure my father's name is Elrick, E-L-R-I-C-K, Mortimer, M-O-R-T-I-M-E-R, Williams, Senior. Born August 25, 1918-1917, sorry. Speaker 1: Okay and he was born in what part of Jamaica? Speaker 2: He was born in Kingston, Jamaica. Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your father's side of the family in terms of his ancestors and what they were doing? Speaker 2: Right so the common theme that you will hear is that both my parents had tough childhoods. My father was an only child, the only child of his mother and his father. His mother's name was Sarah Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D and she at the age of thirteen was sent from the country to live with her cousin in Kingston. She was going to be part of the house staff, and in Jamaica that was pretty common. My [paternal] grandfather [John Henry "Jack" Williams] was a usurer, U-S-U-R-E-R, and that was before they would have been called bankers or lenders or maybe even loan sharks. But it was a legal profession and it existed at a time where Blacks could not go to banks, there were no banks for Blacks to go to. You could not be a customer of a bank and so my grandfather like Norman Manley who, the second [Jamaicain] prime minister [1972-1980, 1989-192] who had been a usurer, my grandfather loaned money for profit and he at the same time or probably before he became a usurer he accumulated his capital by practicing a, oh how would I call it, it's not a religion, I'll call it a craft called obeah, O-B-E-A-H. In African American parlance it would be he was like a roots man, right. But my grandfather would have been an obeah man practicing at something like this, this is a story my father told me. You had somebody who has wished you ill and you want to break this spell; or let's say in Jamaica the ghosts, bad spirits are called duppies, D-U-P-P-I-E-S or duppy. A duppy can destroy you, destroy your family. A duppy is--you want to keep duppies away from you entirely. So you go to my grandfather whose name was John Henry Williams they called him Jack Williams, you go to my grandfather who by the way I never knew either of my grandfathers and you say someone has called duppy down on you and you need this to stop. You can't work, you can't--everything bad is going on. My grandfather might tell you that he can remove the duppies from you and what you have to do is on January 17th when the moon is high at 12:05 a.m. you must take fifteen shillings and you must tie fifteen shillings in a red cloth and you must put that cloth in a leather pouch and then you must go to the big ackee tree that is near farmer Peter's farm, that one that's right by the third post, walk fifteen paces to the north and dig. Dig exactly half a meter and put that pouch with the shillings in there, cover it up and put one stone on top of it and then leave and never come back and that will remove the duppy. Then of course, the next morning my grandfather would go to that location and dig up the money and there he would have the capital to become a usurer. Speaker 1: That's kind of like a hoodoo man (unclear) similar (simultaneous). Speaker 2: There you go, hoodoo, roots all the above. But I want to be clear that it's not voodoo, this is not where my grandfather was actually a believer and a practitioner. So from the perspective of obeah, obeah is very much working roots. I'm not saying my grandfather did not know how to work roots but this was not something he intended to do for any longer than to accumulate enough money. He is now going to start lending you money. So--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Is that how he became a usurer by being an obeah man? Speaker 2: That's exactly right. It was an obeah man first or possibly simultaneously but that's how he was able to accumulate capital. Story_ID: 54514 Speaker 1: This is what many of us have speculated or is that religion. It comes out of a need, so how can I get paid for really doing nothing? Then once you get it then how can you make money off of it, and then-- Speaker 2: Well you know far be it for me to start commenting on the origins of religion. I wouldn't dream of approaching that but what I will say is that factually my father [Elrick Williams] told me that this is how his father [John Henry "Jack" Williams] made money, initially and then my grandfather would lend money at certain rates. By now my grandfather had moved from St. Ann's Bay which is where he was born to Kingston which became the capitol of Jamaica. My grandfather at the age of around thirty was married to a woman her name was Mae [Williams]. They were not able to have children and my grandfather was at that point reasonably prosperous for a black Jamaican and Mae it turns out that it was Mae who could not have children because when my grandmother, Sarah [Lloyd] who was thirteen was sent from the country to work in their household, Sarah became pregnant by Jack. I am sure the scandal was significant although I will say in that era thirteen year olds were getting married, having babies all the above. But still scandalous, this is--I don't, I'm sure they were not first cousins, they probably were like third or fourth cousins but it's still unseemly and in today's world it certainly would have been statutory rape. So my father was born to Jack Williams and Sarah Lloyd who when he was born she was fourteen years old. I found my father's birth certificate, in fact, there are two birth certificates. The first birth certificate that reflects his original date of birth indicates that Mae was present at his birth. I went to the address where that's listed on my father's birth certificate at 9 Hannah Street in Hannah Town, Kingston [Jamaica] and we believe that's where the midwife was. My grandmother, of course, was sent out of that house when she was pregnant and she probably lived with relatives in Kingston until the baby--my father was born. When he was born Mae took possession of him. Story_ID: 54515 Speaker 1: My father [Elrick Williams] did not grow up with his mother. Mae [Williams], the stepmother, took possession of Elrick and she took him home to Jack [Williams] and they raised Elrick as their son. So my grandfather [John Henry "Jack" Williams] had what he wanted which is a son and an heir and Mae had misery because my father said that Mae beat him every day when his father wasn't around. His father however, adored him and worshiped him and my father was extraordinarily smart and while he was going to a school that today would have been a school of engineering, my father ultimately became a tool and die maker. His father also had him working for him. So my father was one of the collection guys in my grandfather's usury business. When my brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] and my father went to Jamaica, I believe it was in 1973, it's first time my brothers had been to Jamaica and they went with my father, no I think it was '67 [1967]. Anyway my father is walking down the street with my brothers and my brother says my father said when this guy sees me watch what he does, he's going to cross and go to the other side of the street and my brothers were like what, and that's exactly what happened. This guy was walking towards them; he saw my father, paused and crossed the other side of the street. My brothers said what's that about? And my father said after all these years this guy still owed my father money and he thought I was going to come after him. My father apparently used to carry a gun in order to collect on those loans and it was how one made a living, I guess. But there are--there's no question that my father had a very difficult growing up. He didn't learn that his mother [Sarahh Lloyd] was his mother until he was almost sixteen years old. Up until then he thought his mother was a cousin and as is culture not only in Africa but even in China of which there was significant numbers of Chinese in Jamaica generationally because she was that much older than him and he referred to her as aunt. So my grandmother's name to my father was Aunt Sarah, he always called her Aunt Sarah even after he learned she was his mother he called her Aunt Sarah. When he was sixteen his mother became pregnant with someone else's child and my father went to his father, Jack and asked his father if he could give Sarah his allowance. He was a student still and he wanted to give his mother his money to help support her and my father said that his father so admired that that he increased my father's allowance allowing him to give his mother money and still have some for himself. Story_ID: 54516 Speaker 1: So your father [Elrick Williams] now he's collecting for his father [John Henry "Jack" Williams]. Speaker 2: He's collecting for his father, he also is attending Kingston Technical College [Kingston, Jamaica] and I've forgotten the name of the other school that he attended but he was a tool and die maker. My father had to me an uncanny ability that made me call him like a human calculator. Like you could say to my father what's 359 plus 72 divided by 15 times 723 give me the square root of that and my father would go and he would tell you the answer. I was like who can do that? I thought that I was inadequate because I couldn't do that and then when I was a kid my oldest brother [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr.] could do that and then I really was like okay I'm just stupid. But it wasn't until much later that I learned that much of the world was like me and not a lot of people like my father and my brother. So he was--my father was the first Black shop steward for The United Auto Workers Airline--Airplane Builders unit on Long Island in New York [City] [New York]. They elected him shop steward back when that was just not happening. But my father never let anybody believe he was anything but a proud black Jamaican man. He didn't mince words at all, not at all and when we were little kids we would dread going places with him because there was always going to be an argument with someone who approached him in a way that was not consistent with how he expected to be treated. And even today as we all recognize that when we go into major department stores, right we are profiled as African Americans. You walk around throughout the store somebody is following you; nine times out of ten somebody is following you unless you shop in this place so often that the sales people recognize you and know you and it's oh Mrs. Madison I have some things I would love for you try on. I now am at the point where I almost never--almost never go into department stores. Like when I was in New York [City] for years, I almost never would take a yellow cab, I'd walk or I would take the subway or bus because I'd be so mad at I have to give you my credentials in order for you to serve me, to take my money, I'm not going to do it. So we would shopping with my father and I-my brothers and I never understood why we would go to these stores, Gimbels and Macy's and Abraham and Strauss and we'd go in and invariably someone would say sir may I help you. My father would say no you may not help me when I want your help, I will summon you and we'd cringe, we would literally cringe. But what I realized later on was that my father observed them observing us and he was not having it so he would say in a very loud and forceful tone, no you may not help me when I want help, I will summon you, go away. Today I totally applaud what my father did and what I realize by growing up like that when my daughter was little, we'd go to restaurants it turns out my daughter would cringe because we-she and I would sit there and we'd be in a restaurant and some other people would come and usually it would be white people and they would-we would have already been seated and usually not always but frequently the people sitting over there who were white who came in after us would actually get served first. Hello, may I get you some water, some menus and I would say excuse me, I believe we were here first. Oh, oh well ma'am I'll be right there; no we were here first and my daughter would mommy why did you do that because we were here first. Now built into this super sensitivity--hyper sensitivity is one where I don't know call it--as I mentioned before the DNA--the Hakka [Chinese] DNA, you know family, education, prosperity. Then I will factor in my Ocond [Ghanaian] background which has me say no, you may disrespect me but you've got to do it in a way that I don't see it. When I observe it, I'm going to call you on it here and now. We are not going to have a contractual relationship where in exchange for me sitting down and eating your fare-your food I pay you money. If you're not going to treat me the same way you're treating all the other people in here and I will use that phrase in exchange for all the white people in here then guess what, I'm not merely going to get up and leave, that would just be too easy. It's too demeaning and I'm not going to slink out the door. What I'm going to do is call you on it, we are going to alter this behavior maybe not for all time but for right here, right now what you're going to learn is you're not getting away with this. And how has that translated, I'm sure my daughter is doing the same thing. It can get you into trouble maybe, I don't know but maybe it doesn't. Maybe it's a learning moment for all kinds of people and my parents grew up similarly difficult growing up. Story_ID: 54517 Speaker 1: For my father [Elrick Williams] to have to face--for as proud as my father was for him to have to face the knowledge that he is the product of such a relationship, you know he's the outside child there were no inside children but he's the child outside the marriage and his step mother [Mae Williams] hated him. And when my father got old enough to stare her down to tell her you will not hit me again, it changed all kinds of things for him and now I know you're not my mother, you're not going to hit me anymore. He never told his father [John Henry "Jack" Williams] but now he knows that he has a mother [Sarah Lloyd] and this woman is his mother. So my father showered her with his affection as well as with his worldly goods. He probably to the detriment of my parents' marriage, my father would take everything my mother said and put it in a barrel and ship it to Jamaica for his mother, for his brother and sister and my grandmother's [Sarah Lloyd] family. And my mother [Nell Williams] said to the point where if we bought anything new, towels, sheets, clothing your father would pack it up and send it to Jamaica because your grandmother could sell it and make money. Story_ID: 54518 Speaker 1: So out of a legacy such as that my father's--I paused earlier when you asked me what was his saying but this saying is my father's saying but I will say it now, my father [Elrick Williams] used to say that any man who works for another man and only collects one pay check from that other man is a fool. Now that speaks to the culture where and probably the stereotype where Jamaicans have a million jobs. At one point there were jokes about you lazy coconut you only have fifteen jobs. 'In Living Color' used to do that, have that as a running joke but it's kind of true. As a buffer against poverty, culturally Jamaicans would go to work for somebody and have side jobs and if you didn't have a side job if you had a house or you had an apartment you would rent out a room. You don't need to have the bedroom; you might sleep on the couch and rent out the room to the person who would actually pay your rent. It is part the culture that you have to have security in the event that some man tells you you're fired. Some boss forget man, generically speaking, but some boss says you're fired, I don't like what you're doing, I don't like what you said, I don't like how you looked at me. You know what, I don't care take your job I'm not going to starve, I'm fine. That is an important cultural trait that many, many Jamaicans still adhere to. You will find Jamaicans who have real estate or they got a little something on the side. There is a financial I'll use the word scheme but in a good sense that Jamaicans practice it's called sou-sou. A sou-sou is if there are fifteen of us or let me make it smaller, it's ten of us and ten of us we all know each other and we stare at each other and we commit to participating in a sou-sou, and every month, I'll use the number a hundred dollars, every month each one of use has to put a hundred dollars in the sou-sou and then we take turns consecutively drawing that capital out. So I put in a hundred dollars and every tenth time I get a thousand. Now the point of that is that you are getting your own money but it's in forced savings. Particularly at a time we were not allowed to participate in banks. We could not belong to banks, we could not--banks would not take Black people's money. So a sousou--now you multiply that you know, do in multiples of ten. I put in a thousand a month, every tenth time I'm going to get ten thousand dollars. You have a bigger sousou and ultimately what you find is that you might end up having the down payment to buy a house; you might have a down payment to start a business; you might have the down payment to send your child to college. That is how a lot of Jamaicans actually in Jamaica and in the United States so much so that years ago before I left New York the banks of New York City particularly those that had customers in Brooklyn and Queens where lots of Jamaicans live began accepting sou-sou as an asset if you wanted to apply for a mortgage. Now not in LA [Los Angeles, California] because there are not significant numbers of Jamaicans here for whom that is an accepted practice and people don't--you don't drop out of a sou-sou. You have to tell in advance I'm going to pull out and then they make the adjustment. But you can't not fulfill your commitment because the sou-sou is conducted with close family and friends. So you would never let them down. Point being here is that my father participated in that. As I told you my [paternal] grandfather [John Henry "Jack" Williams] was an obeah [Caribbean folk magic practice] man and a usurer. I am certain that my mother's [Nell Williams] background would have made her willing to marry a man who was successful at making money which was what my father was; my father was successful at making money and the two of them passed on to me and my brothers the drive and the determination to make significant amounts of money. Story_ID: 54519 Speaker 1: So your parents got together once they reached the United States, once your father got here. Is there a story about how they eventually fell in love? They were a couple--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Somewhere in there I believe that they you know--okay my [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Lloyd] was the head seamstress I learned in the past year or so. My grandmother was the head seamstress. Sarah was the head seamstress at the Alpha School for Girls. I don't know if she hired my mother [Nell Williams], I don't know is she hired my mother, I don't know if she Nell or she met Nell [Williams], my mother there. But one of my cousins who is almost ninety told me that my--it is in fact my grandmother, Sara who introduced Nell and Elrick [Williams] which astounded me because as far as I knew my whole life, my grandmother, Sara and her daughter in law Nell never liked each other. I was stunned to learn that they used to be friends. So my presumption is that Sara took a look at Nell who was very fair skinned who looked very Chinese and who came from a very troubled background and had almost no family and looked at her and said she'd be a good match for my son. Now remember her son is the product of a mother who was fourteen years old. So my father was not going to marry up into society, right background was a little sketchy, not good. But what my grandmother and I could see my grandmother thinking this through that maybe the two of them would produce lovely children which would be the goal. By lovely, what do we mean lovely? Not hair like this and fair skinned. So I laugh because one of my brothers is-was fair skinned but as the years go by he is not as fair skinned. But he was very fair skinned, he looked pretty Chinese, my oldest brother [Erlick Mortimer Williams, Jr.]. Then my older brother [Howard Courtney Williams] was dark skinned and then there is me; I came out in the middle. And I, when my father used to do that thing where he would tell me he was ashamed of Marcus Garvey and why was I writing my thesis at Vassar College [Poughkeepsie, New York] on a man who shamed Jamaica, I had to tell my father at my age of twenty one. In many ways I tried to present it in a way that wasn't disrespectful but I explained to him you are the product of a colonialist mentality. You have been taught to hate yourself and to not recognize the good things that Marcus Garvey would have done for Blacks in the Caribbean and Blacks in the United States and for Pan-Africanism period. For you not to acknowledge that is unfortunate. So yeah, so my--I could see my grandmother putting the two of them together. Story_ID: 54520 Speaker 1: My mother [Nell Williams], I think, would have been attracted to my father [Elrick Williams] because he was making money and he came from--when she met him his father had left him cars. My uncle says that my father had a car I don't know if it was a Studebaker but it was the only one on the island of Jamaica that was that model, that convertible, that color, and because my grandfather [John Henry "Jack" Williams], my paternal grandfather Jack died when my father was maybe twenty, twenty one years old. So my father inherited those things and so he would have been a catch and he wanted my mother. They lived together for awhile in Jamaica I understood. I never knew that. My mother told me she didn't believe in shacking; well apparently that must have been a new belief by the time she reached the new world and had a daughter. But they lived together and she left him. Chinese immigration quota, going to the United States, going to find my way in the world and my father who was gainfully employed as a tool and die maker boarded a ship that was heading to New York [City] and he was hired on to work on that ship as a mechanic, tool and die maker. He could fix the engine, etc. The ship docked in New York, Manhattan and my father had no papers that would have allowed him to get off the ship, but get off the ship he did in pursuit of my mother. He had a few dollars in his pocket; he took the subway to Harlem, got off at 110th Street. He said in that short amount of time someone picked his pocket so all he had left were the coins; he had no bills. He went into a restaurant on 110th Street and Lennox Avenue and I used to see that restaurant when I was a kid, it's gone now. And my father said all he had was enough to get a cup of coffee and when he went in and sat down and he asked the counterman for a cup of coffee the counterman recognized my father's accent and said something like hey man you Jamaican and my father said yeah and he said you need a job and my father said yeah. And so that day my father started working in that restaurant. First as a dishwasher and then he became a short order cook because my father really could cook. He asked this Jamaican man if he knew the Wholeness (ph.) family. These were my mother's cousins; he said yeah they live on 126th Street. My father headed up to 126th Street, there was my mother within a couple of months they were married. They separated by the time I was three years old. So they had three children, I'm the youngest and the only girl and that is how my parents came to be together, married and start their lives in the United States. My father was deported when I was just about three years old. The (simultaneous) (unclear) the parallel life that I thought after my mother told me about her being separated from her father at three years old, I was like wow. I was separated from my father at three years old but my father was deported to Jamaica because he was an undocumented alien. My mother had been raised in the Church of England, my father had been raised Roman Catholic. He was sent to Jamaica, my mother went to Catholic Charities in New York which used to be a place that was very, very helpful to immigrants. So my mother went to Catholic Charities. She had converted to Catholicism as she had to do in order to marry my father and agreed that the children would be raised Catholic. She told them the story of how my father was deported. They assisted my mother in becoming a U.S. citizen, filling out all the paperwork and getting the sponsors and so forth. I found all those documents online, my mother's application, the name of the sponsors one of whom I knew as a child; I had no idea. And in 1955 my mother became a U.S. citizen and then my father was able to come back to the United States. By then their marriage was irretrievably broken, it was destroyed. My father came back, they didn't get along and--but they didn't divorce until I think I was twenty six years old. Story_ID: 54521 Speaker 1: So we grew up in a single parent household going back and forth to family court as both my mother [Nell Williams] and father [Elrick Williams] fought over custody of the three of us. My father wanted us, the two of them had vowed when they met each other and I guess fell in love that they would never have children out of wedlock which is understandable because they were both children out of wedlock. So we were not born out of wedlock. They also vowed that they would never raise their children without a full family, they couldn't keep that vow. They just were raised in families that there was no road map, no instruction for how to be a wife nor how to be a husband. They were fierce as a mother and father. My parents would do anything and everything for us but ultimately when my parents split my father wanted custody. They battled in family court for about the next four years. I remember being in family court a lot and my father was able to buy a house in Queens, Springfield Gardens, New York [City]. We visited him on weekends and spent much of the summer with him and my father had my brothers' names and my name put on the deed to the house. So we were raised knowing that we owned property. My father his name was on the house, of course, but he told us, he sat us down when I was five years old and told us--told me that this house is yours. Still we didn't want to live with him. Springfield Gardens at the time--there was actually cows in that part of Queens. White people, cows, my father was like the second Black person in that whole neighborhood that we--and it was just an unusual environment for us. We grew up in Harlem in a tenement surrounded by Black people and you know you had to go like five blocks north and then you'd reach--you'd see Puerto Ricans and then you'd go north and west and you'd see Jews. By the time the 1956-'58 [1958] somewhere around there the Peter Pan boat lift [Operation Peter Pan, 1960s] happened and the Cubans were there; we had Irish and Germans, we went to Catholic schools but we lived in a Black neighborhood, and where my father lived was not a Black neighborhood and it was a home and there were trees and grass and crickets and cows. Not where my father lived but we were close to Long Island, there were cows. It was very frightening to me. It was a cultural disconnect where we were dropped in and my father had a woman who he lived with who absolutely hated us and it is so odd that some of the stories that my father underwent we ended up repeating because this woman was despicable to my older brother and finally one time I told my father what she was doing to us when he wasn't around; she was out. Then he moved another one in. Story_ID: 54522 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they walked, talked, acted, what they were interested in, their talents; who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my father [Elrick Williams]. I'm really serious, I'm fun loving but I'm not necessarily spontaneous; I have to work at it. If you believe in you know anything having to do with astrology I was born certainly years later but one day before my father and my father used to tell me that I was the best birthday present he ever got. So as a little girl I felt really loved by my father. But my father was also a strict, no tossing of a baseball, no--if my father played anything at all it was cricket, well they didn't play cricket in Harlem [New York City]. So my father didn't play, my father-the men in the neighborhood used to call him champ and as a little kid I knew why they called him champ because my father was a skillful poker player; he won everybody's money. But I tend to be more--I'm more comfortable talking to probably a thousand people than talking to one. I can tell great stories, my father could tell great stories, and even in all of that I probably enjoyed being alone a lot; I enjoyed quiet. My mother [Nell Williams] was more of a recluse, a true honest to God recluse. My mother did not interact well with people nor did she like to interact with people. My mother only wanted to be with her children. Neither of my parents were playful. No games, not that we didn't have games, but growing up the first Monopoly game we had my brother made because we didn't have money to buy. So my brother [Erlick Mortimer Williams, Jr. or Howar Courtney Williams] bought some oak tag you know that white cardboard stuff for probably, I don't know, five cents and we had friends who had Monopoly boards. So my brother memorized and he made a Monopoly board and then we'd cut out from oval loose leaf paper. We made money and we used thimbles and spools and other little trinkets to be the pieces and so we learned to play chess, checkers. There was just a lot of stuff that as kids we didn't have. We never had a Christmas tree until I was--we didn't buy a Christmas tree I should say until I was around eleven, twelve years old. We would always wait until Christmas Eve when the guy who ran the stand was done, finished, gone and we'd go get the least of the scraggly trees and bring it home. My father used to tell us we didn't have to live like that, we could live with him. We weren't leaving our mother. Story_ID: 54523 Speaker 1: So was he working as a tool and die maker? Speaker 2: Oh yea. Yeah he had beautiful cars and a lovely house and he would periodically take us on shopping--like I said he'd take us shopping and challenge the salesperson to go ahead and follow us around and see what happens that kind of thing. But my father [Elrick Williams] was completely dedicated to us but we could not listen to what he called street music in the house. We were raised when we were at my father's house listening to Beethoven who my father pronounced Bee-thoven but he told us very early on that he was a Black man. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise he would say; Beethoven was a Black man. The first time I ever listened to Fela the musical is happening and the people are aware of Fela, I think I was in college [Vassar College], maybe a freshman. My father--I went to see him on the weekend and he said sit down, sit down you have to listen to this man. I sat down and my father starts playing Fela, Daddy, he goes Ransome Kuti: this man's music you need to know, this man is changing Nigeria. My father was--he didn't appreciate [Marcus] Garvey because he felt that Garvey--he characterized it as the buffoonery of wearing a costume and marching down the street, what is the purpose of that? And, of course, as I grew up and explained to my father that, of course, it was symbolism and imagery but you had to instill in people a pride and in an environment where people did not have the opportunity for much ownership other than themselves and they would adorn themselves and drape themselves and dress up for church and dress up for christening and dress up for--they would set aside times in special clothes to dress up and Marcus Garvey was acknowledging that. You're going--here are uniform to dress up. We are the United Universal Negro and Improvement Association and the Black Star Line and if they don't want us in the United States, it's okay. We are going to go to Africa. My father didn't disagree at all with going to Africa; he disagreed with this buffoonery as he said. So because of that he and I used to--we had an argument about it in an intellectual kind of academic but more--probably more vibrant and robust. I tried to explain to my father, I said I'm going to conduct an experiment if you're alright with it and he was like what and this was on the heels of me telling my father I needed to go to Kingston [Jamaica] because I was doing my thesis at Vassar [College] on how Marcus Garvey and W.E.B. DuBois were treated by a Black press. Story_ID: 54524 Speaker 1: I asked him about conducting an experiment. I told him I wanted to go to Kingston [Jamaica] over Easter break. Culturally, I didn't grow up in Jamaica so I didn't know that everything shuts down at Easter. So we went to Jamaica, my father [Elrick Williams] wasn't going to have me go there by myself. I had uncles and cousins and stuff there who would have looked after me but--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Let me just ask you how old were at you at this, how old were you at this juncture (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: College--college junior. College junior, senior. Speaker 2: This happened in 1970-three (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: This would have been 1973. Story_ID: 54525 Speaker 1: And we went to Jamaica and the whole time my father [Elrick Williams] grumbled about why I was wasting my education writing about this man. So he went with me and the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] headquarters in Kingston [Jamaica] was there but it was locked because it was Easter. So I'm trying to make a point to my father. We stood in front of the headquarters and I asked random people walking by just Jamaicans walking by do you know what this place is? Oh yeah, they would tell me and they would tell me what it is? Yeah. And this kept happening and do you know who Marcus Garvey is, of course and they would go on and on and on about Marcus Garvey. And at that point I don't think he had been named a national hero of Jamaica. But I could see my father with sort of this quizzical look on his face because he came from the generation of a colonialist education where he had been taught that a man like that is not someone who a man like you, who aspires to a certain income and a certain lifestyle and a certain whatever, you would never admire this man Marcus Garvey. So my father, I could see it starting to break down as people who he respected--who he would have respected who would have been his peers and of his ilk praising Marcus Garvey. So I did some research absolutely but more than anything I was really happy about that trip because my father started to change. Story_ID: 54526 Speaker 1: So when we got back to the United States I asked him if I could conduct an experiment and I asked him--so my father [Elrick Williams] in Jamaica and his friends, there's the white rum man and the red rum man. So the white rum man drinks over proof rum J Wray and Nephew. It was 151 proof, I grew up drinking up; I still drink it. My father was a white rum man. Then there are the red rum men, they drink brown rum and they drink Appleton. So my father's friends and he would get together usually every Saturday after they finished their early morning, you know they got to make their rounds they call it. Maybe get a haircut whatever, make my rounds and they would usually end up at somebody's house in Queens [New York City]. I asked my father if I could go with him on one of these Saturdays when they were going to do their, you know challenge drinking and we went to a particular friend's house and there were about ten of them there. Ten men and the only woman who was there was the lady of the house, the wife of--you know husband and wife, they owned the house. And she was in the kitchen making little hors d'oeuvres and stuff like that and they were all laughing and talking and they're thrilled that I'm there because the kids never want to be there. So my father prefaces it by telling them that I'm going to write this thesis on Marcus Garvey and they are not thrilled. And so that was my cue, so I said can I ask you all a question, I mean I just want to do a little bit of research for my thesis, I'm just--everybody is Jamaican, everybody was born in Jamaica, everybody is a resident of the United States now. Most of them are not citizens, you know resident alien. And I asked them--let's say of the ten of them maybe three are actually fair skinned but the rest are brown to dark, medium brown to dark brown; my father is dark brown. And I ask how many of you married women in Jamaica who were either another race or mixed race, half Chinese, half Indian, half, Syrian you know mixed? They are like what kind of question is that? No, no--just, I mean how many? Just raise your hand, how many of you? So of the ten of them who were there nine of them including my father raised their hand. One gentleman did not and he also was sort of deep rich chocolate brown like my dad and he was clearly angry that I would be cheeky enough to ask this question of them. Like, the look is like one, how dare you but he can't say that to me because I'm my father's daughter and he is looking at me like where are you going with this. So I then began to explain that from my perspective I thought it would be interesting to compare Marcus Garvey and W.E.B. Dubois and how they were treated not only in the Black press but the white press in that before W.E.B. Dubois declared himself to be communist, socialist he moved away from what a fair skinned, Harvard educated academician in the United States should have been and moved towards a philosophy and a belief that would have been counter to what would have been counter to what would have been expected of someone of his station. Not until that happened did he start to be described in derogatory terms in the news media. Whereas, almost from the very beginning Marcus Garvey deep, deep, deep brown chocolate, hefty in girth, a big man. There was even a description of him in one article that I'd read as a fat, black ape. Like wow, right? So you had Garvey and you had Dubois, fair skinned, straight hair, aqualine features, etc, etc. Not until Dubois started disappointing did they start describing him in ways that were not complimentary. Story_ID: 54527 Speaker 1: So with that back to how many of you have married women, who have--who are mixed race or completely different race? So all but one. And as I said this one now is starting to percolate. I could see him starting to bubble and I began to explain that in my expectation, my belief, my observation is that my father's friends of his generation, those men were raised to marry women who were lighter skinned than they were. This guy couldn't take it, he blew, he blew. What difference does--what are you talking about and he--and the rest of them are just kind of like well I never really thought of that. And I began to fill them in on the color caste system and how in order to raise yourself from one economic level to the other you actually will try to become lighter skinned and you will try to have your children and next generations be lighter skinned and not revert to being darker skinned. In fact, most of the working class Blacks were marrying fairer skins and then they moved to--these guys, they moved to the United States and they; lovely jobs, lovely homes, children. This man is not happy and he so wants to shake me. So the wife of the gentleman who is sitting here, Misses--and this is her home and she's welcoming these gentlemen into her home and she stands in the kitchen door and she's leaning against the door like this and she's broadly grinning. She's just grinning and looking at me and smiling and I looked at her. Now her hair like mother's [Nell Williams] hair straight, wrapped up on her head with great big hair pins, French twist but she's got straight hair and she's fair skinned and she's got sharp nose and small lips, and she's mixed. She smiles and she says, as he is starting to argue with me, she says but Paula asked him who he used to be married to. I looked at her and I looked at him and I said oh so we are doing I didn't ask the question correctly for you because now all the other guys they're all laughing and slapping each other on the back and high fiving because he's now wearing the dunce cap. So I said to him okay did you used to be marry to a woman who was of a different race or mixed race, yes but what does that have to do with anything and I have a girlfriend right now, my lady she is dark skinned, she has a straight nose and little lips but she is dark skinned. I said why did you feel the need to say out loud that she has a straight nose and small lips? And he looked at me and I said you realize that that's probably the only way you would have even considered her. She's got brown skin but--or an--or she has a straight nose and small lips and I'm not going to cross her off the list because she's brown skinned. I thought this man was going to become apoplectic. He could barely speak, he was sputtering and my father and his boys they were just like look man, we'll--and they started ta-it turned into a conversation. They had to admit it and Misses who was standing there she engaged in the conversation and I asked her, I said to her why would your family allow you--approve you to marry a dark skinned man? She smiled at me, she said he had a good job; he was going to be able to provide for me and my children. So for me and my father [Erlick Williams] that brought us really closer together because my father had never participated in a conversation like that and I wasn't being emotional, I'm just looking at facts. For however small the universe but I am taking a slice of random Jamaicans. What do they share? They shared nationality, they shared class, they shared immigration status and is it coincidence that all of them who were strivers and seeking upward mobility--and then I said to them and my father was not happy that I said, I said yeah I think I kind of disappointed my father when I came out looking like this. My father did not think that was funny, he didn't like it all. Speaker 2: These are the questions that all of the generation of African presidents from the '60s [1960s] all of them had white wives, I mean for the most part, not all. Lumumba didn't and they killed him within a year but so many did. Story_ID: 54528 Speaker 1: You know you could have the conversation about being trained to mimic the master, right. I mean--and you fall in love with who you fall in love with but when it starts to be a pattern, when it starts to be a pattern it's appropriate I think, sociology and psychology speaking to take a look at what your definition of love, and what your definition of beauty is based on who shaped those, right? So as things translated to my present day--my contemporary life, I mean did I used to wear my hair straight, yeah. There was a point in life where yeah. You ready-- you need to pause? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Oh, I thought you (unclear). There was point where I used to wear my hair straight. I mean I started out--my mother [Nell Williams] couldn't comb my hair, my mother had not a clue. She didn't know what to do with my hair when I was little, she did not know. So I used the term bussed, although I wasn't really--I used to walk two flights up to the third floor in our apartment building and a woman from North Carolina use to comb and braid my hair. Speaker 2: Your mother never had to deal with hair that wasn't straight, I guess, because she had (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Exactly right, she had two sons, cut their hair. I mean, they went to the barbershop and here I come like whoa what do I do with that. And my memories of that as a little, small child I remember sitting between this woman's legs while she combed and she called it platted, she platted my hair. I never heard my parents--I never heard Jamaicans call it--I never heard that word platted and it angered me, it angered me. As a little kid that I was the only little girl I knew whose mother didn't comb her hair. It infuriated me and when my hair grew long enough for my mother to be able to manage it, probably by the time I was six years old, my hair was like down to here so she could twist it and you know, manage it and I would deliberately go out and get my hair what we called nappy. I used to rebel, I would go out and I would run under the fire hydrant and my hair would (gesture). She didn't press my hair, she would you know while it was wet she would put olive oil and twist it and it would come and it would drape and I'd be like no. I would go out and run in the fire hydrant or I'd go to the park and play in the sandbox and get sand in my hair. Speaker 2: Now this is before natural hair became popular, I guess? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, this was in the '50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 54529 Speaker 1: But there was, I know, there was a movement in New York in the late '50s [1950s] they had the grand (unclear) models and other things in Harlem [New York City]. I mean, other groups of--some of the I think largely West Indians and Africans--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: They'd wear their hair natural but they didn't--what we today--I find it so, it's a political word, it's politically charged. I said to a young woman a few weeks ago--I talked about my fro, my afro and she said no it's a natural and I said no it's not. I said it is not. Maybe for you it's a natural; for me it's an afro and I'm not going to start flipping the word to something else that is, what? More palatable? My hair is in the fashion of an afro and that's how it will be until forever. But that's not how it always was. And my mother didn't know what to do with my hair and as I said hair for me was always like--it wasn't the--boy, I wished I had my mother's [Nell Williams] hair which draped down her back. I came at it from a different way. Like why won't you even learn how to do my hair? So eventually she did when it was long enough for her to be able to manipulate. But when my daughter [Imani] was born my daughter had short hair. And one day, she was about three or four years old, my daughter was--I had just washed my hair and I had twisted it and then I just let it drape down and my daughter was patting my hair and my mother was living with us at the time and my daughter was patting my hair. And she--mommy when is my hair going to be like yours? And I said your hair is like mine. No it's not, I want my hair like yours and I said your hair is like mine. No it's not; I said it is I promise you it is and then the next day I went out cut it all off and I had short hair. Speaker 1: Cut yours? Speaker 2: I cut my hair off and I had short hair that in absent being washed and conditioned and twisted which helped it stay straight. My hair texture was similar to my daughter's and when she saw my hair she was beaming, she was beaming which is an experience that I never had with my mother and my hair and her hair. When my mother was there, my mother looked at me and she said what have you done? Now this was not the first time I cut all my hair off, I did it when I was seventeen and got a fro; but my hair at that point had been kept so straight naturally that I had to put vinegar in it to--that's what they used to do back then. They'd put vinegar in it which actually kind of destroys and splits the ends and all but it got bushy. My mother was appalled, mortified, so mad at me when I did it when I was sixteen. When I did it again when my daughter was about four that would have made me like twenty six. She thought I had lost my mind, told me I looked like a pick-ninny, which is the Jamaican pronunciation for pickaninny, and that's when my mother and I had a really tough conversation. I don't know if it was a conversation. It was probably one sided with me saying to her that my daughter was not going to grow up with you making comments about her hair the way you made comments about mine. My daughter hair is beautiful and she's going to believe her hair is beautiful. My mother just kissed her teeth and walked away. And today my daughter completely shaves her head; she started shaving her head when she was in college. We--my husband and I encouraged her to do it; she continued through medical school. When I suggested to her that when you are working with cadavers and you have to--that smell might stay but I wanted my daughter to shave her head. She's got a beautiful head and a stunning long neck. So she's probably been shaving her head now for I don't know, fifteen years maybe. Story_ID: 54530 Speaker 1: Okay, well I wanted to ask you about your brothers. Now you've got two brothers, two older brothers can you describe them in order of their birth and then--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, my oldest brother is Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. He is the eldest and my older brother is Howard Courtney Williams, he's three years younger than Elrick and two years young-older than me, he's in the middle. Those are my brothers. Speaker 1: Tell us about them. Speaker 2: So my oldest brother [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr.] is sort of the mathematical science whiz guy. Always smart, always moody and we used to describe him when I was little as like you know the mad genius. I remember when I must have been five years old--four or five years old my brother used to by himself listen to Charlie Parker and Ornette Coleman and you know what little kid listens to this kind of dissonant jazz that and he--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: How old was he? Speaker 2: Like nine years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's kind of early for that. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was going to the library and taking out albums, checking out albums. I would go check out books and he would check out albums and he you know--he got a little--put it on and put the needle down and for hours my brother would sit there just you know and he taught himself how to play saxophone because he just wanted to. No basketball, no sports, no any of that but he was a big guy, tall and so people didn't mess with him because my mother [Nell Williams] had taught us survival wise that if you get into a fight don't walk away until the other person can't get up. That's what a single mother raising children in Harlem [New York City] would have to teach. So he was you know the mathematical whiz and he ultimately when the time was for him to take the SATs the college entrance exam he was one of the first people in my neighborhood to go to college. But when it was time for him to take the college entrance exam my brother, he missed like two questions in the math section, he didn't answer. So had he answered them he probably would have gotten a perfect score. And as I was mentioning earlier my father [Elrick Williams] the human calculator, my brother could do all that ciphering in his head. Multiple indentures, different mathematical functions and so ultimately that brother he created, he founded an algorithmic trading company. My brother used to write artificial intelligence before it was called that--before it was commonly called that and while he was in college he majored in economics and minored in chemistry. The reverse, he majored in chemistry and minored in economics. Went on to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]; in the meantime another survival instinct my mother had taught him how to sew so we didn't have any money. I wore uniforms so that saved me, but most of the other clothes my mother would make and my brother, she taught my brother how to make his dress shirts and slacks and so he used to make his clothes because that was--we didn't have money. But he graduated, went on to Harvard Business School, had not been called up for the draft but had a high number so he had to drop out of business school for a couple of years as a hardship, as the sole earner in our family because he supported my mother and my older brother and me. So he started this algorithmic trading company, taught the computers, wrote the programs to have the computers trade on world financial markets and ultimately the business was capitalized at five hundred million dollars, so that's that brother. Story_ID: 54531 Speaker 1: My other brother [Howard Courtney Williams] who had actually the highest IQ of the three of us very loving, charming completely unlike the other two of us. You know my oldest brother [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr.] and I, we don't really care. I don't care if you like me, good that you do, I do what I'm going to do. My other brother--my oldest brother is worse. My middle brother Howard is a charmer, he likes to be liked. He likes to be social, he likes to be around people, he likes--and what we now concluded is that when he was a kid, he must have had ADD [Attention Deficit Disorder] and he learned differently than we learned which led to what the nuns refer to as him being lazy and he wasn't lazy at all. But ultimately a certain amount of harassment by the teachers went on towards him. And when I was a little kid growing up like that with three of us being three different shades of brown going from yellow to chocolate and our mother [Nell Williams] looking the way she did and our father [Elrick Williams] looking the way he did and growing up in Harlem [New York City] and nuns who were overwhelmingly Irish--white Irish and I was very aware of race and color at an early age. I've always looked at it and studied it and been fascinated. And I interpreted the treatment of my older brother Howard because I'd heard some of the teachers and nuns, when they were speaking to him in a reprimanding tone they would refer to his color. And I concluded that he had a harder time than all three of us because he was the dark brown skinned one of us. Although he was the most charming, I don't care. And so by the time he was sixteen or seventeen years old, he had really gotten involved with drugs. I shouldn't say and so, but I'm saying that he was less of an independent person than my oldest brother and I were, and on top of everything else he was my mother's favorite. She adored him and he charmed her. I don't know, it's just as my oldest brother would listen to Charlie Parker, Ornette Coleman my older brother would sit down and he'd massage my mother's feet, mommy let me rub your feet mommy, I just love you so much, mommy I brought these flowers for you, they were weeds. He'd pick them at the park, mommy these are for you and she would oh Howard I just loved it, thank you so much. And I remember being a little kid being fascinated by his personality. I had no desire to do that, but I would watch how he would charm my mother. My mother who was pretty quiet and didn't say much, she kept to herself; she blossomed around him. So it took some years, my brother remained very much involved in a drugged life and I'm proud of him because as my--we got older and my parents who had split when I was three years old they died within three months of each other in 2006 and I challenged him to make them proud finally, and he stopped using drugs. And he has not since then; he's been good. Story_ID: 54532 Speaker 1: Alright, well tell us about school. Now when did you start grade school? Speaker 2: I started grade school in 1958, six years old, St. Rosa of Lima, Roman Catholic School in Harlem [New York City, New York], 164th and St. Nicholas. Today it's Washington Heights. When I was a kid it was Harlem still. And I went to high school at Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx, northeast Bronx. Speaker 1: Let's deal with grade school now then we will move on. So I take you liked school more than likely, is that true? Speaker 2: I liked school, yeah I did well in school so I enjoyed it and when I was a small child I sometimes would not be in class; not because I was cutting class but because my mother [Nell Williams] taught all of us to read by the time we were three. She didn't know that you're supposed to wait until kids go to school before they learned to read. By the way, I don't know where that rule came from but my mother used to read, she could consume newspaper, she'd just read everything and so my brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] and I learned to read by my mother teaching us using the Herald Tribune--The New York Herald Tribune sometimes the Daily News but we learned to read by the time we were three. Story_ID: 54533 Speaker 1: Did you go to preschool or anything? Speaker 2: No they didn't have preschool not in Catholic schools. You started first grade. So my brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] preceded me at St. Rosa of Lima [Roman Catholic School] [Harlem, New York City, New York]. By the time I got there I was the last of the three of us and we were known to the nuns and the priests who were there. We--legacy wise I walked into a school where, as I said my brothers preceded me. My mother [Nell Williams] was known for her--I would call her more like a lioness protection of us and as I said she didn't interact much outside of our apartment building--our tenement. She rarely went beyond our front stoop but if there was something to be done at school she would always go there. She went as far as second form which I think is something like fifth grade before they took her out of school to have her clean people's houses and work on a farm. So my mother--this incident I'm going to tell you about happened when I would have been too young to remember but it was lower in my grade school and in my neighborhood. My mother--my oldest brother [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr.] in the first grade he was always kind of a smart, detached kid and uniform, navy blue pants, white shirt, navy blue ties with school emblem on the tie and he was playing--he was in class and then recess comes. So recess comes, you're supposed to go to the bathroom, he didn't have to go to the bathroom, he's six years old and he didn't have to go to the bathroom then. And when he did have to go to the bathroom, recess was over and the nun was mad that he didn't go during recess. So she would not allow him to go to the bathroom and of course, the inevitable happened. So he soiled himself, he wet his clothes and although we lived immediately across the street and a half a block away, you could step outside and see our apartment building, she would not let him go home. More as a punishment because if he had been sick, they would have sent him home, just get one of the patrol boys to walk him home. She made him stay in school for the rest of the afternoon. So that by the time he got home he was beyond humiliated, irate and my mother did what my mother always did when we--when something had happened where we were either in a fight or whatever, she'd take a bath, she'd run the tub, give you a bath, fresh clothes, give you something to eat, sit down; so she did that and then she went over to the school. So the convent where the nuns lived backed then the overwhelming the teachers were nuns and the convent was next to the school separated by the schoolyard, right. My mother went over and she rang the bell for the convent. The principal came to the door and my mother was carrying a baseball bat and my mother told the principal to send the nun out. Well the principal could see at a glance what was about to go down, so no Mrs. Williams no and my mother said any woman who would do to a child what that woman did to my son deserves to be beaten, send her out here. So the principal closed the door and locked it and it was two glass doors and it had iron grill work on the overlay. So my mother strolled from the convent, she passed the entrance to the schoolyard. And our school is on the corner of, it still exists, it's on the corner of 164th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue. My mother took the baseball bat; she was tall for a woman born in 1918 and half Chinese. My mother was about 5'7. My mother stretched and broke every first floor window that she could reach with the baseball bat. She probably broke about seven or eight windows. She went down 164th Street west and then went north on St. Nicholas Avenue. So the auditorium windows my mother broke. That's how--the lower of the Williams family that I walked in to when I started at St. Rosa of Lima. They accepted that we were highly a motivated, well taken care of; we struggled financially no question. My mother would not eat sometimes because she made sure that we had as much as we could--as we wanted and we didn't realize she wasn't eating, I'll eat later, we didn't realize she wasn't. But we were known in our neighborhood for they stick together and don't mess with them, their mother will kill you. Story_ID: 54534 Speaker 1: So first grade did you remember your first grade teacher? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Anything good about her that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, I never had problems, I never had a problem. I was sometimes taken out of class as I mentioned a moment ago because I was really smart and I could read early and I knew how to do the simple math. I knew all of that stuff. My brothers [Elrick Mortimer Williams, Jr. and Howard Courtney Williams] would come home and I'd sit with them while they were doing their homework because I wanted to go to school. I wanted to read, I wanted to do that too. So by the time I got to first grade, they wanted to skip me but my mother [Nell Williams] did not believe in skipping. My mother said you should accommodate, give her other things to read or do. So they frequently took me out of the class because I would get bored and I would help correct papers, I'd be in the principal's office correcting other kids' papers or I'd be filing cards or I'd be in the school library putting books back because I had to have something interesting to do. My brother Howard [Courtney Williams] still tells the story about how he'd sit in the classroom and he'd see me like going up and down the hall not being unruly or, but because I was on my way to do something at the nuns had sent me to do and I--so probably my first three years, I was in and out of class all the time and then it started to catch up as we started learning things like geography, you know. Or reading and math and spelling but by the time we got to diagramming sentences, now I was excited and I wanted to be in class. So I would do that. Story_ID: 54535 Speaker 1: So grammar school [St. Rosa of Lima Roman Catholic School] for me was interesting up until once fifth grade classes were co-ed. By the time we got to sixth, seventh, eighth grade they were separated. You had sixth grade boys, sixth grade girls, seventh boys, seventh grade girls but I started being elected class president by the time I was like in third grade and every year I was elected class president for at least one semester. So I'd always spoken up and you know leadership stuff and I later on learned that I operate really well in a crisis and I think that growing up--the growing up the way we grew up, we were kind of almost always in crisis over one thing or another and I always could you know, figure out how we're going to get beyond this, let's come up with a solution. I was also really good at bringing opposing sides together and let's figure this out. We've got to work this out, let's stop this arguing and stop this fighting. So those were skills that later on became helpful. But the grounding, having gone to Catholic school, I think, saved me from the kind of boredom that I think I could have encountered in you know a school where I was going to be tracked; poor Black kid, you go here. That is not what my experience was all through grammar school and unlike some of my classmates; I never ever wanted to be a nun. I never gave it a thought. Story_ID: 54536 Speaker 1: Now you lived up in 160s right isn't that up near where the Audubon Ballroom is where Malcolm X was assassinated? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was outside jumping double dutch the day he was assassinated. We were playing and you could see running towards us down Amsterdam Avenue [Harlem, New York City, New York] crowds of people just running, screaming and crying. They killed Malcolm, they killed Malcolm and you know what I knew, go inside. Speaker 1: Its 1965, February I believe, yeah February 22nd or something like that. Speaker 2: February 22, 1965 and I was--I would have been in seventh grade because I graduated in '66 [1966]. So we still lived there and as I said we were outside. It wasn't summertime certainly but it wasn't snowing. We were outside; we used to figure out how to play and do whatever all into the wee hours of the night and be cold. But it was on an afternoon, it was still day time and as I said I knew enough to just go in the house. We lived on the first floor of a five story walk up and I went inside and told my mother [Nell Williams], ma there is all these people running down the street and they're screaming Malcolm X, they killed Malcolm X. And my mother had the radio on always, all news radio and probably within the next fifteen minutes it was over the radio. Story_ID: 54537 Speaker 1: I'm trying to think this is--so as you--did they have a middle school (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No middle school we went from first to eighth grade and then you'd go to high school, nine through twelve. Speaker 1: So this is Cardinal--? Speaker 2: I went to St. Rose of Lima and then when I went to high school I went to Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Cardinal Spellman [High School], okay. Speaker 2: It was an archdiocesan school. The school had not been--the school was a relatively new school named for Francis Cardinal Spellman who had been the war chaplain in World War II and it was interesting because the school was named in his honor and he was still alive and it was an archdiocesan school. So you had to take an entrance exam to go to Catholic school in New York [City]. By it being an archdiocese in school, it meant that students came from the five burrows of five counties of New York [City] to go this school. But for the most part, I'm sorry three burrows because the archdiocese of Brooklyn/Queens they were separate. So we had Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island and you had to score a minimum of ninety five on the entrance exam. So Cardinal Spellman was able to pull the cream of the crop. By the time I got there, there were about 2,000 students. There may have been around 600 in my class. It was co-institutional, girls were on one side of the building, boys were on the other side. So of that number that were girls maybe 300 there were fourteen of us--fourteen, fifteen of us who were Black or Latina and we were a small minority. Speaker 1: So this is 1966, I guess? Speaker 2: That I entered and I graduated in 1970, yeah. Story_ID: 54538 Speaker 1: So what was high school like? From what I read you were encouraged to write, you had writing skills. Speaker 2: Yeah but I went to high school leaving my neighborhood where most of the kids went to George Washington High School, public school and a lot of the--I hung out with girls who were probably two, three years older than I was. A number of them had gotten pregnant and I knew better than to even walk down that path. That was just--that was not going to happen. My parents would have as my mother [Nell Williams] said pulled my tongue out of my head and importantly I had been raised to believe that where we were living and how we were living was a temporary setback; that we were not meant to be poor and we were not meant to have to struggle financially. So my mother characterized it and my father suggested as a--this is a one generation blimp in our family. This is happening because we are immigrants but this is not going to continue. So I had been certainly primed to not get myself entangled with boys and end up pregnant, that was just not going to happen. And so when I went to high school [Cardinal Spellman High school] and it would take an hour every day, a minimum of an hour. When I started out it took three trains to get to the northeast Bronx [New York City, New York] and then I would do my homework. By the time we got to the third train, you could sit down for about a half hour and I'd do some homework and reading. But there were a handful of us who came up from Harlem. Some of the Blacks, Latinas came from the Bronx, some came from Mt. Vernon, Westchester County, hand full of us came from Harlem and it was a long ride. I liked it, I liked it, I thought--I was of the opinion that when I got to Cardinal Spellman High School [New York City, New York] I'd find people like me, you know. People who were going to go to college and Black people and it was going to be this. I got there and it was like--we were in the abject minority. Most of the kids in Spellman had never been to Harlem and then I had a class. So this for me was a pivotal moment. I was a freshman, I believe. And up until then I had the kind of long straight hair. I used to start--go to homeroom in the morning and Motown was hot and I can't sing a lick but I'd stand in front of the classroom during homeroom when everybody is milling about and making noise and I'd stand up sing Supremes and I'd act it all out. So on the one hand I'd mentioned earlier about how I was somewhat to myself but I was so exuberant over I'm here and we're having a good time and we just listened to the music on the train coming up and whatever. Story_ID: 54539 Speaker 1: But there was a period, I believe it was 1966 or '67 [1967] when the then mayor of New York [City], John Lindsay in order to balance the budget decided that he was going to cut library, public library hours. So instead of library being open seven days a week, I think it went to maybe five and a half days a week. And I used to live in the library. I mean I lived in the library. In order to keep myself interested and I--let's say I was a little more advanced than the kids who were in my grammar school [St. Rosa of Lima Roman Catholic School], I spent forever in the library. So I was crushed, you know that library hours are truncated. By this time we lived on 110th Street [New York City, New York], we'd moved from-in my freshman year in high school we moved from 164th Street, Amsterdam Avenue between 163rd and 164th. We moved to 110th Street between Manhattan and Columbus, and it was a whole different library and it just felt weird. So I didn't spend that much time in the library anymore. But we were having a current events class, history, Sister William Mary and on a particular day it was history class but same day every week it would be current events days. So you had to bring stuff out of the newspaper. Things we were going to discuss and one kid brought--one girl brought this business with the library hours and it started this entire discussion around how unfair it was that the library hours were cut and the mayor could have cut something else and he should have cut something else and it went on and on and on and of course, okay. And then the topic of people who are on welfare came up, you know and those people on welfare he should have cut those people from welfare. The people on welfare we all know the people have cars, you know they have--they're taking money from us and they have Cadillacs and they blah, blah, blah. And it just went on and on and on. And now I'm just kind of sitting there, listening. Usually I am a participant in class discussions but I really just wanted to listen to this. So in that class that had maybe twenty five students, all girls there might have been three or four of us who were Black, maybe one Latina. The difficulty in engaging in that conversation would be that you know it was welfare code word for Black people. So I just listened and when it was all over and the bordering on disgusting things that were being said about people on welfare, I let it all happen and then I raised my hand. Yes Paula, Sister I just have a question, does anybody in here know anyone on welfare? No, it's like recoiling, us no. Sister, yes, I'm on welfare. And I just let it hang in the air and I said so I want to tell you what it's like at least for me and I went on to explain how social worker would show up, case worker would show up. Pick a time; I want to see if my mother's got a man in her apartment, looking for men's clothes, men's toiletries, men's something, evidence of a man; no man. I told them how, yeah I go to midnight mass at Christmas that's right after we've gone to get the bedraggled, scrawny Christmas tree because we can't afford to buy one. That's how I grew up not buying a Christmas tree. Now the sobbing starts, now oh my God I--but we didn't know and it just--now it's like--and I said there is something about Christianity and charitable people that I think is missing here. And I'm looking at the nun because I'm thinking why didn't you say something? But it was a piling on. By the time current events was over, they're sobbing (unclear); it's like, you know what side eye. Sister William Mary asked me to stay after class for a moment and she asked me if I would be willing--would you please come back this afternoon for my class this afternoon, we'll discuss this in current events and I'd like for you to tell them your story. Sister God didn't put me on this planet to teach white people what it's like to be poor and Black, I said you didn't stop any portion of that conversation and you want me to come to your class this afternoon to help your students, right? She didn't say anything; I said who is going to take my biology class for me when I'm here teaching your kids, your white students about my life. I said no I'm not coming back, no and I'm not here as an experiment for you. Turned around and walked out. I won't even begin to tell you that all of high school was like that because it wasn't but oh boy there were instances, there absolutely were. Story_ID: 54540 Speaker 1: There were cultural disconnects in a way that--senior year in high school everybody at Cardinal Spellman [High School] [New York City, New York] goes on to college. It is a college prep, college bound--we don't take shorthand, we had something called note hand in typing to help with your notes when you're in college. Senior year there is about thirty students in the note hand class. First semester is note hand, second semester is typing or reverse, I don't remember. Anyway, we're in class and everybody takes their seats. The nun who is our teacher says why do you Black girls always sit together? Now let's say there are six rows of seats; two Black girls are sitting here, two others are behind them and two others are behind them. So front and center we are literally front and center and I always sat in the front because I couldn't see well, I've got bad vision. All around us are white girls. She walks in with why do you Black girls always sit together. Sister it's interesting that you look at this class and you see Black girls sitting together, I look at this class and I see friends sitting together and she looked at me. I said she's sitting right here as my friend and she's white and over here is my friend and she's Black and behind me I said but you looked at us and you see Black girls sitting together. I said four of the six of us come up here and we spend an hour and fifteen minutes with each other each way every day on the subway wearing uniforms that makes us targets for the public school kids, we're friends. She turned purple and as is my usual style, I just continued to stare at her until she looked away and we got on with class. That was senior year. Story_ID: 54541 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit now I didn't ask you this; I caught up in your story because it was so good, but in 1963 the year that James Meredith was killed, March on Washington, John F. Kennedy was killed, 16th Street Baptist Church was bombed and all the Birmingham marches on TV, it was pointed out to me like a month ago that a Reverend in San Francisco who wrote a book on '63 [1963]. 1963 marked the first time when network television went from fifteen minutes to a half hour. Now did you watch the news on TV-- Speaker 2: Network television news? Oh sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And did you pay attention to it? I know you didn't project yourself necessarily being involved with the news but--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: But my mother [Nell Williams] was a news junky. My mother consumed news. So when it was radio in the background all-news radio was always on or my mother was always reading newspapers or my mother was watching the news. She didn't sit all day and watch soaps she sometimes would watch them but when news time was on, you know, we sat and watched Walter Cronkite [CBS Evening News], we watched--in New York [City] I grew up watching Eye Witness News and I watched Eye Witness News because to my recollection they had the first Black anchor, Melba Toliver and that cemented even to this day the loyalty where significant numbers of African Americans in New York continue to watch Channel 7 News. When I was news director there, we were pretty successful in growing our ratings so that Channel 4, NBC, became the favorite newscast when I was news director. But legacy wise when we saw Melba Toliver and John Johnson on the news that didn't come in '63 [1963] but it was after the riots. So when the riots happened in Harlem [New York City] what we saw was news organizations, print and broadcast, I mean television and radio. They were going--that people who had worked for Black publications and maybe could be a part timer or a stringer, suddenly these people were able to get full time jobs because white folks weren't going up into Harlem to cover the riots and you had to cover that. So you know, they were told stories of how they had worked--they were working as a secretary or was a part timer or maybe was a driver but they had prepared themselves as reporters by working in the Black press, Black media. So my mother was not happy that I didn't become a doctor but my mother was thrilled when I became a journalist and I think she probably largely steered me that way just because I grew up consuming news. Not even, one of my friends Leflore Passeur (ph.) who preceded me at Vassar [College] [Poughkeepsie, New York] by two years, when I was a college senior she asked me if I would consider going into journalism school, and I said what's that. Now, that was--what's that? She said journalism school. It's 1974 when she asked me that. I said journalism school; she said yeah where you go to train to be a reporter. I said Black people have those jobs? And she said not many, but there are more of us now. That completely changed my career path. I had been admitted to Columbia University Teachers' College to get a doctorate, EDD in educational administration, that's what I was going for until I can be a journalist?.