 Story_ID: 76333 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I am an interviewer for the HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Benita Fitzgerald Mosley, it's B-E-N-I-T-A, Fitzgerald, F-I-T-Z-G-E-R-A-L-D, Mosley, M-O-S-L-E-Y, no hyphen. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 6, 1961, in Fauquier County, Virginia. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm the President of an Association called Women in Cable and Telecommunications. It's a 5,000 member association, really serving executive women and men in the cable telecommunications industry. Speaker 1: And you had a career in sports too, as well, of, I was wondering you could tell us, I guess, kind of sum that for us that, you know, not the whole thing, but just tell us what you did? Speaker 2: Yes my, ca--were you talking about the professional career or the running career, or both? Speaker 1: The running, well I guess--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Laughing) Speaker 1: You've been a spor--I guess a sports administrator--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uhm-huh--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And an athlete--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uhm-huh, so you want both? Speaker 1: Well, just give me summation, and I guess, not too much--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Of both? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay (laughing) that's all I was just trying to say the athlete career or the administrative career, that's all I was asking. As an athlete, as--I don't know, grew up running track in Virginia, state champion, went out to University of Tennessee. I was actually a junior national champion in high school, as well. Went on to University of Tennessee on a full athletic scholarship, was a fourteen or fifteen-time All American at Tennessee. Made my first Olympic team at eighteen in 1980, we didn't go anywhere because of Carter's boycott. Four years later, in Los Angeles, I made the Olympic team again. Won an Olympic Gold Medal in the 100-meter hurdles in Los Angeles and was the only Afri-- and still am, the only African American woman to win a gold medal in the, hurdles, actually probably only woman of African descent. And also the second woman, American woman behind Babe Didrikson, back fifty years, fifty-two years before I did it. I was also winner of the 1983, a year before the Pan American games and seven-time National Champion. I retired in 1988, just missing my third Olympic team by hundredth of a second at the Olympic tryouts, and then embarked on engineering career for a few years. I have a degree in Industrial Engineering, so I did that for four years, and then went to work for Special Olympics International in Washington, D.C. For a couple years, the Atlantic Committee for the Olympic Games. And then ended up working for the United States Olympic Committee, running their Olympic training center in San Diego [California], and then all of their Olympic training centers across the county. Speaker 1: Alright, okay. Now before we, oh, I'm sorry. What is today's date? Speaker 2: I guess its January 22, (laughing) 2003. Speaker 1: Right and where are we, at the present time? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Alright, so that, that almost complete, complete our slating of this. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 76334 Speaker 1: The--before we get into depth, there are five "People-Magazine"-ish type questions, light weight questions that I am compelled to ask you. And the first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, wow, I have so many, my favorite food, the thing that keeps coming to my--my favorite food, apple cobbler, with ice-cream, vanilla (laughing). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, probably, early summer. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I really don't because I haven't vacationed enough, but if I did, it would probably be, well anywhere where there's a beach. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, I don't think I do. Story_ID: 76335 Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to ask you about--what you know about your family history. How far can you trace your family, can you go back to the 19th century with them or do-- Speaker 2: Probably so, my--we have a family tree books on both sides of my family, I didn't review, you know, before I came here so I'm not all that well versed. But my grandfather was born in 1896, I believe, that would be my paternal grandfather and I believe my paternal grandmother--maternal grandfather was also born in the late 1800's, so that for sure, just through grandparents, can trace back that far. Both of them were ministers, one was a pastor of several churches in Amelia, Virginia, that was my--my mom's father, Isaiah Wilkinson. And David J. Fitzgerald was a--was my mom's father, was also a farmer. And my father's father was a minister, First African Baptist Church, which is a pretty historical church in Richmond [Virginia]. My father just told me, and I--I have to believe it's true, that it was the first African church in the United States. Made up of people of African descent so it's a very, very, very, very old church and my father was a--my grandfather was a minister in that church. So--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: That's first African Baptist? Speaker 2: Baptist church, yeah, yeah, in Richmond, Virginia. So I--I didn't know that and he's got part of a website, my dad has, which I may just refer you to after we're finished here. But anyway, he was a minister and also a tailor. And my maternal grandmother, Lavennia, I just talked to my mom about her recently. She bore eleven children. My mothers the youngest of eleven and there are four of them left, all girls. Seven girls, four--four boys and she was a, you know, just a homemaker and she did everything from make weave baskets and sell them and twist tobacco and, you know, make salt meats and--and sell those and raise vegetables and she, you know, of course bore a lot of kids and raised them, so was a great lady. Gertrude, on my father's side, bore eight children and my father is one of the youngest of the eight. And most of them are still alive. I think six of them are still alive and doing quite well. So, the oldest, my Aunt Julia, is in her 80s, late 80s. Speaker 1: So do-are--do they pass down any stories of what life was like back before the Civil War or after or, immediately after the Civil War what happened, 'cause I know that really--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Really active during the Civil War, I mean so--so much was going on the armies were, going back and forth--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The battles, you were born in Manassas, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Where the Battle of Bull Run, I think took place. Speaker 2: Yes, definitely, huge battlefield still there. No unfortunately, because my family, my--my grandparents are so old, my mother's father and mother, I never got to meet. And one of their siblings, my mother--my grandmother's sibling, Aunt Julia, I did know. But really I think she passed when I was a teenager, so I didn't never did get to have those, you know, conversations with her as you might, when you're more curious in your twenties and thirties, I think. My Aunt Mary was on my father's side and she lived to be 103, I--she also passed when I was a teenager. And I saw her a lot but I never really got to hear those kinds of stories. The one storyteller in my family, my--we have big Christmases at my house and almost every year, and this year, we built--my husband and I, built a new house in Virginia, we moved back, almost two years ago, now. So we've been in the house since last April of 2002. And we said the Christmas before at my mom's house when the whole family, her side of the family was there, we said well, you know, when the house is finished, you guys can come out for this Christmas. Well, little did I know, you know, (laughing) that they were all going to take me up on it so, I, I was supposed to have sixty-five people at my house, I had fifty. It was a great celebration, and--and my cousin, Phyllis, did a video of some of my aunt and uncles, and, aunt and uncles from actually my aunt's husband's side of the family that were there, and got a lot of great stores. Unfortunately, because I was the host of the party, I didn't really get to hear them, but I'm hoping to hear them soon. Story_ID: 76336 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about your father could you spell-- state his name and spell it for us and give--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: The full name? Speaker 1: Date of birth, yes. Speaker 2: Rodger, R-O-D-G-E-R, Pierpont, P-I-E-R-P-O-N-T, Fitzgerald, F-I-T-Z-G-E-R-A-L-D. He was born on the day the stock market crashed, or right--right the month the stock market, it was the 29th, he was 10-10-29,and--I think it crashed a couple days later, something like that, but it was around the stock market crash. So he just always says he's stock market baby. But anyway, he's 73 years old and he, he's an amazing guy, he's born 1929, and so I guess in the '50s [1950s], he went to Virginia Union, I think, and, and he met my mom there but they didn't start dating. He got, went to the Air Force and went into the Korean War and when he came back he finished school at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. I think, my mother by then had already finished and began teaching in Amelia County. But my father got his undergraduate degree in education, actually math and science, for--I think his--his specialties and went on to become a teacher in Prince William County, Virginia. I'm not sure he taught before he came to Prince William County, I believe that was his first. And he taught at a school called Jennie Dean and it was named after African American educator in--in Prince William County it was an all black school. And, I believe he taught like math and science and, and then--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Can you spell Jennie Dean for us? Speaker 2: I think its J-E-N-N-I-E, Dean, D-E-A-N. And she was a, you know, she was a pretty historical figure in Prince William County there. They actually had a celebration of her, I don't know which birthday about a year ago, did the, went to the school and did all of this, and so-- Speaker 1: Was she basically an educator- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So Jennie Dean, yeah, I'm not really all that familiar, my parents know a whole lot more about her but, yes, she's a pretty historical figure and, and black educator and in--in the Prince William County. So he taught at that school and then eventually taught at Gar-Field Senior High School, where I actually end up went, going to school. I remember going to school with him, you know, during breaks or something, and hang out with the teachers. I remember some of his, you know, best friends, just running down the hall, and just getting to know some of the students. And he was always such a likeable guy, and the students really loved having him as a teacher. It was never one of those, teachers, oh I hate going to Mr. Fitzgerald's class. You know, it was always kids coming back or seeing him in the grocery store later with their three kids, you know. After they've married and gone on with their lives, always just speaking so favorably about my dad. You must be Rodger Fitzgerald's daughter, he was my, guidance counselor, he was my math teacher, so just a really strong legacy. He taught at Gar-Field High School for the remainder of his--his career, he ended being, going to Virginia Tech [University] in the '70s [1970's], I believe or late '60s [1960's], '70s [1970's] to get his Master's Degree in Guidance Counseling and became a Guidance Counselor and was head of the department for a little while before he, he retired in the, in the 90's [1990s], I'm not exactly sure what year he retired, it's been about ten years, so. Speaker 2: Now Gar-Field High School, from what I read in the literature is spelled a little differently than what one, you would expect? Speaker 1: Yeah, G-A-R-DASH-F-I-E-L-D, yeah, capitol F-I-E-L-D. It's named after two different guys, but I'm not sure who they were. It's not President Garfield, but there was--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: People would think it was President Garfield--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Uhm-huh. Speaker 2: --President Garfield. Speaker 1: Uhm-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, Gar-Field High School, let me think, when he retired, he still has a picture hanging, hung in the halls of Gar-Field high school, has been, his photograph is, is, you know, for all the kids to see, and he really was an institution there, at the school, and ended up being my Guidance Counselor, when I was in high school. And used to, just pretty much make my schedule for me (laughing). I didn't, you know, you didn't go to your Counselor at school, "what classes do you want to take, okay, I'll fill out the form", it was, you know, it's filled out for you, you're taking Math Analysis and Calculus, and Advanced Chemistry and, you know, whether you like it or not. So he was trying to prepare me, obviously, for a career in math or science or engineering and really felt like as a black female I would have a lot of opportunity if I chose a career path like that. So, we looked at all at the different engineering disciplines, when I was in high school, and I was looking for one that was more people oriented. I didn't want to be sitting in a laboratory doing some more, science related type engineering discipline. So I chose Industrial Engineering because what I, from what I read in a literature, it was a lot more people orientated, you dealt more with people in processes rather than an actual making of machinery and that kind of thing. So I was drawn to that discipline basically because of my father. Story_ID: 76337 Speaker 1: Okay. So he had a big influence on you, I guess coming up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, huge influence. He was also is a very big, which I, I kind of really talked about his career but not so much his impact on me. You know, he, he and my mom both grew up obviously in the '30s [1930's] and '40s [1940's], you know, pre-Civil rights. And, and Jim Crowe laws in the south and all of that so endured all that, intense racism and prejudice. Don't have even the tiniest chip on their shoulders, they just are so gracious and loving and giving and caring, and just hold no animosity at all, and they share their story with kids even today, every--every February, during Black History Month. They go round to different schools in the county and speak to history classes and government classes, to talk about their experiences; so that kids don't lose sight and lose touch of, kind of where they've come from and where the nation's come from. That being said, he really knew that he grew up, you know, not, obviously, not in a wealthy family and, you know, struggling to make ends meet. His folks were and working from a young age, and got to see a bit of the world by--through the [U.S.] Air Force but realizes a great big world out there. And I--I kind of give him a lot of credit for really taking his life, you know, and fulfilling his potential. But also exposing myself and my younger sister, Kim, to anything--and museums and zoos, and we'd go into, look at the Smithsonian all of time. A lot of people live at a city or near a city like Washington, D.C. and never take advantage of all of the sights. That was not, you know, not my father at all. Every single museum, Air and Space Museum, and Museum of Natural History, and Fine Arts and everything. All the monuments we'd go to, take bike rides through the city a lot. Go see all kinds of sights, up and down the Eastern seaboard, and natural bridge or Luray Caverns or, you know, Disney World, when it opened. So, I mean, he wanted to expose us to all kinds of things. And it was never a question in my mind whether or not I was going to go to college, it was like what college and, what was I was going to major in. It was just an expectation that they were saving for that and preparing us for that. Speaker 1: Was he the first member of his family to go to college? Speaker 2: One of the first, I--I think he and, maybe one other person have degrees. He may be the only one as far--I know my mother the youngest four all have college degrees. The oldest seven paid for the youngest four to go to school, but I'm not totally sure about my father. He may be the only one. Story_ID: 76338 Speaker 1: Okay. Can you, give us your mother's name and spell that for us? Speaker 2: My mother is Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E, Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Wilkinson, W-I-L-K-I-N-S-O-N, Fitzgerald, F-I-T-Z-G-E-R-A-L-D. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Amelia County, Virginia, Amelia, Virginia and her birth date is July 27, 1930. Speaker 1: Alright, now what kind of person was your mother and what does she do? Speaker 2: My mom, also an educator, grew up with the youngest of the eleven, as I said earlier. And she was, you know, the baby of the family, and you know, loved and adored by all of her older sisters and brothers, still is, you know, you can still tell. She's got that little spoiled brat kind of attitude. You know, she's just very confident and very self-assured, but at the same time, always wanting to give and love and be the glue kind of that keep that whole family together. She's the one that's kept the family reunions going. But she, her--unfortunately her mother passed when she was eleven years old and so she had a step mom for the balance kind of her growing up years. And when she got to high school, the oldest siblings, when they got to high school age, there was no black high school in Amelia, Virginia. So the parent--their parents, my grandfather and grandmother paid for them to go to Richmond [Virginia] and live with relatives and go to high school in Richmond, 'til they got a high school education. So my grandparents were very adamant that all of the kids, you know, maximize their educational opportunities as much as possible. So by the time my sister--my mother went to high school, there was a high school in Amelia, Virginia, she graduated high school. She had a great teacher in high school that really inspired her to become a teacher. And so she went on to Virginia Union to major in education, came back to Amelia and taught in a one-room school. Not the same one that she went to, but similar school like the teacher that she had in high school. And really learned a lot of the lessons from that teacher as to how to manage a class from with varying ages and stages of kids, all in one room, and teach them all adequately and bring them along and discipline them. And so she just really modeled a lot of the behavior she saw that--in that teacher. She really wanted to better herself she said you know what, I wanna do more with my life and I wanna kind of get out of Amelia, and so she wanted to go to graduate school. And at that time in Virginia, there were no graduate schools in Virginia that would accept African Americans. Excuse me. There were no graduate schools in Virginia that would accept African Americans And so she got a full scholarship from the state of Virginia to leave Virginia, go to New York City and go to Columbia Teacher's College. So she got an Ivy League education on, you know, on the state of Virginia. Got her Master's degree in Special Education, in the summers, actually she was teaching in Prince William County, at the time. And she--so every summer she'd go stay with Aunt Connie and my Aunt Martha in a New York. She'd worked as a domestic in the summers, she did the same when she was at Virginia Union in the summers, and she got her Master's degree. Story_ID: 76339 Speaker 1: [Her mother, Fannie Fitzgerald] Came back to Prince William County and, this is in the mid '60s [1960's], about '64 [1964]. And it was about the time, obviously, that desegregation was occurring around the country, and Prince William County was no different. They wanted to kind of test, do a pilot, so they chose four African American teachers, out of Prince William County black schools, and put them in all white schools. My mother was one of the four teachers that was chosen to integrate schools in Prince William County. And she said she was nervous and scared, you know, the first day, all white teachers, all white faculty, all white kids, all white parents and, you know, what is that, you know, what are they gonna think of this black woman? And she realized, you know, after the first the day the kids are the same, you know, the parents are the same and they respected her for her abilities, her education and expertise and so she felt that mutual respect and she was very successful, as were the other three teachers. And as a result of that successful pilot, they went ahead the next year and integrated the schools in Prince William County. Actually must've been a little bit later than '64 [1964] because the following year, my mother and I went to--I went to first grade, so it must've been '67 [1967], that fall. And I integrated my elementary school, Manassas Park Elementary School. I was the first black student to go to that school; my mother was the first black teacher there. And so in that year, I didn't really know the difference, I remember asking my mom a few days ago, what was--whatever happened to Patricia Whalen, which is my little best friend in first grade. And her mother was also a teacher at the school. And I thought well, how did her mom respond when, you know, this little black girl was her--her daughter's best friend? She said she was welcoming and wonderful and warm, and you went to each other's birthday parties and everything. So just off the bat, I really felt no different than, than any of the other kids in the in the school. Mrs. Spoon was my first grade teacher, and she was actually was at the street dedication many, many years later when Benita Fitzgerald Drive was dedicated in Dale City, Virginia, where I grew up. So, you know, kept--kept abreast of my career throughout my life and, you know, still one of my favorite teachers and members of one of my favorite teachers, that first grade teacher. So my mom, you know, integrated the schools a couple years later. She was asked to be supervisor of elementary education in Prince William County. She had seven schools, all white male principals that she was the supervisor for, and had to visit all the schools. And she said, you know, pretty much everybody accepted her, and welcomed her with open arms, except--with exception of one teacher. And the superintendent told her she didn't have to go back to that one school, that he was treating her so poorly, that he didn't--she didn't have endure that. But everybody else was very welcoming and very accommodating to her. She left that position after a couple of years because she got pregnant with my sister and she wanted to be at home more with her girls. She really did sacrifice, I think, a lot during her career, because she wanted to be that, that mom, wanted to be at home with us when we got home from school. But she had so many other opportunities, she could've, she could've done anything she wanted to particularly in Prince William County. People have such great love and respect for my mom, and really had a lot of confidence in her abilities. And she's telling me now that she didn't have as much confidence in herself and her abilities as she probably should have. And would've taken on more principalships and other opportunities that had come her, way that she ended up turning down because. Feeling, I think, probably not as confident as she should of in her abilities, and I really appreciate that. I look at her, her life and her career, and realize, you know, back in the 50s [1950's] when no one would let her go to University of Virginia or Union--Virginia Tech. or William and Mary, you know, twenty some years later, all of them are clamoring to get their daughter, you know, to come to their schools, to--to run track. So it's kind of poetic justice, I guess. Story_ID: 76340 Speaker 1: I want you to reflect, I guess back to your childhood and give us some idea what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Dale City, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I first grew up in Manassas, eight years, and then from eight years on in Dale City. So you want me to start with Manassas? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, Manassas, I'm trying to think. I--we had a single family home on Douglas Street and it's in what is now termed old, kind of Old Town Manassas. Very small area where kind of the first part of the city was and all single family homes, all black families and two bedrooms, a bathroom, a living room, and kitchen on the top floor and then a full finished basement that my mom and dad finished. They bought it brand new and $10,000, I think, they paid for the house and paid off--paid it off in 10 years. But they--I'm thinking, the smells, I, I remember persimmon tree in our backyard, actually (laughing). And I remember tasting those persimmons and my dad had some the other day trying to get me to eat them. I still can't eat them-because I hate--I still hate the taste (laughing) from a, way back when. I haven't tasted one still I was since I was probably five or six years old, but didn't like them. We also had a blackberry bush or tree in, the backyard, grapes. My dad had a nice garden and, there's a, creek that ran at the end of the property. I just remember roll, I remember grass smell, because I remember rolling down the hill, on the side of the house and getting hives as a result because (laughing) I'm allergic to grass but I couldn't help myself, it was so nice. And I also remember, I also remember some taunting from kids in the neighborhood. We had a apartment complex that was built next to our house, probably when I, by the time I got to elementary school. And so it was all single family homes and then there was the apartment complex and some of the kids there. I think they were just jealous and I think they, you know, saw this little girl with her little frilly dresses and little crinolines under her dresses and spoke so properly, and liked to tease me. And they threw rocks at me and did all kinds of really mean things. And my parents had to hire like a high school student to walk me to, from the bus stop. After first grade I went on to a different elementary school for second grade. My mother stayed at Manassas Park, but I went to Baldwin Elementary School in the second grade and, so I had to go a bus stop and everything. And the kids treated me so badly that my, parents had to have someone walk me. So after a couple years of that they just said, you know what, we're gonna, we're gonna move. And we moved to Dale City, Virginia, predominately white neighborhood. They had several incidents, I think, in Princeton County, where they went to new housing developments, where they were building new homes and were not treated very well and weren't welcomed, I think, to move into that neighborhood because they were black. So Dale City was not like that and they built a beautiful home on a cul du sac, middle of a cul du sac, beautiful backyard nobody built behind us. There was a creek back there too, Neabsco Creek, it kind of runs into the Potomac River behind our house. I remember a big weeping willow tree that eventually they had to cut down, but, I loved that tree. And I remember our dogs, Duffy and Duke and I also remember, just lots of family, lots of people coming to the house, lots of gatherings of friends. My parents friends, I remember them having parties downstairs in the family room and the kids being upstairs, you know, watch TV and five or six of us kids of people that were downstairs. And I remember coming downstairs saying good night to everybody or doing a trick or singing a song or something (laughing) and then going back upstairs. I remember cleaning bathrooms, I remember the chores I used to have growing up and remembering, you know, how nicely my mother kept that house. And I, just now with one child can't seem to keep up, but she kept up with, keeping the house pristine and cooking dinner every night, you know, 5 or 6:00 we had dinner every night and... Story_ID: 76341 Speaker 1: So--I, it was just a really warm loving family. And I just, you know, you talk about people having dysfunctional families, and someone's an alcoholic, and someone does this and someone beats so and so up, and, we just didn't have any of that. And my family was just, you know-my husband met my family and he said, you know this is the Cosbys come to life, it's just no better way (laughing) to term it. And, you know, you've got two professional, you know, people--parents and, you know, two kid--the daughters, you know, beautiful daughters that kind of grew up both, educated and everybody's happy and loving. The other day, we all sat around watching The Sound of Music on television. My sister and I were singing every single song on the--(laughing). Our husbands were looking at us like, what planet did you come from? (laughing) and so that's the kind of growing--you know, every musical that came out my father went to take me to see it. And he--we both, my father plays the flute and I used to hear him play the flute piano. So I end up playing flute and piccolo in high school and middle school, and doing really well with that. My sister did as well, and we both still play. So he inspired us in music, as well, my mom--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Just the two of you, you and your sister? Speaker 1: Yep, just two kids and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: You're the oldest. Speaker 1: Yep, we're five, five and half years apart. Story_ID: 76342 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm just asking you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: About the first place you lived in, in Manassas and why some of the other kids didn't like you or didn't--seem to resent you for some reason. Speaker 2: You know now that I think of it, it probably was somewhat of a class issue. But at six, seven, eight years old, you don't really understand that, or know that. And my parents certainly didn't talk about themselves being better than anybody else, so I didn't ever pick up on that. But the kids, you know, as you know, they pick up on differences and they understood that I spoke differently, and I dressed differently, and I probably just acted differently than they were used to. And just because of that decided they, you know, I was a good person to pick on. Speaker 1: It was common, yeah, it was pretty common, I guess for black kids to tell other kids that they're speaking too proper--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Or you trying to be proper-- Speaker 2: Mm hmm. Or you trying to talk white or-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: In the south, they say you're trying to be sadiddy. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: That kind of thing-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh Speaker 1: and whether the person is really trying to be white or not, that's--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's more--more of a function of how that person makes you feel, and not something that the other person's doing, so yeah, it's interesting. You know, I--I grew up and I, I know I had a lot of, you know, issues with the black kids in that neighborhood, but then in the white neighborhood that we moved into, they were kind of wishy washy too. Some days they loved me and would go outside and play and other days they were teasing me. I think that was less a function of my color and just more a function of that's the way kids play. One day they like you, one day they don't because I probably didn't like somebody else so that they'd get different day, but I probably don't really remember that, as much. In the middle school a little bit, but again I really ultimately don't think or feel like any of that had to do with racism throughout my--my growing up years. It was sometimes it was nerds versus jocks or, you know, something else, but it was--or just girlfriends bickering, but it really didn't ever feel to me like a--like a race issue. Story_ID: 76343 Speaker 1: Now did you have a-a--a very strict household in terms of, I know--I mean I've--I've read that you are a National Merit Scholar Speaker 2: Um-hum Speaker 1: and, you know, a real scholar in school, you know. Taking subjects that would scare away a lot of kids (laughter) and you know, so you've must have a lot of discipline in the household to be able to, you know do that and, you know, athletics too, I mean, is that true? Speaker 2: My parents really set guidelines and kind of rules for us and one of which was, we couldn't watch television during the week. We could pick one--one story that we could watch, one show a week that was it. The rest of time, they said you've got too much to do with your schoolwork and playing your instrument and running track and doing all the other things that you're doing. You don't have time; really to do all those things well and watch television. So, you know, we'd pick The Waltons or, you know, something on television during the week, and that was it. On the weekends we could watch more television, but if it--by that point you're not really, it wasn't that much on to watch. So I probably didn't watch that much the weekends either. Particularly once I got to middle school and high school and started running track so much and having competitions for music on the weekends, and you know, all regional band competition, whatever, and so you're--you're just so busy, I didn't really have time. I had plenty of friends and so I'd rather talk to them on the phone instead of front of the television. So that was one rule, I think, that really helped us stay on track. You know, we could get the sleep we needed, we get, you know, study the way we needed to, practice and do all the things that we needed to--be successful in the areas that we chose, you know, we really enjoyed. So, strict no, I don't think it was very strict, I just think they had hard and fast rules about things like that, that were just part of our household. They didn't have the TV on either; it wasn't like someone else was watching TV and we couldn't watch it. So that was fine. About studying and grades, they didn't set huge expectations for us. Said you have to have straight A's or something, I never had straight A's. I always had A's and combinations of A's and B's and in high school, I remember the first semester in Calculus, I think I was doing really poorly, I can't even remember what my grade was, but it could've been, I don't know, a C or a D or something. And my teacher, Mrs. Frost, talked to my dad, and, my guidance counselor, and talked to me about the fact that I really wasn't applying myself, I really wasn't studying. She watched me, in my other, you know, Trigonometry class, or whatever class I had with her before and done much better, so she talked to him. My dad had a real stern talking to me and he said you know what, you will study, you will do this. And I'm sure I got, you know, some privileges taken away, and I ended up getting A's in both, you know, grading periods in the latter half and getting a B out of the class. But it was, that was only one time that I really remember that my parents had to kind of step in and say you will study, and you will do. I was pretty self-motivated and it might have been a little rebelliousness, I probably didn't want to take Calculus and so I was just kind of sitting back, or maybe I didn't like the teacher. But ultimately that talking to really did turn me around and I realized that, I was only hurting myself by not learning it. Thankfully, I did learn Calculus really, really well and so the first two years in college, when I was taking Calculus, a good portion of it was a review for me, so I got A's in that in college, as well. Story_ID: 76344 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I want to take you back again to childhood now. What kind of little girl were you? What did you like to do and, you know, what was your personality like? Speaker 2: I think I was a real amiable personality. I like people, always talkative, I'd get, you know, C's in conduct all the time in elementary school 'cause I talked too much. And so my friends loved me but the teachers probably got--I probably got on their nerves (laughing) because they wanted to teach the subject and I'm too busy talking and laughing and giggling. So fun-loving and amiable and friendly. I think my mother used to say that I'd be a little shy when I first met people and take me a while to warm up. I kind of remember that, my mother saying that to people. Take her a little while to warm up but she'll, you know, she's a sweet girl or something. And sure enough, as soon as I got to know the person, I'd warm up and we'd be fast friends. What did I like to do? I liked to, I loved to play outside, I loved to go in the--in the woods and climb trees, and build forts and climb up. We had this, we called the cliffs so we'd climb up the cliff, it probably was, you know, a little bitty hill, but you know, eight, nine years old it felt like a cliff. Wade in the creek, and, you know, collect rocks, I mean all kinds of tom boy type stuff that all the kids in the neighborhood liked to do. We kind of just get together and, I mean, and nowadays you wouldn't let your kid run through the woods like that. But we did, we spent most of the time just running through the woods. I remember in middle school, we all started doing gymnastics, 'cause we saw Olga Korbut compete in the Munich Olympic games and all thought we would be gymnasts. So I joined the gymnastic team in middle school and, so we'd hold gymnastics meets in my front yard and other people's front yard (laughing) and grade each other and do all that. So we had a really great time. What else did I like to do? I like to play sports, I was on the softball team in elementary school, I wasn't very good at that either. But I got better as time went on, but I remember the coach telling me years later that he'd never thought I'd ever be a world class athlete 'cause I was such a poor softball player. I tried ballet, really liked it, but wasn't very good at that. Played piano for a while, loved playing piano, but I just wouldn't practice so my dad stopped paying for the lessons for me. What else did I like to do? I liked to read, I actually love to read. I would stay up late at night reading "Nancy Drew" or "Little Women" or--I remember this "Hello God It's Me, Margaret", I don't know where that book is, but I remember the title of it like it was yesterday. So I read a lot, and one of those people with the flashlight under the bed, you know, after your lights were supposed to be out and, loved to read, I still do. What else did I like to do? Play Barbies, I remember I had a lot of Barbies and play with my girlfriends. But yeah, playing outside was the most fun thing, I think, just being outside in the air just ripping running through the trees and the woods and with my friends. Speaker 1: It sound like a beautiful place to grow up-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh, it really was-- Speaker 1: Fruit growing and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Laughing) it really was, it was. And it was real wholesome and, you know, all of the families in the neighborhood had lots of kids, you know, we were probably the smallest family in the--on our street. The Dyblers (ph.) had six kids, and they have four kids, everybody had, he had, at least three kids, another family did have six or seven kids, so there were always lots of kids, all, you know age groups, ages and stages in the neighborhood. So if it wasn't running around in the street, we were playing hide and seek or kickball or dodge ball, or something like that. And it was never, it wasn't a lot of organized play, you know. People--I did softball, that was the one sport I did do, that was organized, but I learned how to play a lot of sports and did a lot of activities just in our own immediate neighborhood. Story_ID: 76345 Speaker 1: Now, did you have any idea that you would be good at sports, you know, at all? Speaker 2: I will tell you that running was something I was always good at and, but didn't ever join a track team, and never ran a race until I was twelve years old. But in elementary school and in my neighborhood in Manassas [Virginia], I remember I used to race the boys on the street and I would beat them and they would say, well, that's on the street, let's get on the grass. And I'd beat them on the grass, and they would say well, I run faster barefoot, so they'd take their shoes off and run barefoot, and I'd still beat them (laughing),and so, so that was in my neighborhood in elementary school we had Field Day every year. Back then, it was a whole day, got on a bus, packed a lunch, you know, went to a big park and you had all kinds of races, three-legged races and, you know, run the 600 and do the broad jump, and all that stuff and I had my first picture in the paper. I had this pink and white, frilly dress on with little bloomer, pink and white bloomers underneath, I'll never forget. Long arms and long legs and stretching out to the moon and won the broad jump and I had my first picture in the paper. So I was probably about eight or nine years old then. And so I knew that I was fast, I knew I was good, people used to, ah, she runs like a gazelle, you know, this is when I was in elementary school. In every P. E. [physical education] class, we were running I'd beat all the boys; there was never a kid that beat me my whole growing up. Speaker 1: Now, that's some that should be, you know,-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Laughing) that should have been a clue, but I was too busy trying to play softball and do gymnastics, two sports that I was really horrible at. But, you know, you find your way. And I had a middle school teacher, Gwen Washington, who was the gymnastics coach and the track coach and a good friend of the family, and she told me one day, she said you know what, you're on the gymnastics team, that's great but, you know, you really need to come out for the track team. You know, you're fast, you're best, you know, fastest girl out there. And so I did and I never, never really looked back. I started running hurdles right away and I never fell and got cinders all in my knee and all that kind of stuff. I just somehow knew how to three-step the hurdles-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, that's not easy. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. I never, I'd never run a hurdle before, but I never had any problem with it. Speaker 1: There not easy for the average person (laughter) just to get the timing--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then to make that stretch and get over the hurdle that's, running hurdles is not easy. Speaker 2: No, and-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: And to be able to, so you could do that right off the bat. Speaker 2: Right off the bat, and never had a problem. I think someone just showed me this is how you jump over, and this is what you do. Speaker 1: At age twelve? Speaker 2: At age twelve, yeah. Speaker 1: You could run hurdles--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Uhm hum. I never fell, I really never fell 'til, I think, I got in college, was the first time I fell. Speaker 1: That's something, how tall were you at twelve? Speaker 2: Twelve, I remember at thirteen, I was five, eight. So I must've been close to that at twelve years old, you know, definitely about five, five. So I was a very tall girl, long legs, long arms, as I still have, and not obviously suited for gymnastics where they're usually a foot shorter than that (laughing) but I would get on the uneven parallel bars, that was my so-called specialty and I remember this thing called the Soul Circle and would stand on the bottom bar, hands on the top bar, jump and straddle the top bar, swing down, do some twist thing and flip around the bottom bar. Well, I would do that and my spine; I was so tall they would stretch the bars out as far as they could go. And my spine would still hit the bottom bar, and I had a black leotard that just had permanent white marks on it, because I used to hit the spine and that chalk with be on (laughing) there and just rub the black off. So I was not good, I wasn't suited for it, and thankfully, Gwen Washington kind of saw the talent in me, and geared it-geared it down the right path, so. Story_ID: 76346 Speaker 1: In middle school, seventh and eighth grade, I, I started running in district meets and local meets there. Speaker 2: What was the name of your school? Speaker 1: Godwin Middle School. That was named after a former Governor of Virginia, Mills E. Godwin Middle School. Speaker 2: Okay. So you ran in meets--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Uh-huh, for Godwin. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we only had a handful a year, three or four a year. And it wasn't anything farther than district meet, so that was like the eastern end of the county. All the middle schools that were going and, Marsteller and a couple of others that we would have a track meet, and I would win the races there. And I kind of, I remember the feeling, I remember some of my teammates, I remember just the feeling of running so fast. It's just such a fun, fun feeling (laughing). Speaker 2: Did you get into the training, I mean, I know that no matter how fast you can run, I mean you got to really train to be a good sprinter even, or a hurdler. Speaker 1: You know I was always very easily coached. Very coachable athlete and just listened to what my coaches asked me to do, and I did it. I didn't really balk, I didn't say I don't wanna do that or not show up for practice or anything. That discipline, I think, that my parents instilled in me early on really served me well, still does. But definitely through my track career, because I had a stick-to-itiveness that a lot of people don't have. Speaker 2: So you were very active, I mean extremely active as a youth, you know, with your studies, with band and track. Speaker 1: I was a two-sport athlete in middle school, as I did gymnastics and track, played the flute and you're right. My studies, so active, and I'm thinking, you know, I had like the Lioness Club, not Lioness, Leo Club, I think it is. With the Lions and Lioness, my parents were in that, and I was in the Leo Club, so, it was--church activities, you know, it was always something. (laughing) Speaker 2: Now, where did you go to church at? Speaker 1: We went to Dale City Baptist Church, when we moved to Dale City. Before we went to First Baptist Church in Manassas and Dale City Baptist and then we ended up, probably my middle school years at First Mount Zion Baptist Church, and I still go to that church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hum, my family still goes to that church. So that's been a long time, thirty years. Story_ID: 76347 Speaker 1: Now, in--in high school, did you have an idea, by the time you went to high school that--did--did you have an idea by what career did you wanted to pursue when you started high school? Speaker 2: No, I think, when I started high school, I probably initially thought music. I might major in music, I was, you know, a good flute player, enjoyed doing that. As I finished my high school, music wasn't as important to me, track was really the top priority, as far as my extracurricular. When although I was still first chair, still did, you know, great, had music lessons and did all the things I was supposed to do, I just wasn't as passionate. I saw that track was taking me so much farther than music ever could, so. Somewhere in high school, my dad planted that seed in my mind about engineering and so it just kind of stuck. I don't think I ever, probably because I just never had a real other interest to say I'd much rather do medicine, I much rather do, you know, pre-law or something. I just never had any other desire, any other way so. And then ultimately once you're kind of conditioned through taking all that science and math in high school, you kind of think you're good at it, so you might as well do it. So, I think it was a self-fulfilling prophecy, in a way. But, so engineering just ended up being the thing that we kind of gravitated to. And I was--I was pretty smart, I mean I looked at all the salaries--starting salaries for all the different professions and engineering was clearly, you know, heads and tails above the rest, where you needed a graduate degree or PhD to get the same money, you know, as you would from an engineering degree. Starting off, I thought, wow, I could not ever go to school again (laughing) and still make decent money. So that was, I tell you what, one of the motivating factors, as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, who were the teachers in high school that, were there any teachers that sort of, you know helped develop you, kept an interest in you? Speaker 2: Teachers, school. You know, I think as an athlete, you really look to your coaches. They're the ones that kind of end up guiding you. I'm trying to sit here thinking why is that? But you probably spend more time with them than any other teacher, obviously, 'cause it's two and three hours a day, weekends and travel with them and everything. So, I would say it's the coaches; they were all teachers at the high school. First it was Ann Lockett, she was a P.E. [physical education] teacher, and she might've run the department, actually at the time. She was an amazing coach. She had--my freshman we won our third straight State Title, Virginia Triple A or whatever the top high school classification is, a girl's track and field, State Title my freshman year. And then she went on to lead the basketball team to a State Title and the gymnastics team to a State Title. So it wasn't just in one discipline that she had really great expertise. So she was great at motivating girls and coaching them and getting them to work hard, and she could be mean as a buzzard sometimes and sweet as your grandma the next, you know. So she really knew when to use what techniques with us and, and really put together a group of girls, I think, that really cared about each other and wanted to help one another do well, so it engendered that spirit in us. She stopped coaching track after my freshman year and her assistant coach, Ruthie Brown, was the coach of the women's track team. She was about twenty-six years old, young, blond hair, long, blond hair and beautiful woman, and she didn't know a thing, I don't think about really coaching a track team, other than what she learned from Coach Lockett. And another guy, Coach Campbell, he used to play professional sport like for the Chicago [Illinois], I think, for Chicago or for another team, maybe two or three years professional football. But he was a P. E. teacher and track coach and football coach at Gar-Field [High School]. So he was the men's coach, but he, and Coach Brown really together, I think, in high school worked together to develop my talent, and my skills, my sophomore year through my senior year. Story_ID: 76348 Speaker 1: Ruthie [Brown], I credit with not knowing a whole lot at the beginning, but reading and talking to people and looking at videos and doing whatever she had to do. She realized she had this raw talent in Benita Fitzgerald that she didn't want to be responsible for not cultivating (laughing) and she just did whatever she could. She exposed me to every kind of competition and she ended up getting me in the Melrose Games and the, you know, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] meet at, what was the old arena they used to play in? Speaker 2: At the Penn relays? Speaker 1: Not penn relays, but indoor, indoor comp. Where did the Sixers used to play basketball? Speaker 2: Spectrum? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was the Spectrum. I ran a competition there and all kinds of arenas. At my high school, junior and senior year, she'd leverage relationships that she made with folks and they ended up, you know, getting me into these big meets, and I did really, really well. So she got me in track clubs, and got me to the Junior Nationals, where I won competitions, and by senior year, to the National Championships. And I really credit her a lot with my success throughout my career 'cause she helped lay that foundation and helped, she just didn't say, well, it's good enough that she's the best girl on my high school team. And she helped me win the State Championship. I mean she really felt the responsibility and took on the responsibility of making sure that I reached my full potential, and I give her a lot of credit for that. Coach Campbell too, like I said, was kind of there along the way and giving his coaching expertise, which he probably at the beginning had more of than Ruthie. And a lot of encouragement, and really, understanding, I think, that sometimes I didn't have the confidence in myself or the killer instinct in competition to really push myself to my limits. And I think Coach Campbell was really responsible for helping light that fire in me. Story_ID: 76349 Speaker 1: Now, did they ever try to get you to play basketball, 'cause you're about five ten? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Did they ever try to get you to play ball? Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact they did. Coach Lockett, as I said, Ann Lockett was the track coach, was also the basketball coach and gymnastics coach but she, after my sophomore year, summer after my sophomore year, we decided she and I decided that I was going to try to play basketball. All my best friends on the track team also played basketball. And so that summer, we did all kinds of drills, I learned how to dribble, I learned how to shoot and, you know, plays and all that kind of stuff, I did, and then they changed the rules and made basketball, girls basketball coincide with boys basketball. Girls basketball used to be in the fall, boys basketball started in the winter, and so did indoor track. And so, then when they moved girls basketball to coincide with boys basketball, which was nice, so it wasn't kind of a second-class status any more, it had prime-time basketball season status in high school. But for me, it was no choice to run indoor track or play basketball, sport I'd never tried before. So, that was the beginning and end of my basketball career. Speaker 1: In those days too, I guess basketball wasn't that as big a deal as it is now. Speaker 2: No, it really wasn't, it wasn't. I think now it probably would have been, might have been a different decision, but 'cause it was probably more money to be made, you know, one or the other, but at least more notoriety. Story_ID: 76350 Speaker 1: Another thing I credit Coach Lockett with is there is girl named Paula Girven, that went to high school with me, she was senior when I was a freshman. And Paula was an amazing athlete, she was, you know, like four-time state champion, you know, hurdles, 100, 200 high jump, long jump, I think it was five-time, at one time. And she went on to make the Olympic team in 1976 in the high jump. She grew up around the street from me in Dale City [Virginia]. Our parents were in the Lions Club together and, you know, grew up together. And so her younger sister, Marcia, (ph) and I were on the gymnastics team in middle school and track team in high school together. So she was a real inspiration for me. Here it is a teammate, a friend, a neighbor, you know, friend of the family who got to go to the Olympics and compete in the Olympics. She got 16th, 17th in the high jump in Montreal [Canada], but she was our hometown hero, you know. And when she came back, and Coach Lockett and I were talking one day and she said you know you can be there in four years. And I looked at her like she, you know, had just grown broccoli out of her head or something. I just thought, what do you mean I can be there in four years? You have the talent, you can make the Olympic team, and that was the first seed of, you know, a thought in my mind that I could possibly, you know, be an Olympic Champion in track and field. The thought had never occurred to me. Looking at Paula even that being such a tangible thing for me, I still didn't ever see myself in her shoes. She was too big, she was too great, she was too awesome, you know, I could never really--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: How much older was she than you? Speaker 1: Four years, well three years older. And we were both on the Olympic team together, 1980, four years later. So her, you know, prediction did come true and I got to join my hero, at the same time, so. Story_ID: 76351 Speaker 1: Well, what was the most outstanding, I guess, event of your senior year in high school, well of your high school track career? Speaker 2: I would say my junior; it was my junior year, summer of my junior year, I never got to run summer track, like end of my sophomore year, I got a knee injury of some kind and, so my dad, said, no, you can't go to Junior Olympics or anything, you gotta let that knee heal. He didn't want me to have to end up having surgery and cut my knee open and it was a smart decision, but a disheartening one at the same time. And it was after my rehab and everything that I started playing basketball that summer. But the summer following my junior year, was the first year Coach Brown, Ruthie Brown, had gotten me associated with the DC Striders Track Club out of [Washington] DC and they really pulled all the best high school kids from Maryland, [Washington] DC and Virginia. And we got on a great big bus and we went off to Indianapolis, Indiana for the Junior National Track and Field Championships. Excuse me. A woman by the name of Glenda Moody, was the manager of the track team. She really wasn't a coach but she hired a bunch of people or had a bunch of people that were coaches, and Ruthie went with me up there. And they told us, you know what, the people who get in the first top two, first or second place, will make the Junior National Team, U. S. Junior National team and they'll go to Russia to compete against the Russians, and they'll go to West Germany compete against Great Britain and West Germany for Tri-meet and, I was like, oh, cool, you know, this sounds great. But I never really thought that I was gonna actually do it. But, you know, my parents were like, well, we'll get your passport and get you all ready, so I packed as if I were gonna be leaving there going to Russia. And sure enough, I won the race, I beat the current, you, know, the defending National Champion, and all these other people in the race, that I was supposed to know that I didn't have a clue who they were. Should have been intimidated by, but didn't know who they were, so it didn't matter, I just went out there and ran my best and won the National Championships, so. Speaker 1: Now did you have any sense of your own times in these events, I mean did you check that, did you time yourself during practice to see where you stood? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew where I'd stood, you know, at the state level; I was the state champion at that point. But no, I didn't really look at nationally. That was, you know, I think, the credit again I give to Ruthie [Brown] because if weren't for her, I wasn't looking to do that. She realized that she needed to get me more on a national stage, how can I do that? Well, the DC Striders will take, you know, and somehow got hooked up with that track team; I didn't have anything to do with it. So, going there, I didn't like research and figure out what times people were running or what time I had to run to make, I just went out there and ran. And ran the heats in the quarter finals, and the semi-finals and got to the finals, and the gun goes off and I run and I beat Candy Young and Kim Turner and some other people in the race. And they were just so angry with me for beating them. And Kim didn't make the team at all but Candy did, and we had to room together when we got to Russia and she was not very nice, you know, the first part of the trip. And we ended up becoming, you know, great friends. But at first there was a lot of animosity, I think, 'cause who's this upstart from Virginia coming in here beating everybody. So that's really probably my breakthrough success in my track career was kind of bursting onto the national stage that way. And then I was able to defend my National Championship, a year later and win again. Speaker 1: But what did you think of Russia, I mean that's, you're a junior from Virginia--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: In 1978. Speaker 1: Cold War. Speaker 2: Cold War's going on and Iron Curtain and all that, and my parents, poor things, you know, Dale City, Virginia, thinking, Oh my God, (laughing) my 16-year old daughter, not only is she get on her first airplane, you know, but she's going overseas, you know, to some foreign, you know, communist country. There's woman named Pearlie McDaniels, she just died a few years ago, but she was like the Den mother, she was the manager of the team and she took really good care of all the kids. And my parents met her before I went off to Russia and they felt comfortable that there was a Mommy-like figure that was gonna take care of their daughter. Story_ID: 76352 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were asking you about going to Russia, what that was like? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, sixteen years old, getting on an airplane for the first time. We actually came here, to Chicago [Illinois] cause a lot people didn't have their passports and everything yet. So we took care of that and then we got on the plane and flew from here to Russia, to Moscow and then on down to Dunnett, (ph.) which is in the Ukraine and we stayed there for about ten days, actually. We had two track meets, dual meets, U.S. versus Russia and USSR and junior team. So the first track meet we had, you know, we were all fresh and we had just kind of gotten there a couple days before, you know, still had plenty good food from the United States, cause the food was really horrible in Russia. And we won the meet, you know, the U.S. beat the USSR, whatever, you know, score was. Men beat the men, the girls beat--you know, women beat the women, overall team score. And so I guess the coaches got blessed out and they got in a lot of trouble. And so they went and finished as juniors so, all of us had to be 18 years old or younger, by a certain date, you know, and they brought people in that had full beards and, you know (laugher) Speaker 1: Not the girls? (laughing) Speaker 2: No, not the girls (laughing) but they--the next meet, a week later in the same stadium, same people now, granted are big shot putters, I can't think of his name, went to SMU [Southern Methodist University], God, God dog it, and played football, professional football for a long time. But anyway, he lost about twenty pounds in that week and, you know, so we were a little emaciated. But we were also, you know, competing against a whole different team; they brought a whole different team out there to compete against us the next week. And so they obviously beat us, I mean (unclear) chasers. I remember they just look like old guys, I mean they look like they were thirty-something. I mean to us, that's old, you know, at sixteen. So yeah, it was amazing. So we lost that meet and--I have two vivid memories. One was of seeing there really touting the fact that they had no unemployment in the Soviet Union and seeing women with, you know, with a broom about this tall, bent over, you know, cleaning off steps and cleaning off the floor. And I thought to myself, okay they're employed but what are they doing, and how are they doing it and what are they getting paid? And, you know, the--unfortunately, you know, they didn't use deodorant, and didn't bathe very often and so the maids would come into your room and just light up the room, you know, with their body odor (laughing) and so. And we had a interpreters, you know, that were coming through so, we ended up packaging up a bunch of our toiletries at the end and giving to each one of them, you know, perfumes and lotions and deodorants and soaps. And they were so appreciative. A couple of them we really didn't like in the very beginning, but we ended up liking her after the ten days were over. They seemed kind of mean and gruff and just not very nice. I remember trading, you know, jeans, and T-shirts and all kinds of commodities that people couldn't get in Russia that we had in the United States. You could make all kinds of money and I bought souvenirs with all the money I made, the rubles I made. Cause you couldn't do much with then after you left Russia. And so I--those were kind of the vivid memories I had kind of trading and getting knowing some of the hotel staff and-- Speaker 1: What kind of food did they--did you all have? Speaker 2: Pretty much had the food, we kind of had this poached egg thing for breakfast, had little bits of ham in it. I never liked poached eggs at home so I certainly didn't like it there. We had these potato kind of things with the cut up meat; they were about bite size piece of meat and potatoes. And I remember a guy named Eric Brown, carved his initials in one of the potatoes and--two of the potatoes somebody got one of the potatoes back the next meal. So lunch and dinner we had the same thing and probably just took our leftovers and just served them back to us the next meal. So it wasn't very nice and I celebrated my sixteenth or seventeenth birthday, seventeenth birthday in Russia and my 21st birthday and another birthday, I celebrated three birthdays in Russia but--over the years. But they sang happy birthday, had this beautiful cake and I went to cut it and it sounded like I was cutting, you know, graham cracker, something was so hard.(laughing) It looked beautiful though (laughing) but it wasn't much to the cake, so yeah, the food was really bad, it was really bad. So I don't know. They had a little deli on a couple of the different floors, that's where the guys, particularly shoppers would go and they'd make omelets with cheese and ham in there for them. That's only way they could keep their weight up and so we'd go there every once in a while. But I kind of sick of that, ate lots of bread so ten days of that. We, you know, we left there not too healthy (laughing) And then we get to West Germany, of course we're back on the other side of the Iron Curtain and food, galore, we just--you would've thought we were, you know, refugees, or something, it was great to get more Westernized food and plenty of it. Story_ID: 76353 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about, at the end of high school, I mean were you, like a--I suppose you were a top ranked track and field star, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, that--the age of innocence was pretty much over after I finished that Junior National competition and winning and then going on to compete in Russia and Germany. Came back home, and then I was more cognizant of the rankings and my times and where I was and--but even still my time had me ranked like thirtieth in the country overall, that's all hurdlers. That was probably going into, yeah going into my senior year, throughout my senior year. And so, you know, I was good but I wasn't Olympic caliber quite yet. And I remember my senior year, all of my teammates and, you know, all my fellow students and the teachers, oh you know the 1980 the Olympics are coming next year, we wanna see you there, you know, you going to make the Olympic team, you going to Moscow [Russia] to the Olympics? I'm like, I don't think so. I don't know how I'm going to go to thirtieth to top three, you know, overnight, but, you know, a miracle do happen and that summer won the Junior Nationals again. And then Mamie Rallins was also a great hurdler back in the day and she coached at Ohio State and she coached Stephanie Hightower, who was a great hurdler teammate rival of mine. And she was the Head Coach or a Coach on the World University Games team that summer. So the summer of 1979, and I still was probably, ranked, you know, top thirties or so I hadn't really improved my time much in that year. And went to Mexico City [Mexico] and competed for the U.S. team on the World University Games team. As long as you were enrolled in a university, you didn't necessarily have to started yet, you could compete. And I got eighth place in the final, last, but it was eight and ran 13:33 which dropped my time by seven tenth of a second and put me in the top five in the country, at that time. So I went--I did go (laughing) like thirtieth to, you know, Olympic contender over the course of the summer. So went my whole freshman year at Tennessee, you know, trying to break that magical thirteen second barrier that women hurdlers like to try to break. And I didn't do it that year but did make the Olympic team, finished second at the Olympic trials. But by then, [President Jimmy] Carter had already boycotted the games. Story_ID: 76354 Speaker 1: Now you graduated from Gar-Field [High School] in 1979 --(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And how did you choose the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Okay. So it was 1979, Title 9 was passed like in 1972 so it started in '75 [1975] I think, offering college athletic scholarships to, to girls. But we were part of the AIAW, American Intercollegiate Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women, I think, AIAW. We weren't part of the NCAA, and so the AIAW rules were much different than NCAA. NCAA you could do six paid visits, the guys could--they could pay, you know, your way--pay your whole stay, you know, six visits girls could get three visits but they couldn't pay for your visit. So my parents of limited means, you know middle class but couldn't be paying for me to fly all over the country, particularly back then, so expensive, and so they took me to [University of] Tennessee to University of Virginia, and to Penn State [University]. Penn State, I had never been to before, but University of Virginia our State Championships and Regional Championships had been held there. So I was kind of familiar, at least with the track and the coach, Dennis Craddock, and some of the other folks at the University. Tennessee I went to every year, they had Vault Track Classic high school big, you know, all over southeast, kids came. And we would travel from Virginia every year to take the whole track team, not whole track team, but fifteen--ten or fifteen of us, a van full and run all the relays and I used to win all kinds of events. I was Most Valuable, you know, or whatever for the track meet, two or three years in a row. So Terry Crawford, the coach there had started kind of, just talking to me, you know, she wasn't doing anything illegal. But definitely familiar with her and met her through the course of my going to Tennessee. So two schools I was really intimately kind of familiar with, the third school, Penn State, not so. I went with another girlfriend, Linda Portersic (ph.) she went to Ford Hunt High School, she was a white girl and long blond hair, little squeaky voice, fast as the wind, and she was a sprinter for a long time and a hurdler. She used to beat me in the sprints and beat me in the hurdles, and then I started beating her and she started running more of the 200, 400 and she ended being a middle distance runner by the time we finished high school, and I kind of took over the sprints. But she is amazingly fast and talented young lady. And her father and my father and the two of us went to visit Penn State together. It's a cold kind of dreary day and I didn't really, you know, care for the coach that much and, it just really wasn't a good experience. You know, I'd never been there so my first impression was this cold, dark dreary damp place. Speaker 1: It's up in the mountains--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Kind of isolated - (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of isolated, didn't really do much for me. So really it ended up being between Virginia and Tennessee. Now granted, I was recruited by like sixty-five, you know, schools across the country. Everything from Ivy League Brown and Harvard and Yale to UCLA and University of Colorado and Ohio State and, you know, Florida, you just name the school, I was recruited by --excuse me, I don't know why I have so much in my throat, get some more water-I was recruited by all these schools across the country and it was so hard for me --because they were calling me all hours of the night and day and, you know. You know, talk to them for a while and they'd call me back and they were just kind of bugging me to death, so it was just like a signing deadline, like, let's just say March 15th. March 16, I'm like signing with Tennessee, cause I just really wanted all those people to go away (laughing) they were really getting on my nerves and causing a lot of consternation and just, you know, stress. And I just-you know, I had to finish school and do my Calculus homework, and play my flute and run my track, and I just, you know, was too distracted by all that. So, I really think I picked the place and ultimately the way best place for me, because I was familiar with the school, I was familiar with the coach, I wasn't so--it was far away enough but not so far away. And they also had their own Women's Athletic Department, which at that time was critical. Because in lot of schools the Men's football team kind of ruled the athletic department and you kind of got the leftovers. You didn't get new uniforms very often, you didn't travel to meets very much, you didn't--a lot of the things you just didn't get to do if you didn't have your own budget and control of your own kind of destiny. And so the Women's Athletic Department there at Tennessee did. And I give first Gloria Ray and Joan Cronan, the Athletics Directors for the women a lot of credit because they had this huge vision for that--for a program at Tennessee. And you see what's happen to the basketball team and many of the other women's sports at Tennessee it's just been incredible. Story_ID: 76355 Speaker 1: Do you think that--do you have any reflections on why you think Tennessee, not just University of Tennessee but Tennessee State, black school in Nashville--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: They have such a reputation for women's athletics. Speaker 2: I can speak to [University of] Tennessee just from a standpoint of that structure that they have that separate women's athletic department it's still separate. I think, you know, a lot of critics like to say it's not a good idea, but, I think, for me that they were able to make decisions about my career and where they sent me, and what I got to do, separate and apart a lot of the times from the rest of the team. Because they were trying to make sure to maximize my success and my potential, that they couldn't have made. They wouldn't have the resource to do, to send me to the Melrose Games or, take us on a spring break for, you know, for a week and a half to California to run two or three dual meets and get new uniforms every year. So all those great things, I think--they really put a lot of resources and energy behind the women at Tennessee. I went back there; I was inducted in the Inaugural Class of the Hall of Fame, The Lady Vol's Hall of Fame, at the University of Tennessee a year and a half ago. And going back to see what they've done with that--with that department, the Women's Athletic Department. They've got this beautiful, men and women, have this student athlete area where you go and get tutored, and they've got all state of the art equipment, computers and, I mean they really support their athletes. Tennessee State, you know, Coach Temple, Ed Temple, is an amazing man and he too had a vision for his girls. He had, you know, certain standards and requirements of them back in the 50s [1950's] and he knew there were very few, you know, the only black girls on the track team, you know, they're traveling to all these foreign countries. People have preconceived notions about blacks in other countries and parts of this country. And he wanted them to be dressed impeccably and speak impeccably and get great grades and, you know, represent themselves, himself their families, our country in the most positive way. So I think it was that structure that discipline that he instilled in them that allowed them to be so successful on and off the track. I think he was really the energy behind that. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered if one is feeding off the other or something, you know. I mean because of, you know, with great success of Wilma Rudolph--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: in 1960 and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think they had success way before University of Tennessee did. Speaker 1: Yeah, they did. Speaker 2: Way before. Speaker 1: I just wondered if that inspired you, the University of Tennessee to try to do something--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Very much might have. Speaker 1: You know, I don't know, I just-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I had--I never heard that, but it could be true. Speaker 1: Now, University of Tennessee Women's basketball team just set a record, right for wins and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Pat Head Summitt did, yeah. Most wins of any coach and college history, 800 something. Speaker 1: At every year there when best--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: or one of the best teams. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I just wondered, you know, I just wondered. When you say Tennessee, you think of women's sports. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: (laughing) Okay. So--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So I was just really glad, you know, fortunate, blessed to have chosen Tennessee. It was a perfect place for me to be. Story_ID: 76356 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now what happened there, I mean what was your--was academic life there at [University of] Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] just as rewarding as the athletic life? Speaker 2: I majored in Engineering, thanks to my dad, Industrial Engineering and my academic life and my track life are kind of like two separate things. Cause none of the people in my track and sports life were actually engineering students, I think I was the only one, at that time. (laughing) So I didn't see any of my teammates when I went to class and I didn't see any of my classmates when I went to my--my track practice or meets. I kind of almost felt like I was leading two separate lives. Speaker 1: Now I guess that would be true, I was reading your information, you really are a scholar and it's probably not as many, I don't know, I don't know how many athletes are really scholars-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum, right, right. So it was really important to me to maintain good grades and, it was a hard curriculum and, you know, got this matrix of classes that you are supposed to take and when you're supposed to take them to finish in four years. And I looked at that at the very beginning and thought; I'm putting my own self on the five-year program (laughing). It's just no way I can take eighteen hours, you know, six Engineering classes at one time, compete and travel and do all that and so I decided early on with my coach, with my parents that I wasn't going to put kind of pressure on myself. That in order to be a success in all that I wanted to do, I couldn't, I just couldn't do that. So I would take three or four, every once in a while five classes if it were maybe, you know, the fall or something like that, I would take a little--few more classes. And it was difficult, it was really, you know, hard to be up studying all that crazy Thermodynamics and, you know, all the kinds of stuff you have to do. And Industrial Engineering it's kind of a jack of all trades. I took a lot of Mechanical Engineering classes, Electrical Engineering classes, Chemical Engineering classes, lots of Physics and Chemistry, Math, I took Business Classes, Accounting, Statistics, so it was all that, you know, kind of put together that made up that curriculum. It was nice, cause it's well-rounded and it's good for business, now that I had a lot of the classes that I had. But it was a difficult curriculum and it was, I think, a really good idea that I didn't try and push it. I finished in just over the quarter over five years, but, and that was mainly because of the Olympic year. I took it really light the spring before the Olympics. And I didn't really go to summer school, maybe one time, I took a class, but it was all during the regular years--school year. Balancing the two was pretty good because, you know, track practice was at 3:00 every day and I would start my classes really early, so I would take a 7:50 class every day and so I would be up at the crack of dawn, go eat a big breakfast, go to my classes, come back eat lunch, and come back to my room and take a nap (laughing) usually before track practice because it was just so much on me. And study a little bit, if I needed to and then go to track practice, eat dinner and then I would study and then start the whole process over again the next day. And I was pretty disciplined about it. I wasn't like trying to, you know, party during the week or anything; I mean pretty much that schedule every day. And I would say with a women's athletic department, they were you know pretty adamant that we maintain our grades and remain eligible and they provided study hall and tutors as you needed, and I never really took advantage of it, cause I had the discipline, but they were definitely keeping track of our grades. So there wasn't a possibility for me to start slipping and they not know about it and me still have an opportunity to run track. So, that--that was always, of course, in the back of my mind. Story_ID: 76357 Speaker 1: There's something else I was going to say about balancing. Oh, it's always been important to me to have a well-rounded life and I think it's because I was involved so many activities growing up. And still had, you know, friendships, you know, still dated a little bit in high school, and not seriously or anything, but wanted to have that well-rounded life. So I dated, I got married when I was still in college, you know, the first time and so I felt like, I don't have any regrets, I don't feel like I missed out on a lot. I didn't drink, I didn't smoke, I didn't do drugs and all that kind of stuff. But I look back and now I say, was that really missing out? I don't think so. I think--I got to do all the fun stuff, go to the prom and everything, but I didn't really get involved in the negative stuff that would've brought me down. And so I--I don't feel like I missed out, I feel like I had a nice well-rounded life. I don't feel like I--growing up was deprived because I was so intent on doing good in school and competing well. Speaker 2: And you were a Debutante in high school--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: too? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So I got to do--I got to do everything I wanted to do and, so I don't have any regrets. I kind of look at some of the gals that I've know and met, along the way or just see and then some sports maybe it's just more that's required that you kind of give up your life in order to compete. But I look at Sarah Hughes, who won the figure skating Olympic gold medal a year ago, in Salt Lake [City, Utah] and she has continued that well-rounded life, much like I did. Even post Olympic glory and just compete in the National Championships last week, and got second place. The first Olympic American--Olympian champion ever to do that. They never did that they retired or went pro, right after winning their gold medal. So, I think, I give credit to her, her family, her coach that they're able to--to develop that around her. And for me, it was just a key to my success in life, cause I know when there's too much pressure in one particular area, I'm not at my best. Story_ID: 76358 Speaker 1: Now, now that's one of your--one of the issues that you've written about, I guess, as a member--of as a--I think President of the Women's--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Sports Foundation. Speaker 1: Sports Foundation. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Right. I mean the pressure that someone put on themselves--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: To the point of trying to lose too much weight or -- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Un-hum. Speaker 1: Or, you know, practice too much, and you know. Have you known athletes that really just went too far? Speaker 2: Yeah, I really have. I'd like to tell the story when we started my freshman year at [University of] Tennessee, there were a lot of amazing girls on that team. You know, you're all State Champions and quite a few Junior National Champions and different disciplines, and--that was my freshman year, I would say. And in my sophomore year, we won the AIAW National Championship, University of Tennessee did. There were ten of us, and they called us the ten who made one. Ten of us that competed for that, went at Nationals and qualified and everything and brought home the National Championship. Of those ten women, by the time I graduated, you know, two years later, I was the only one that was at Nationals that year, competed for four years, got my degree from Tennessee and, you know, did all that, everybody else either transferred schools, dropped out, had a kid, got married, was injured, couldn't compete at the Nationals, something happened. There was something, and so again, you know, I'm feeling, kind of blessed to just have survived, you know, what others didn't, weren't able to survive. And I don't think that's an exception, I think in a lot of cases, those people who kind of rise to those championships heights are the ones that are survivors through a lot of the things that bring a lot of folks down and distract them. A few of the people on the team were really, I think, over achievers to the point where they just demanded so much of themselves. And when the coach would say go for a three mile run, either they might do three miles, but they're gonna run at twice the pace that the coach asked them to or they'll go six miles. Well three more miles, I'll get that much more training in, or--so they over trained. They would compete in practice and those two things are deadly, because if you train like it's a race and you, you know, then when it comes time for your race, where do you go from there? If that adrenaline's pumping all the time, if you're at your peak performance, every day at practice. You wear yourself out and you can't compete and you get injured. And so that's what happened to a lot of people, they just wore themselves out in practice. Just so intent on competing so hard, everyday, that they didn't save themselves for practice. By virtue of the fact that I was studying so much and, you know, doing all these other things. I couldn't over train cause I had three hours, you know, get my track practice in, I gotta lift my weights, I gotta do this, I gotta do that, see the trainer. And I couldn't, I didn't have time to over train (laughing) I didn't have all this extra time on my hands. And I--that just isn't part of my personality to be obsessive like that. But I saw a lot of athletes on my team at Tennessee throughout my career just do that to themselves. Over train and sometimes, the other thing is, you know, too much pressure that sometimes, self-imposed but sometimes, it's--they got coaches and family members that put that kind of pressure on you. My parents never did that to me. One time, after the Olympics, went to Europe to compete and my father and I spoke on the phone. I was in Zurich Switzerland and excuse me, I had won a meet in France, in Nice France and run a meet in Germany and a few other places, you know kind of post-Olympic tour. And I went to Zurich and it's the biggest non-Olympic, you know, meet every year. Big huge invitational, every top athlete in the world shows up there. And I'm ready to win this race and it's a couple of competitors that weren't at the Olympics because of their--they boycotted, that I wanted to beat. And my dad's like, oh, Benita set the American record, you know, go for it, you know, I'm really pushing for you, and he never said anything like that. Never in my whole entire life had he ever said anything like this. It just like, sweetheart, you know, do your best, or give us a call and te--it was never any pressure, whatsoever. I got on those blocks and I ran so fast and, you're supposed to take eight steps to the first stride, I think I took seven, I got to the first step hurdle, and I was on the wrong foot. That never happened to me in my whole career, but I think I was just so anxious to get out there and try, you know, fulfill this dream of my father's that--and I really realized that that's what other people probably experienced all the time. When they have that kind of outside pressure exerted on them to do things. It really needs to be something that comes from within that drive and determination, cause when it's externally imposed, sometimes it's--you can't control that and you're trying to meet everybody else--make everybody else happy, and you end up failing in the process, so. Speaker 1: So how did you do in that race, did you? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I did horrible, I don't even know what place I got, probably 5th, 6th, something, I didn't compete well at all, it's horrible. Speaker 1: The timing was off--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: My timing was off, by the time I got the hurdle wrong and I had to hop over that, for what, and kind of get my momentum back again, it was really bad. (laughing) So, I really, I did, I learned a valuable lesson. Story_ID: 76359 Speaker 1: Tell me about the Olympic, making the Olympic team in 1980, when you were still in University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You're selected for the Olympic team, how you feel about that and how did you find out about that? Speaker 2: Well, I was at Tennessee and by then, like I said, I was kind of in that whole mode of, you know, looking at my rankings and I was counted top five in the country, at that time. And looking, you know, to try to make the Olympic team, I knew I was a top contender and throughout that spring and all the invitational meets and other competitions, I was doing really, really well, and we get to the Olympic trials, they were in Eugene, Oregon. And we walked into the trials, unfortunately knowing that, you know, President Carter had determined that the U.S. team wasn't going to be able to compete in Moscow [Russia], but, it was still an Olympic trials, nonetheless, the Olympic team berth was on the line and it was an Olympic team in all shape and formed, except we didn't actually compete in the Olympics. And so the pressure was on, I never felt pressure like that before to know it was kind of a do or die race. It's always another race when you're competing and to know that forever and ever, if I didn't do well there, I wouldn't make the Olympic team, if I did, all these other opportunities would present themselves. So, feeling that pressure was something new for me. It's always pressure in a race, but that kind of extra pressure was new and I ran the race, and I got second place. I think one of my other top competitors hit a hurdle really badly and ended up not making the Olympic team. But Stephanie Hightower was first and I was second and Candy Young was third and we were the, you know, hurdlers on the Olympic team that year. And it was very celebratory, we came to [Washington] DC and had this wonderful tour and meal at the White House and beautiful concert at the Kennedy Center and parade and Congressional Medals and all kinds of great honors. But nothing could take the place of being in Moscow at those opening ceremonies and competing at eighteen years old in my first Olympic games. It would've been great. I wasn't a contender for a medal, but it would've been a great experience, I think, for me to have gone and competed. And I really still regret that decision that the President [Jimmy Carter] made to use sport as leverage in what was then the Cold War. Story_ID: 76360 Speaker 1: Well tell me, making the 1980 [Olympic] team, what did the 1980 do--team do except do, you know, go around the country? Speaker 2: We did that and we had a couple meets, I think, it was a Freedom Games or something they did in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then we went as a team over to Europe. That was my first time after that time as a junior, competing in Europe with all the big races, you know, Nice, France and in Berlin and Cologne, Germany and Brussels, Belgium. So we went to several different really high-profile, international competitions in Europe. I think it was post Olympics, so I--you know, it was a great opportunity to tour and to see competitors that I'd only read about or, you know, and really test my mettle against them. I did, you know, okay, but it was still somewhat anticlimactic, as we just couldn't compete at the big show. Speaker 1: Was Stephanie Hightower still the top--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Hurdler then, I guess Speaker 2: Um-hum. Starting then, yeah, pretty much, that was her first time winning the Nationals or Olympic trials. Story_ID: 76361 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the 100-meter hurdles, is that a sport that is traditionally won by white women in these events? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, Debbie LaPlante was the one who, for some reason didn't, I think she tripped and fell in the final at the Olympic trials in 1980. But she was the American record holder at the time. And favorite to win the Olympic trials and make the team. And so I was trying to get third really, because I was, you know, I knew Debbie LaPlante, Stephanie Hightower, myself, Candy, Pam Page, Kim Turner. A bunch of us kind of also rans, not also ran, you know what I mean, vying for that third place spot, but I was definitely the faster of them. And so I really felt like, well now, it's second even if Debbie made the team, I would've still been on the team, but there was a disappointment that she wasn't able to make the team for herself. And that was, I think, about the last time Debbie was the last white hurdler in the United States to be National record holder or the top hurdler in the country. Since then it's been a string of African American women. On the world stage, it still predominately, you know, Caucasians that are running the sport and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And they're pretty good too. You know--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh they're amazing, they're great. Speaker 1: Yeah. So I wonder it makes you wonder when you watch these games over the years, as a kid that's watching from 1960 on, you know, that certain races, you know, black American seem to just dominate them completely-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: you know, all the way across the board. On the National level and the International level, in the women's sport, you know, these, certain sprints are still--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, there still--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: now held by Europeans--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So I wonder what the, you know. You can't really have a unified theory about this. (laughter) Speaker 2: No, you really can't, you really cannot and particularly in women's sprints and hurdles. All of--all of the women's events particularly track and field. Yeah, Caucasians, particularly Europeans are dominating, any of them. Could be Middle-Eastern, could be Asian, I mean could be, some nice multi- cultural mixed of races and cultures that predominate in those sports, so. And back in the day, you know '70s [1970's], '80s [1980's], there was a lot, you know, hanky panky going on. Because there was eastern bloc country that were using, you know, performance enhancing drugs to maximum effect (laughing) and so that was a major reason why they were so strong. Speaker 1: And then there's also the rumor, and I guess maybe some of this have been proved, I believe and my recollection in this is hazy over the years of the things I've read. That some of the athletes that ran as women were actually, not really women. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, I think, a little bit further back, probably the '50s [1950's] or early '60s [1960's] when they started doing this--really a sex test, take a little sample of cells from the inside of your cheek and put them on a thing and take it to a lab and make sure you're hormonally what you say you are. (laughing) And so we had to do that, and then they stopped, it's like the '90s [1990's] and they started again, about four or five years ago. So, yeah they definitely do that and they, and it's been proven now, I mean there have been people been on part trial in Germany for doping athletes. Yeah and there are plenty of women now, who have had children, had several miscarriages or have children with birth defects, or. One or two just said you know what, I'm just going to be a guy and just have been transsexuals (laughing) yeah. Because they were all intents and purposes, you know, the hair, the chest, beard, you know, low voice, the whole thing. They just had, pretty much been turned into men by all the steroids that they had to be--had to take. And they were given vitamins or shots, saying, okay you need this Vitamin B shot to make--so they didn't know really what it was, and they didn't really think. They weren't purposely doing it for the most part. And I'm sure after they starting competing so fast and heard the rumor and innuendo, they probably got a clue, but by then they're competing so well, they probably just kept on agreeing to do it. I don't know. Story_ID: 76362 Speaker 1: I guess one of the downsides of international sports is that athletes are used as political tools -- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: by the governments that they represent. There was a today as we speak; there was a piece on public radio about the Olympic team from Iraq--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: and them being punished, you know, by the state, tortured--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh, wow Speaker 1: tortured for losing--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Wow Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a strong story about that, it's on public radio today, have you ever heard about that kind of thing? Where athletes were actually afraid to lose an international--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No. I didn't hear that, but like I told you what happened to that team that lost when I was a kid, I knew that there were repercussions for those. I did know that when they lost that dual meet, ok, that those-- Speaker 1: [Off camera discussion] Speaker 2: --I knew that when the coaches and those athletes lost that dual meet that they were in big trouble, you could just see it on their faces. And that--you know, that's why I didn't feel as bad when we lost the meet a week later because I knew that at least they redeemed themselves and whatever torture awaited them might not be so bad (laughing) afterwards, so. I think somewhere underlying I kind of knew there were repercussions, but I didn't really ascribe that, I think, to probably the individual athletes themselves. They wouldn't let them fraternize with us, you know, we'd be at all these big multi-sport competitions, World University Games or World Championships or Pan Am Games, not Pan Am, because there's no eastern bloc. But I mean there lots of multi-sport competitions internationally and we'd see each other all the time. And in these big invitational meets they go to as well. And they'd sit together and if you tried to talk to them after or before a race, you know, they'd be sweet to you, but they, you know, would try not to--and they could all speak English. They weren't allowed-because someone was always watching them. Someone was always watching them. Speaker 1: They were instructed really not to--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, and not only instructed they knew if they did it, someone was watching them and would tell on them. Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of tension. Story_ID: 76363 Speaker 1: Now, from 1980 through '83, [1983] I know that you went to the Pan American Games in '83, [1983] and won first big Gold Medal, right Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: We wanna talk about what happened between '80 [1980] and '83 [1983] but--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I just think just for me as an athlete maturing in '80 [1980] was my first Olympic team, '81 [1981] I broke thirteen seconds for the first time at the Penn relays and-I think it was 12:97 (simultaneous) Speaker 1: That's a World Record--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It wasn't world record, but it was definitely probably the top two or three times ever in the U. S. at that time. And so it was a top time at the U. S. at that time, but among All Time Americans, it was, you know, one of the top times and so it was a real breakthrough time, you know, just to be running that fast in '81 [1981], '82 [1982]. Eight-three [1983] I won my first National Championship, Senior National Championship. I won Collegiate, NCAA, AAIW, you know, all these other kinds of titles, Junior National, but never the Senior National Championships. So I was really on my game in '83 [1983] and running faster than I ever run before, consistently and, you know, got to the Pan American games in Caracas, Venezuela, just feeling like I owned the race, you know, it was a good confident feeling. I think one that my coaches in particularly in high school trying to get me to feel a long time before that kind of confidence that--this is my race, not to say I couldn't lose or that I think I'm better than anybody, but just that feeling that strong about my abilities. Speaker 1: You think it was your attitude really that made the difference-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh definitely. Speaker 1: or physical maturity? Speaker 2: It was both. But I had a really great coach in Loren Seagrave in '83 [1983] that was new at Tennessee. He was Assistant Coach and brought a kind of new technique and new philosophy to my training that really helped me break through. But I also think with that, physical transformation came a new self-confidence, and I think without that, I don't care what he was doing with me in practice, I wouldn't have been able to translate that on the track. And I realize how much my mental state going into racing when I'm trying to get third, helped me get third, you know. Or how --I hopeful--Stephanie's [Hightower] probably going to win so I wouldn't--I mean I kind of conceded races in a de facto way in my brain, cause I wasn't confident enough to think I could beat those people. So I realize, you know, that if you're going to race why the heck are you not thinking you are not going to win? Why not just stay home, if you are going to do that. And so, and it wasn't be all the time, it's just that having that confidence at the appropriate--at the championship event in that arena, I hadn't had that before, so. Speaker 1: So it's not just how fast you run or fast you can run, but it's, you know, a race you're actually running, I mean, you're thinking about the other person, you know, that affects your performance, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, well it's not so much in the races, even preparing for the race. Just what you think about your chances in that race and in the race, you know, you're hoping. You're not thinking much at all, but just running like a crazy person, and with reckless abandon, is really how you should feel like when you're competing in a race. On that edge of I'm out of control, but not. And so you try and push that as much in practice, and that's one thing that Loren was able to do with me, is help me simulate that feeling in practice, put the hurdles closer together, had me run with the wind to my back, all made me feel like I was out of control. And the hurdles were coming up faster. And how do I react to act, and so it was kind of pushing me to world record speeds, and that world caliber speed, without me being actually in a race. And having felt it and conquered it, and kind of done that in practice, keeping that confidence in my abilities. And then I was able to kind of think bigger than myself, and say, you know what, I can, I can do this, you know? I can win Nationals, I can win, you know, the Olympic Games kind of going into that. So winning that Pan American Games Medal solidifying that as, you know, kind of those who athletes that win Pan Ams the year before, kind of favorites, the year after at the Olympics, so it was nice to have that victory under my belt, both of them, the Nationals and Pan Ams. Speaker 1: Now, where were the Pan Am Games held? Speaker 2: In Caracas, Venezuela. Speaker 1: Caracas. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And the Pan Am Games and when all the nations of the Americas that fill a team like--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Canada, U.S. all South America teams, Central America. Story_ID: 76364 Speaker 1: That's 1983, okay. So 1984, now two big things happened to you, you won the Olympic Gold Medal and you graduated from University Tennessee, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. I also got married to my first husband, that year, yeah. Speaker 1: That was a big year. Speaker 2: It was a huge year. A lot going on, so as I said a kind of well-rounded person, I think, that's what ultimately helped me be successful. I got married in March and then I won the Gold Medal in August, and graduated in December. So kind of on a track to finish three major milestones in my life, all in one year. Going into the Olympics, there was another big announcement that you know the Eastern Bloc was going to boycott the games and it was a disappointment to some degree, just because you wanted to go into a competition knowing that all of the best are there. But it was also in a way a feeling of, vindication is kind of the wrong word. Just justice, justice in a way because the athletes from those countries, pretty much to a person as far as the females athletes were concerned were on performance enhancement drugs. And everybody knew it, but they obviously weren't caught, but it was, it's a known fact. And it was somewhat of a relief to know that I could be racing with athletes that I knew were clean. And it was the best of the clean athletes in that competition, the legitimate athletes in that competition. Nothing you can do about it, I mean people who talked about that, at that time were, you know said to have sour grapes, or not really be sportsmanlike or something like that. I think Gwen Torrence, a few years later kind of talked about some of her competitors and the media really lambasted her. She was speaking the truth but nobody just really wanted to hear it and nobody wanted to see someone in defeat accuse the victor of cheating, when there's no proof to that affect. So, you just kind of kept your mouth shut and kept on going. But with that boycott, I really, that confidence that I already had in my ability, and feeling like, well, I'm going to the Olympics, I'm one of the top hurdlers in the world, I could win the Gold Medal the same as anybody else, realizing that here is my real chance. I mean, that, you know, anybody who I thought was going to be a top, you know, European competitor of mine was not coming. And that all the rest of folks, I, you know, I really felt confident that I could beat, it was the ones that I was a little worried about, they weren't coming. So it was--again it was a dichotomy, it was the top four or five people in the world weren't there, but at the same time, since they were cheating, it was a good thing. Story_ID: 76365 Speaker 1: And so in winning my Gold Medal and, you know, becoming the first African American to do that and following in Babe Didrikson's footsteps in the same stadium at the Olympics. She won in '32 [1932], the 80-yard hurdles, I think it was, at that time. Or 80 meters, I'm not sure. In '52 [1952] in Los Angeles at the Olympics and I won in '84 [1984], Los Angeles, and it was a lot of history, how I just walking into the stadium, and we had our Olympic trials there so I was used to the stadium. But nowhere close to that many people were there at the Olympic trials, maybe 25, 30,000 people and here you had 85, 90,000 people in the Coliseum. And for each race, I mean, from the quarter finals, early in the morning to the finals, two days--a day later, you know, in the evening. There they were, screaming, yelling USA, USA and it was the most gratifying feeling. You know, to be there on your home soil with your U.S. uniform on, you know, representing your country and yourself and all the kind of the dreams that you've had all those years kind of coming into fruition, all at one time. I remember walking through the tunnel--the quarter finals in the he--heats in the quarter finals were in one day and then the semi-finals and the finals were another there like an hour, two hours apart, each of those. And so, I had won all my heats and fastest time going into this and fastest time going into that. So I'm feeling like I'm building this momentum and go into--walk through the tunnel under the stadium out to the track and you get to this light and you get to the crowd and the noise and it's just an amazing feeling to be in that kind of arena and that kind of situation. So I win my semi-final race and everybody is just screaming and yelling and I thought, wow, this feels great, I wanna win the race, I wanna feel this again. And be able to take my victory lap and everything. So I go back through the tunnel, and get ready and get psyched up for my race. And really feeling confident and really feeling, you know, almost like I;d had that premonition, you know. Because I felt what it felt like to win already. And so going back to the stadium and getting in the blocs and just really focus on--it's a guy named Ralph Boston, he's a Olympic Gold, Silver and Bronze Medalist it's in the long jump, back in the '60s [1960] and had always told me, he said when you get in the blocs, just make them disappear, you know. Cause I used to have horrible starts. So he just say think about making them disappear. So that's really all that I was thinking about, make them disappear. Came out of the blocs and just go, and I did that first hurdle, second hurdle, third hurdle, fourth hurdle, fifth hurdle. All the way through the race until about the sixth, seventh or eighth hurdle, I realize there's still another competitor that I hadn't made disappear yet (laughing) and named Shirley Strong, and from Great Britain. And she was, I think, probably touching down just before I was, and I found the gear somewhere, about the eighth hurdle and passed her and beat her by 400th of a second. So it's a slim margin, but enough to know I won, but it was really nice to have that kind of control over your body. To be running that fast to kind of see midstream, that, you know, something else happening being to find the gear and run and win the race. It's a powerful feeling, it's very empowering and then first to cross the finish line. I wasn't quite sure it's close enough but you just hope and pray, you don't--aren't celebrating too soon. And they say, you know you won, you won and I started my victory lap and someone thrust a flag into my hand. I go embrace my parents and my sister, my aunt and uncle and kept on running around the track. It was just really a blur, you know, at that point. You just hear all this, people screaming and yelling your name, and your name's on the marquee and you just, you know. It's a really great feeling. Speaker 2: I can imagine from watching, I guess but to be there, you know, in Los Angeles (unclear) Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Powerful experience. Speaker 1: It was very powerful. And one that you realize what you as one individual can do. I still get fan mail from people, you know, just having watched that race, and wanting my autograph, and you know, keep it in their record books. And it's something that no one can ever take away from you and it gives you the feeling that, you know what, there was a day when I didn't know how to hurdle and, you know, ten years later, I'm winning an Olympic Gold Medal. I can do anything I that I set my mind to, when I get passionate enough about it, you know, work hard enough at and just apply, apply yourself to. And I feel that confidence in myself throughout. And I've been able to take risks in my career as a result, I think. Do different things, and take on different challenges, with a lot of encouragement from my family and friends. But that confidence comes from being successful on the track. Story_ID: 76366 Speaker 1: Okay. So would you say that athletics have really been like a major part of building your self-confidence. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You know, in general or? Speaker 2: I think so, kind of going back to my childhood, I always felt, you know a little dark skinned kid and, you know, growing up in the '60's [1960], you kind of feel like, I think, there's another reason may be why I was teased by, by the kids, but you feel less than in some way or made to feel that way. I have absolutely no idea, but you kind of have a complex about that, or I did. That feeling I wasn't as pretty or as attractive as some of the other girls. And so not having that self-confidence being successful in school, being successful in music, kind of being this over achiever that I am, I think has compensated for that. People say actors and actresses are deep down inside just very hugely insecure. People, Meryl Streep said that the other day, after winning her Golden Globe award. She just says, you know, as much success as I've had, and they're like, you've won so many of these awards. You've won Oscars, how can you be so excited? She said you know, deep down inside you just so insecure, you're just so wanting the approval of the thing that you're so passionate and, you know, enjoy so much. You want other people to approve you--of you. And I think getting that success and building that--that's what helped me build that confidence in myself to say, you know, you are attractive, you are smart, you are funny, you are good at what you do. And being able to have the confidence in myself in athletics enabled me to have confidence in myself as a human being. And I think that's a huge gift that sport has given me.04:23:21:00 Speaker 1: Okay. It's even different from academic achievement than I guess on that level? Speaker 2: I think it all comes to play once you put all the little victories, whether it's an A on a test or, you know, first chair on the flute or whatever it is. They all kind of came together to build up, but athletics is such a massive scale, as compared to winning or, yeah, make A on a Calculus test. It's just no comparison--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Laughter) You don't get 90,000 people screaming Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. (laughing) You're screaming, yeah, for an A on your test, you just don't so. The sure magnitude of winning in that kind of arena with, you know, 90,000 people and then billions across the globe watching you. And knowing in that moment in time, you know, you're the best in the world, it's, it's really a confidence booster of all confidence boosters. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's well said (laughing) I think we understand that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 76367 Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened after '84 [1984] I know, well I know in '85 [1985] you started your career as a engineer. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: As an Industrial Engineer, right? Speaker 2: Right. And did so right out of school. I realized that I had this engineering degree, it's a technical degree. If I don't use it, I'm gonna lose the skills and/or won't be much on the open market after I retire. I always kind of planned to retire in '88 [1988] so I though why I could work part-time as an engineer for a while. I moved to Austin [Texas], my coach had moved down there, my ex-husband left Tennessee and wanted to go to Texas. So we kind of all worked out, but we ended up in Austin, Texas. So I worked for Tracor Aerospace for four years and sometimes full-time, sometimes part-time, sometimes part of this Olympic job opportunity program ultimately kind of got them organized with the US Olympic Committee and they started this program where they--you work part-time, but you get paid full-time. So that really helps subsidize my training that year. Are you okay? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. Working at Tracor really helped subsidize my training and I was able to work in the morning, learn more about industrial engineering and go in the afternoon. On the same schedule kind of always had of training at 2, 3:00 in the afternoon. Story_ID: 76368 Speaker 1: It was hard for a while, cause I got injured and had an ankle injury to my left ankle. I stepped in a hole running after my dog, you know. One thing, it's a silly thing but you don't think it's going to be that bad. It just got worse and worse. I kept turning and kept turning, and pulled the ligament and tore them. It just was really proved to be the end of my track career, as a result. But I ended up having to get surgery on my ankle, I came back in '85 [1985] it was kind of a lull kind of a year for me. I was post Olympics, I just you know, of course just got married and gotten a Gold Medal, and graduated and moved to a new town. You can't have many more stressful things happening in your life, so a lot of things were happening and I wanted to kind of live life for a while and not have the pressure of competing. So I competed, but just not very well in '85 [1985], '86 [1986] I kind of came back with a vengeance and I competed really well, I won a National Championship again, went on to what other competitions that summer and did really well. And it was that fall when I twisted my ankle. And '87 [1987] was tough year, because I, you know, was riding such a high in '86 [1986] and was expected to compete so well, competed horribly at the Nationals, didn't make the World Championship Team, didn't get to defend my Pan American Games medal. It was very disheartening, ended up having surgery at the end of that year cause my ankle just wasn't getting any better. And it was like August of '87 [1987]and then I--in '88 [1988] finally got to start hurdling again in the spring it was a long time. Rehab after I got out of a cast and on and on. Atrophy, my leg atrophied a lot and so I was kind of running on a wing and a prayer. A lot of the hard work I'd done years previous, self confidence about the job, I just said, you know what, I'm just gonna run like a crazy person. And you know, and I got, almost won the National Championship again that year, came to loss by a hundredth of a second and then went to Olympic trials, running really--injured. I mean I had every area back injury, I had an ankle injury, had Achilles injury, I had a hip injury (laughing) I had a lot of injuries. I was falling apart, because I wasn't able to get in that great of shape, because I was in a cast all fall. Story_ID: 76369 Speaker 1: And the Olympic trials were in Indianapolis [Indiana] in 1988 and my ex-husband was a football player and he had been drafted by the Redskins in like '87 [1987], and then he played for the Broncos during the strike that fall, gotten cut by the Redskins, played for the Broncos, during the strike, got cut by them when the strike was over, came back got picked up by the Broncos again. So he was in training camps summer of '88 [1988] with the Broncos in Denver, or wherever they go, and I was at the Olympic trials with my family and his family and everybody around me. Called him between the semi-finals and the finals telling him I made it to the finals, fastest time doing really well, and his roommate answered the phone and said, oh, Larry got cut this morning. And so I was like, what do you mean he got cut? Yeah, he got cut, he's not, you know. So I hadn't heard from him, he didn't call me cause he was gonna just come to Indianapolis and show up and be there for my race and then make up some lie and then tell me what happened afterwards. You know, he wasn't gonna tell me cause he knew it would damper, you know my--my spirits, so. It was really hard to try and kind of bring myself back up and get ready for the finals. And I saw him in the practice field before the race and we hugged and cried did all the things you might do with your spouse when a huge devastating blow like that. And had to kind of get myself emotionally, then pick back up few minutes later for my, my race. And I get to the starting line and there's a bunch of mishaps, false starts and saying my fingers were over the line and it was just lot of distracting things happening. And the gun goes off and I'm winning the race, I'm charging down, on my way to making my third Olympic team, and I think I just celebrated a little too soon. I saw that finish line and I snapped my leg down off the tenth hurdle and hit it and tripped and fell over the hurdle, and tripped and fell and over the finish line and went from first place to fourth place in a matter of, you know, a few yards and missed making the team by a hundredth of a second. So it was not a great day in my life (laugh) back in '88 [1988], summer of '88 [1988], not to make the Olympic team, my ex-husband not to make football team and kind of have my dreams of defending my Olympic Gold Medal in Seoul kind of dashed, and. My protege, the only good news, my protege, LaVonna Martin, also from Dayton, Ohio made the Olympic team. And she's the one that edged me out at the finish line as I tripped and fell, so it was the end of my career. I went to compete in Europe for a couple months, mostly vacation. Competed in the meantime and I ended my career in India, of all places. Not even running the hurdles, running the 200, so the Olympic trials were my last major competition. And you know, I feel proud that I was able to compete at such a high level, as injured as I was and out of shape as I was. But it kind of probably came down, that's when my reactions and my fitness level, just wasn't there enough to kind of probably last four rounds and ten hurdles and keep my--you know, it just--it wouldn't--I hadn't never hit hurdles like that, so it just probably wouldn't have-- Story_ID: 76370 Speaker 1: So you were an alternate in '88 [1988 Olympics]--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, I was an alternate in '88 [1988]. That just really means up until the time they kind of board the plane for the Olympics if something happens to somebody you'll, take their place. But after--I think the rules are after you've kind a declared the team and all that, if someone got hurt they just wouldn't be able to compete or they would just two people, instead of three people on the team or something. So I didn't actually go to Seoul. Speaker 1: Okay. At the Seoul Olympics right, right in Korea. Okay. So now all during this period of time, you're working in as an Industrial Engineer and you're designing software and hardware for the Defense--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Contractors. Speaker 1: Contractors, right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was doing that as an engineer and I really never enjoyed being an engineer. It was kind of nice to have the degree and nice to have a job, you know, to help support me through my training. But I--it never floated my boat and so when I retired in '88 [1988] and had to do it full-time, it was a real challenge for me to get up and go to work every day. Because I was used to being outside and competing and, you know, having that flexibility and traveling and leaving it every once in a while. I never had to do it day in and day out, you know, for month after month. And so after two years of that, going through my divorce with my ex-husband and then kind a lot of changes, kind of acclimating to life post athletics. I got this great opportunity to go work for Special Olympics International. I worked with Sargent, Eunice Shriver, Eunice Kennedy Shriver and Sargent Shriver and their family, and all the staff there, at Special Olympics. I was Director of--a Regional Director so I had thirteen states that I managed and the programs in and oversaw and it was a real turning point for me in my career. Because I realized that I that I could use my athletic expertise, you know, off the track and really help kids, in this case, Special Olympians fulfill their dreams. And that was just a lot of fun for me to, to have a part in that. In realizing that, actually sports careers outside of you could be administration and in sports, marketer, you know, whatever. And so I was looking at all the different career paths and at Special Olympics I had a chance to do some marketing, as well as administration. So those kinds of skill sets came together in the job in Atlanta [Georgia] where I helped sell sponsorships for all the different Olympic sports in the United States. And got to know all the different athletes and administrators for gymnastics and table tennis, and all the other different sports. Worked closely with track and field, as well. Negotiating sponsorship agreements and so honed my negotiating skills, marketing skills, administrative skills there. Joined as a Volunteer at the U. S. Olympic Committee Board of Directors and their Athletes Advisory Council. So I got a great experience in the whole Olympic movement learning all the players. And they offered me a job as Director of abrand new Olympic Center out in San Diego. So I went out there in '95 [1995], so I was their first permanent director. They had a couple of interim directors prior to my coming on board. It opened in the early part of '95 [1995] and I got there in November of '95 [1995]. And ran that center for two years and through the '96 [1996] Olympics where I went to Atlanta [Georgia] for four weeks and worked with U.S. Olympic team and got to work with all the athletes that I helped train for two years prior to the Olympics. And see, you know, see their dreams to fruition. It was a really great feeling to be on the other side, not really wanting to be on the track, I really didn't. I felt like, you know, I had finished that chapter of my life, but I was still actively involved in helping other people complete that chapter for themselves, so. It was very inspiring, it was very fun, then all of a sudden you know, kind be successful one thing, they wanna take it to another level. So they said (laughing) well you've done so great with one training center, we like you to run all of our Olympic training centers. I took their promotion at the U.S. Olympic Committee moved me to Colorado Springs, Colorado. While actually when I got to California, is when I got engaged to my current husband, Ron Mosley. And so we got married in '96 [1996] and he's a really great guy from Ohio, Brown [University] graduate, engineer, as well, but also found engineering wasn't for him, so he's pretty much had a career in sales throughout his whole career. Works currently for Johnson Controls and he--what has been a great support to me and in our lives, building our lives together, for the past seven or eight years, it's been amazing how supportive he's been of my career and moving when need to move and taking a different job, and building houses and selling them (laughing) as we've done two or three times. And we've also had a little boy, Isaiah; he's named after my grandfather, my maternal grandfather. And Isaiah Fitzgerald Mosley, he's four years old; and he's the joy of our lives. Story_ID: 76371 Speaker 1: But he [Isaiah Fitzgerald Mosley] was born in Colorado Springs [Colorado] as I embarked on that new opportunity as Director of all the Olympic Training Centers. So I did that for two, three years and then got recruited away to do what I am doing now, which is the President and, President of Women in Cable and Telecommunications. They came after me because I had the strong management operations background through the Olympic committee. But I also had served as a volunteer, elected President of the Women's Sports Foundation, founded by Billie Jean King and a bunch of--Wyoming Atius (ph.)and Wilma Rudolph and Donna Devereaux, and a bunch of fabulous female athletes of the past. And they had founded this organization back in the early '70s [1970] and really were instrumental in passing Title 9, the law that really helps women have access to higher education, particularly sports opportunities. So I was, you know, very impassioned about the cause of women athletics and getting more opportunities for girls in sports, realizing how much sports had played a part in my life. And so I joined the Board of Trustees and then was elected President and served for four years in that role. And because of that, women's advocacy role, as well as the administrative skills they ask me to come, come serve in this role. And it's been great, out of sports now, missing the sports life, I'm able to dabble in it as a volunteer in different capacities. But I'm excited about the opportunity to help women in another arena achieve their dreams of success in a career in the cable industry. Speaker 2: Now has the cable industry been a tough industry for women to get involved? Speaker 1: There are different aspects to the cable industry, there's operator side, here, I guess it was "A T and T" Broadband now purchased by Comcast. They've got all different kinds of people who give you your cable, pipe the cable into your house. Excuse me. And so the operator side has been, particularly in the executive ranks, more male dominated. If you talk about the Customer Service Representatives that answer the phone when you call, that your cable is out or you want to order HBO, they're predominately women. But the higher you go up the ladder, as it is with many industries, if you a woman, you see. And so, we pretty much serve middle managers, you know, people from the managers, supervisor level, all the way up to VP's. There are definitely members that are non-managerial all the way up to the CEO's of corporations on our board and among our membership. But we're trying to serve those middle managers, those trying to make it up the ladder and provide leadership development opportunities and training and networking for them. Story_ID: 76372 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Yeah. What I think is that in my case, I was obviously you know blessed with parents who had a vision for what their lives, what they wanted their lives to be. What they wanted to accomplish, what they wanted for their family and their daughters. They kind of got that vision from their parents, who you know, in the 1800's figured it out that, you know, when they had kids that they wanted to provide the best educational opportunities so that they could be successful. So, I think that strong faith in God, I wish for the black community continuing on, you know, I wish that they have a vision for their future that's different than you know what they're doing today. And hopefully that someone or something that's going to instill that vision, which I think is lost among people, a lot of people. I think they just see what's in front of them. I think they just see what their mama did or what their or sisters are doing or their brothers or their fathers and not really being able to see themselves. Kind of like me, I wasn't able to see myself as a National Champion or Olympic Champion. And it wasn't until I got the confidence to be able to do that, so I really wish that they're able to somehow through their life journey get that confidence in themselves that they can achieve whatever they set their minds to. That they don't have to stay stuck, wherever they're stuck on, you know, in this situation, whatever that might be. So, I honestly think we are a community a race that has moved, you know, mountains, we've just done so much. We've got so many great, you know, leaders in corporate America and government and all aspects of life. We've got people, athletes and corporate CEOs making all kinds of money, and all kinds of wealth, you know. Huge numbers in the middle class of America, but there's still, you, know a lot of people that are disenfranchised that aren't kind of living that American Dream. And I think it's got to be a dream first. I heard once [HM]Jesse Jackson say, "Conceive it, Believe it, Achieve it". And it has been in my mind, kind of something that I've tried to live by, that if you can't really think of the idea in the first place, if you don't believe that it's something that can happen for you, it's no way that you're going to be able to achieve it. And so that's what I really hope for the Black Community. That they're able to conceive a life different than what they're living today. Story_ID: 76373 Speaker 1: Okay, and what would you see at this point like--as your future, what do you really want to do that you haven't done? Speaker 2: It's been a whirlwind the past six or seven years. My husband and I have probably had, I think we are in our sixth residence in six and half, almost seven years of marriage. And we've had a child, we've had several different jobs so, in the near term, we just want some stability. We've built a house we hope we'll live in for the next twenty-five years and, our son will grow up in and hopefully another child or two along the way. So definitely we wanna grow our family in the coming years. And either naturally or through adoption, and we want to, I want get to the phase of our life, I think, I'm looking forward, maybe ten or fifteen years where, I'm kind of reach whatever plateau I'm kind of gonna reach professionally. Then I'm, able to start giving back again to the greater community. I feel like I'm so caught up in my career and my family at this stage in my life, that I'm not really able, you know, get involved with my church, or community activities. I'm a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority and I'm not an active member in that. So just finding a way to be able to get outside myself and my immediate concerns and help other people in a real direct way. I feel like I do that in my job, I've always kind of had jobs in the non-profit sector where I've been able to give back. So I feel like I do that professionally, but I want to be able find a way to get more involved, play my flute more and do some of the--and take more vacations. Do all those kinds of things that really enhance life. Spend more time with my family and friends. So, I don't really have huge career aspirations for myself. I had said three or four years ago I wanna be the CEO of a Not for Profit someday. I thought it would be a sports organization, but it's not. So I kind of already met that goal. So I have a lot of goals for the organizations, growing its membership, growing in influence and stature within the cable community, but also within the just women's advocacy role, just for women at large. So if I see anything for myself, I just see kind of staying on the path that I'm on and being as effective and impactful as I personally can be and make the organizations for which I work have the most impact. Story_ID: 76374 Speaker 1: Okay. What do you see at this point, and I know it's probably early, even though, you've done a lot so far. What do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Legacy. I think my legacy probably is one, someone who rises to the occasion. Someone who when a challenge or an obstacle is put in front of them is able to somehow round up the resources and the energy and the sense of purpose, I think, to just get it done. And that's been the case, throughout my career. Whatever it's been, you know whether, okay, do you wanna be--whatever I've been trying to achieve for myself or for an organization, we've been able to accomplish. And it's just a lot of hard work; it's a lot of dedication. And I think that's part of my legacy, I don't know I think definitely the track career is huge, you know, when you think of legacy, it's always the Olympic Gold Medalist, it's the Benita Fitzgerald Drive, you know. All the tangible things, it the Hall of Fame inductions that I've been able to enjoy so I definitely have a strong sports legacy. But I don't think just as a person I'm hoping that people look to me as someone who can, you know, get things done, that they can count on and depend on. Story_ID: 76375 Speaker 1: Okay. And what advice would you have for young women especially going into sports; these days or really your life has been brought in this forefront--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But I guess (unclear) Speaker 2: I would say young girls, particularly do it because you love it. I ran track because I absolutely loved running, and particularly loved running fast (laugh)I enjoyed it because I enjoyed it, I worked hard because I worked hard, I got better, because I got better, I got to enjoy it, and it's just all this, you know, goes round and round. And so it has to start with really finding something you just love to do. And for some, it may be sports, for some, it may be something else, but do it cause you love it. And when you stop loving it, don't do it anymore. Because then you become more bitter about it and so I did that in '88 [1988] I retired and then a couple years later, I started trying to kind of still compete and come back. And I wasn't really enjoying it, I didn't have the friends and teammates around me that I had before. I didn't--wasn't-didn't have the discipline and the lifestyle to really support competing at that level, and so I didn't enjoy it. So I really actually aren't having fun, you're not competing, I never ran another race I was just so-called training and realized that the fun was gone. It was absolutely gone so, that's the main thing, have fun. Story_ID: 76376 Speaker 1: Okay. And this last question is similar to the legacy but not quite the same thing, but--oh, before I ask that how does your parents feel about your success? Speaker 2: My parents are tremendously proud of both their daughters and always make a point to say that because my sister is an amazing woman herself. She's pregnant with twins, right now, been married five years, being trying a long time for kids, and so this is a real blessing for our family. But she is an educator herself, a great elementary school teacher, highly successful in that. And so, you know, she very smart girl too. She's just as smart as she can be and wise and she's my best friend. And so she--I think they're proud of us as women, I think they proud of us, the fact that we're able to have such a strong relationship with one another, with our parents; I think they're proud of that. And then of course of my accomplishments, they've always known particularly, in Prince William County [Virginia], as being you know Benita's mom and dad. And not a day I think goes by that my mother doesn't meet somebody or see somebody who mentions me to her or somebody, the way that I touched their life or their son's life or daughter's life. I speak a lot at schools and you know graduations, and stuff like that, and have always done that. And I don't remember all the kids I've spoken to but they certainly do and their parents certainly do and so that makes my parents proud. That, not only was I able to be successful on a world stage but that, there at home, I've been able to make an impact. Story_ID: 76377 Speaker 1: This is the last question now. How would you like to be remembered, it will probably be a long time before we have to worry about that. Speaker 2: Well definitely as a loving wife and a supportive loving mommy. I think those are two roles that I cherish above all. And that I was able to be an example, I think, for women and for girls, that they could, you know, achieve great things in their lives. And I've been told that by peers, even just recently as last week. I'm in a leadership program that my organization puts on; I'm a participant this year. It's a yearlong fellowship and it's a lot about developing leadership skills, for yourself, and you partner with twenty-seven other women in this program. You're going through the whole year and they say every time you open your mouth, something wise comes out (laughter)you never say anything that doesn't have--and so I think, I'm just saying stuff that comes in my head, I'm not trying to be profound. But little things that I, the Conceive it Believe it, Achieve it thing that I had said a year ago, has now become a mantra for a family of a woman that was in the program last year. And her kids, they just short handed to CBA, I just found this out last week--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Believe it--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Conceive it, Believe it, Achieve it. Conceive it, Believe it, Achieve it. And again I--can't, It's not mine, I heard [HM] Jesse Jackson say it one time heard him speak in Atlanta [Georgia]. And it stuck with me and I told this group of women last year that and I hadn't said anything about it and EJ got up there this past week and spoke about it. She said at first I heard it, I thought it's a bunch of hogwash, you know, she said but I, from my own personal experience and experience of my kids, I've seen it really come to life and I really imparted that to them, and they--her daughter did a report at school recently and they said you know, what kind of family things or philosophies do you have? And that was the philosophy that she told her kids at school. So you know, something Jesse Jackson said probably off the cuff one day, cause he can say stuff like that, without even thinking about it, you know is now kind of gone through my life and helped me impact, you know, a group of elementary school kids that I never met. So it's a, that's the kind of legacy and that's how I'd like to be remembered as loving mom, wife, friend and hopefully an imparter of wisdom , I think, as I--as I can. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thanks, appreciate it..