 Story_ID: 174637 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Faith Williams. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please, Speaker 2: Antoinette Marie Malveaux, A-N-T-O-I-N-E-T-T-E, M-A-R-I-E, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 19th, 1958, San Francisco, California. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Business manager, business executive. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is--well you left out one important--tell us about the, your position with the National MBA. Speaker 2: National Black MBA-- Speaker 1: Black MBA Association [NBMBAA]. Speaker 2: --National Black-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I started with the National Black MBA Association as a volunteer in 1986 after I graduated from business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], led the New York chapter, became president of the New York chapter shortly after I joined about eight months or so after I joined and then went on the board of the National Black MBA Association heading up their strategic planning committee and started the strategic planning committee, took the organization through a strategic planning process because it was very interested in and very desirous of really capturing its aspirations as an organization. Speaker 1: Now I just wanted to establish what you, your, your position with that organization. Speaker 2: Well, I've just stepped down as presidency of National Black MBA Association. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what are you doing currently at your--? Speaker 2: Writing, plugging in, plugging out (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I just wanted to establish that now. All right, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date? I don't know, what is today's date? August 21st (laughter), 19, I mean 2003 [August 21, 2003]. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Are you trying to test me for sanity (laughter)? Speaker 1: No, this is historical slating. This is slating actually for us-- Speaker 2: Okay this is slating, okay. Speaker 1: --and what we're doing--what we're trying to do. So, we're, we're in the offices of HistoryMakers, right, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, we're in the offices of The HistoryMakers-- Story_ID: 174638 Speaker 1: Ma'am before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Right now it's Rocky Road ice cream (laughter), since it's summertime. Speaker 1: That's a good time for it. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I have two favorite colors, green and purple. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Italy. Speaker 1: And ma'am do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I actually have two. To those who much is given, much is expected, and reach for the moon for if you fail you'll fall among the stars. Story_ID: 174639 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and then about your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I'm not gonna leave anyone out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux, P-R-O-T-E-O-N-E, M-A-R-I-E, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-I-A, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 17, 1928 and Biloxi, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now how far back-- Speaker 2: Or Moss Point, Mississippi excuse me. Speaker 1: Moss Point. Speaker 2: Moss Point, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Is that near Biloxi? Speaker 2: Yeah, about you could spit to it (laughter). It's about seventeen miles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right now how far back or, or what do you know about her side of the family in terms of history? Speaker 2: A little bit. We've had a number of family reunions and some of the family tree has been traced back. The matriarch of--there was a matriarch of the family, Rose McElroy [ph.], Rose Smith [ph.], Rose Macintosh [ph.]. She had three, three husbands that died, married, died, married so there are three branches of the family, the Macintoshs, McElroys, and Smiths and we often have that reunion. And there's family that on those branches that have located in the Ohio area and still family in Mississippi where the family originated and, and then family in L.A., Los Angeles [California] area. We are a family of entrepreneurs, early entrepreneurs. Our great-grandmother, Attie McElroy [ph.], we called her Mamoo [ph.], she had a restaurant and her husband was a chauffeur for a rich white family in Moss Point, which is in the Gulf Coast, Mississippi. And my grandmother, Rose Hawkins-Nelson, she remarried, was divorced and remarried, she was a seamstress. She had gone to Tuskegee [Institute, later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and family starting with my grandmother was educated at the college level and Grandma Rose went to Tuskegee. My mom went to Xavier University [Dayton, Ohio] and then moved to San Francisco [California] and later, and, and finished up at San Francisco State University [San Francisco, California] and then later after she had us went back and when I was thirteen and got her master's degree in sociology and gerontology at UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. And then us. So that's about the branch of the family that, that I originated from. Story_ID: 174640 Speaker 1: Now, are there, are there any old stories about the family, that, that are passed down from the, you know, the beginnings of the family, any stories from slavery or, or the 19th century? Speaker 2: There's a couple that I remember. I'm sure my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] remembers far more than I do. There's one of a family member, I don't remember his name, who was a slave who would constantly or consistently I should say, consistently try to run away from plantation, and did have, was blinded so that he would not be able to run away again. We do have that story, but he was not going to stop trying to get his freedom. He had to be stopped physically be stopped. His spirit was not going to be broken. So, that's a story that circulates and pops up around the family from time to time. There's stories about Mamoo [Malveaux's great-grandmother, Attie McElroy (ph.)]. Those are probably the stories we've heard more of, that's our great-grandmother. Mamoo was very fair complected [ph.], had a very fair complexion and even fairer than I. Right now I have a summer tan, but she, she and my great-grandfather often times in order to make sure that they weren't harassed on the streets when they were driving through either late at night or whatever by hostile whites, Mamoo would get in the back seat of the car that Papoo [ph.] drove for the white family. I don't remember their name. My mom knows their names. And, and he would pretend that he was driving this white lady, like 'Driving Miss Daisy,' where they needed to go so that they wouldn't be harassed. So, that was one that we often would hear about how the fair complexion helped Mamoo and Papoo get out of dangerous, potentially dangerous situations at a time when there was quite a bit of danger about, for African Americans time when lynchings were happening on a regular basis the way in which they grew and lived. Those are two stories that I, I always remember and kind of hold on to. Story_ID: 174641 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] she pursued an education with, you know, on up through later life. Speaker 2: Yes she did. Speaker 1: So, what kind of person was she and, you know? Speaker 2: She is very, very feisty, very spunky, strong spirit, very determined, very independent strong woman. She actually was put out of Xavier [University, Dayton, Ohio] because she was caught climbing the fence to get back in. They had a curfew and she was caught climbing the fence to get back in and Xavier was run by nuns. It's a Catholic university very, very strict and very rigid, and she found the rules to be too confining for her and so she--that's, that's how she ended up in San Francisco [California]. Her father brought her back to school to put her back into school after she got kicked out and the nuns said fine we'll take her back, but she, she's gotta follow the rules, and she said no she didn't want to follow those rules. So, she had to go live with her mom [Rose Hawkins-Nelson]. But, the education was obviously very important in the family. It was a value that was embraced early on with my grandmother's generation as a way out and a way up, and so my mom embraced that wholeheartedly and both she and my father [Paul Malveaux] had been teachers. My father was a teacher. My mom taught early childhood education preschool for a while before she became a social worker, and then later after she got her master's [degree] she actually went back to Mississippi to teach at University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], at Ole Miss. Daddy was a, a math teacher and eventually a, a high school principal and then an administrator with the school district. So, the education is, is on both sides. I think for folks of my mom's generation and, and also of my grandmother's, but particularly of my mom's generation, African Americans in a lot a part of the country understood and embraced that education was the way out and up and so it was a value that was embraced and expected and that most of us have pursued. Story_ID: 174642 Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Paul Warren Malveaux, P-A-U-L, W-A-R-R-E-N, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X. Speaker 1: And his date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: September 2nd, 1925, and I believe he was born in Lafayette, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't know as much about his side of the family. I know a little bit. And I don't know as much because my parents were divorced and the relationship wasn't--it was pretty acrimonious, so to the extent that there is some knowledge, as it's, it's more distant and we're not as engaged in that side of the family. My dad was Creole. He was raised in the Opelousas area of Louisiana. His mother, Julianne Malveaux [ph.] whom my older sister is named after was, was Creole and don't know anything about his father. He was the youngest of--my father was the youngest of thirteen, born on a farm, large families then, and I don't go--know much back beyond that-- Story_ID: 174643 Speaker 1: He [Malveaux's father, Paul Malveaux], himself, prior to coming to San Francisco [California], or on his actually, on his way to San Francisco. He met my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] on his way to San Francisco. He was in the [U.S.] Navy and then he was, he was stationed in Alameda [California] and met my mom on her way being sent to San Francisco after her episode at Xavier [University, Dayton, Ohio] and they met, fell in love and married and then fell out of love and divorced. Speaker 2: So how soon was it, you know, after they were married that they were divorced? Speaker 1: About seven or eight years, long enough to have five children and I think they had my oldest sister about a year and change after they got married and then they were divorced when I was two. So about eight years. Story_ID: 174644 Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's [Paul Malveaux] personality and what he did for a living? Speaker 2: Well, he was a teacher. He did stay in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] and so we did have an opportunity to, to grow up and have a relationship with him. We visited with him often, on weekends and summers and the like. He was a teacher. He cared very much about education. He spent a lot of his time, a lot of his career in the educational, in the educational system in San Francisco [California] in the San Francisco Unified School District. But, he also had an entrepreneur's spirit as well, as did my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux], and he started in real estate prior to retiring from the San Francisco school district and then after he retired continued in real estate management, owned property, managed property, and so that's, that's what he was. He was a--he taught us a lot about the outdoors. He was an outdoorsman, cared a lot about camping. We camped every summer with him. I think those were some of the more joyful times in terms of our relationships with him. He taught us about the value of the earth and valuing the earth for some of us who enjoyed the camping. There are some of us in the family who didn't (laughter), but camping was something we always looked forward to with him in, in those summer times. Some of us looked forward to it in those summer times. Taught us how to fish, taught us how to swim, taught us all those things that you do as a kid when you're running about in the outdoors. Story_ID: 174645 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have and can you name them for us and where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: Okay, I have three sisters and a brother, [HM] Julianne [Malveaux], James, Marion [ph.] and Mariette [ph.] who are twins and myself in that order. Or Marion and Mariette will fight over who came first, so (laughter). They were switched. They, they, they got, I shouldn't say they were switched, they got confused as kids, mixed up as kids, and I'm the youngest. Story_ID: 174646 Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Wow, my earliest childhood memory I actually think, I actually and it's not a very good one to be quite honest, it's the memory of my father [Paul Malveaux] leaving the house for the last time, and, and my reaction to that. Yeah, it's my earliest. Speaker 1: Can you describe it for us or? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was going down the street and I was crying and asking him not to go and, you know, grabbing on him around his leg and 'cause obviously was a little tot and, and just a lot of tears, a lot of anguish and, but, and that's, that's, that's all I remember of it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)-- Story_ID: 174647 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights probably we lived in, we lived in San Francisco [California] in Bernal Heights, lots of noise in the house, in the neighborhood, lots of kids in the neighborhood. We, we ripped that neighborhood up. We ran all over the place as kids. There's just lots of kids in that neighborhood, so lots of interaction. Noisy household, five children, close quarters. All of us, very close in age. My parents [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux and Paul Malveaux] had five children in 4-1/2 years, a set of twins-- Speaker 1: Now did you live in a house or? Speaker 2: Lived in a house. In our backyard, lots of--we're always running in and out of the house. We had a huge backyard. My mom still lives in the house that we were, that we grew up in. My brother was born there in the house. The rest of us were in the hospital, but she couldn't get there in time for him, and so, there were always kids over to the house because of our yard and the size of the yard, so lots of noise, lots of, lots of kids around. I also remember lots of--my mom was very creative. As a preschool teacher, she also--it still is very creative, very much into crafts and teaching children how to think and learn and do things with crafts and so we were always making something or, you know, playing with something. You'd never be bored in our house. There was no reason for boredom because there was always something to do. If you didn't know what to do, there was a crafts table for you to go figure it out. So, we were always very active. A lot of--and there were quiet times. A lot, lot of reading. We all grew up reading. We all have a passion for reading, and we all have our own versions of our own libraries and we have a passion about books. So, lot, lot of that. A lot of music in the house. My mom in undergrad [undergraduate] was a music major and so she actually was always playing the piano and or I was playing the piano, or a clarinet, or a guitar. There was--my brother was playing some drums or there was always that kind of noise in the house. The--and we were always--my--we would have either Friday nights or Saturday nights or Sundays, my mom would be playing the piano and we'd be back singing and dancing in the living room with her. So, there was always that in the house as well, always music in the house. And on Sundays the Mahalia Jackson records were coming out after you came home from church and the house was full of music on those days. And when she was at work and we were supposed to be doing our homework there was Motown going on in the house. So, a lot of music in the house as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Smells, I, I don't know that I remember a lot of smells to be quite honest. Speaker 1: Probably, might, might be a good thing, yeah. Speaker 2: Might be, I don't know (laughter). Story_ID: 174648 Speaker 1: What about food and stuff in the house? Speaker 2: I don't think there were lots of foods except camp stuff, you know s'mores and fish frying over the fire, when we were camping out or hot dogs, but that's maybe summer is just on my mind 'cause it's, because it's summer. But, there was a time when I guess there was--some of the things I remember about food, now let me think about it. Some of the things I remember about food we always had cornmeal mush and there was a time when things were very tight in the family. We were on welfare for a little while, and we had to have cornmeal mush every morning for breakfast. You had to put something in our stomach like oatmeal or whatever, so you get, and we went off to school, and I could not stand, got--I got so sick of cornmeal mush that we used to--I know I used to hide out just so I wouldn't have to eat it. So, I remember the cornmeal mush. I remember Easter time and baking a lot and baking cupcakes and making little cupcakes that would look like, coloring the coconut and making them so they'd look like little grass with the, and putting the little jelly beans in them and, and making the cakes that looked in the shapes of rabbits with my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux]. So I remember that, that about food. Other than that, I don't remember a lot about food (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you mentioned Mahalia Jackson. Was, was church a big part of life? Speaker 2: It was. My mother was a devout Catholic, and we were raised in a Catholic church. We had catechism every, every Saturday. Went to church as a family every Sunday, and she still goes to church almost every day. We were confirmed in the Catholic religion and so up to--we had the normal part of, it was a normal part, religion was a normal part of our lives as it was for most people in our neighborhood, a very working class neighborhood, very diverse neighborhood. It wasn't totally Catholic. Most of the African Americans in the neighborhood were not Catholic. They went to other churches. We went to the parish church because my mom was Catholic and so yeah it was, it was very much a part of our lives then. Not as much for my father [Paul Malveaux] as it, as it was for my, my mom. Story_ID: 174649 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What kind of little girl were you? Speaker 2: I was pretty precocious. I was a little tomboy. I used to follow my brother [James Malveaux] around, and I was always tagging around behind him. We had a pact where by the time he was in--when he got to ninth grade and I got to sixth grade we were supposed to run away to Mexico and which of course never happened, but pretty, pretty adventurous. A little-- Speaker 1: Now how did you all come to that? I mean what is-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) When we got in trouble and we had punishment together because I would follow behind him and he was always cooking up some kind of scheme, so we would get in trouble together a lot. So, he'd get in trouble for cooking up the scheme and I'd get in trouble for not having enough sense to not follow him. So, we'd be sitting on the back porch grumbling about our punishment and we're like you know we're out of here, we're gonna get on our bikes and go to Mexico. But, we can't go just yet 'cause we're not big enough (laughter). So, that was our pact is that we would run off to Mexico together, that's how we would get--he'd, my brother he'd jump out the living room window literally and I'd go follow. He would jump off the roof, and I would go follow, and he would--I used to do the, this paper route with him. Get up early in the morning about five in the morning go out with him, do his paper route. I would tag along behind him with his friends in their little bike club and bribe my way into it because I had these, these handlebars that looked liked tigers and the head of the, the little group let me trade one of the handlebars so that I could follow along with them for a little bit, then they took off without me. But, I would, I'd, I'd, I was somewhat independent. I had a mind of my own as much as I followed my brother. I would have my--not as conscientious about things that should frighten a little girl. I just didn't think about it. I just would go off and do what I wanted to do. So, sometimes I'd get in trouble for being missing in action 'cause I was off doing whatever it is I thought, visiting a friend, hanging out after school, when I was supposed to come home. On my bike, you know, meandering around the neighborhood for longer than I should be, at the movies watching the double features twice, so I wouldn't come home for six hours and not conscientious of the fact that it was dark outside and I should be home but I was into the movie. So, somewhat, you know, had a mind of my own. Very protected, very loved. The youngest, so they were all, you know, they're all protecting me-- Story_ID: 178176 Speaker 1: Tell me about school. Speaker 2: School? Speaker 1: Yeah, what school did you go to, what grade school? Speaker 2: Elementary school was Paul Revere [Elementary School, San Francisco, California] and then for a while, I think it was a year and a half, we were bused 'cause our school was being refurbished, and it was also dovetailing with integration, so we were bused to a school called Diamond Heights [Elementary, San Francisco, California] and then bused, and then we came back to Paul Revere. Speaker 1: What was the other school? Speaker 2: Diamond Heights. Speaker 1: Diamond Heights, okay. Speaker 2: So, those the two elementary schools I went to and then came back to Paul Revere. Speaker 1: Now, what happened why did they, they bused you to-- Speaker 2: Well we-- Speaker 1: --Diamond Heights and then they, they refurbished Paul Revere (unclear). Speaker 2: We had two, we had two structures that were part of Paul Revere, where kindergarten through third grade were in one structure and fourth through sixth grade were in the other structure, and the, four through sixth grade structure was torn down and a new, a new school was built and so they didn't have anywhere to send the kinds, so they sent us to all different schools in the school district and I went to Diamond Heights. My brothers and sisters went to other schools and-- Speaker 1: You started school around, around '66 [1966], or is this '64 [1964]? Sixty-four [1964] I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah about '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: You were born in '58 [1958]? Speaker 2: Yeah about '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: And then, and then we came back to Paul Revere and then we, then I went to Aptos Junior High School [later, Aptos Middle School, San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: A-P-T-O-S, like the Aptos Indians, and then I went to Lowell High School [San Francisco, California] L-O-W-E-L-L, and Lowell was the, it was the one public school that was a college prep, college preparatory school, very competitive to get into. Story_ID: 178177 Speaker 1: I was very studious, very conscientious about studies, loved to read, good student. Had challenges when I went to Lowell [High School, San Francisco, California] for a little bit of time. Not as much 'cause it was competitive, but I think that was probably one of the first times I began to get a sense of the separateness of, of races. In Paul Revere [Elementary School, San Francisco, California], it was a neighborhood school, so our neighborhood [Bernal Heights, San Francisco, California] was very diverse. You had pretty much every race. In the city, there and when you look at the pictures, when I go home and look at the pictures I really see how diverse our neighborhood was. You had blacks, Hispanics, Filipino, white, Chinese, just about, quite a few mixes, Italian, quite a few mixes in the neighborhood. In Aptos [Junior High School, San Francisco, California], it was a school that was a junior high that was outside of our neighborhood because our mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] did not want us to go to the, the junior high that where we were zoned because it was in a bad neighborhood, a lot of fights, bad reputation. She was concerned about that, so we went to a school in another neighborhood where my aunt lived and our cousins lived. And that was, that school was, was not as diverse, but was probably more 50/50 black and white, so it wasn't as diverse as, as Paul Revere was. In junior high school, I was in the gifted program, and I was the only black in the gifted program and that's when pressure, racial pressure, started to come in terms of expectations that I felt anyway as expectations of how I was supposed to interface with the white students who I was in classes with and the black students who I was in homeroom and PE [physical education] with. So, there started to be a challenge. I think that's when race became, started to become an issue in my life in terms of how I was expected to deal. And then when I got to Lowell, it was the brightest kids in the city that went to this school. You had to compete to get into this school. You had to be at the top of your classes in your junior highs to get into the school. There were not as many blacks in this school and after being in a junior high where there was some degree of isolation for me because I was the only black for a little while in the gifted program and by the time I graduated there was only three of us in that program, then to go to another school where only about 3 percent of the student body was black. So, you know, I ended up having my time in the cafeteria hanging out, connecting, but not going to class, playing spades and bid whist and not going to class. So, there was a little spot there where I let my grades suffer, which my mom and I had some very interesting interactions with. 'Cause I do remember once when I got my report card, got my results, and the results were not good. I lost the report card legitimately and I'd come home and told my mom that I lost the report card and she said well what did you get? And I was like four Cs and two Fs, and she just kind of looked at me 'cause for me to get four Cs and two Fs it was just unheard of. To even have four Cs was unheard of and to have an F at all was like totally boggled the mind, so she kind of looked at me and said okay. She says well what did you---'cause she didn't know where to start (laughter). She said what did you get the Fs in? I said, English and math so then she looks at me again because math was--I always got As in math and you could always count on me having As in math and then other things and, and I always had good grades in English. I always had good grades period. So, she asked me well okay why'd you get, how'd you get an F in math? I said I wasn't going to class, and she said you know--she didn't talk to me for a while, 'cause she couldn't talk to me for a while 'cause she didn't know what to say to me 'cause it was, I wasn't the one she'd normally had to worry about with grades. Then she came back and she said, you know it's your life. If that's what you want to do with your life there's nothing I can do about that and that probably was one of the hardest lessons for me. You know, any shouting she could have done, any punishment she could have done was not as impactful as leaving me to deal with it for myself and knowing that I had disappointed her and knowing that I was not doing, you know, half of my best, and I wasn't even living up to the potential that I had and after that, you know, I had to sort it out for myself and turn my grades back around where they belonged and went on about my business. Story_ID: 178178 Speaker 1: Okay now was your mother [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] the driving force behind your educational aspirations or did it make a difference when she you know? Speaker 2: I think she was the driving force behind a lot of things including the educational aspirations because she had custody of the children and so most of our time was with her and then we spent weekends with our dad [Paul Malveaux] and a month in the summer with our dad. So, by just virtual of time he didn't have as much of an opportunity to be the driving force around school, but he was a principal. He was a principal. He had been a math teacher. He was a principal. It was hard for him not to be a driving force as well, so you know the education was just in the air and, and in the households on both ends. In the summertime, he taught summer school. So, sometimes when we were with him spending our summers with him we were going to classes with him or participating in summery, summer activities as centered around the school. So, you know, yeah she was a driving force, but he had an influence. There was no, there was no detractors for me. I think there were for my brother [James Malveaux], but there weren't for me. Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any teachers in grade school that took a particular interest in you or that you considered mentors? Speaker 2: In grade school, there was Ms. Jones [ph.]. That was my first grade teacher and I always remember Ms. Peatree [ph.] who was my, my kindergarten teacher. Ms. Jones was a black teacher. She was one that insisted upon--she, she insisted upon high standards, which was important and she made sure we understood that high standards were important. Ms. Sitt [ph.] in my second grade she was one that recognized, I think, early on the, the intellect and was challenged, but--or recognized that I was challenged, but because I was so, I would learn so quickly and then I'd get bored because there would be nothing to do. And so she was the first one, and she was a Chinese teacher, she was the first one that really worked with or recognized it and began to work with me and factor, factor me in as an individual into the activities with, the activities and the competitions that you'd have in the classroom. So, for instance if we were having a math challenge she normally would split the class in half and, and the one half would compete against the other half. Well, I was always quick with math and so what she would do would have me on one team for one, one part of the competition and then put me on the other team for the other part of the competition or she would find different books that were challenging for me, a lot more challenging for me both in reading because I was an avid reader and loved to read and also with the math. So, she would, she would find things at a different grade level to help me stay engaged, stay involved, continue to learn and make sure that I wasn't sitting on the side bored and not doing anything. Those--Ms. Jones and Ms. Sitt I remember more than anyone in grade school. Speaker 1: Now, what about middle school? Speaker 2: In junior high, Mr. Caruse [ph.], Hispanic teacher, he was my English teacher. He really cared about having fun with education, and he was always one of the more popular teachers in our gifted program because he knew how to make, I think he knew how to make the subject matter interesting. He knew how to make the subject matter fun. He knew how to make class fun and everybody looked forward to coming to his classes. Speaker 1: Did he talk about the history of Hispanics any and--or black people? Speaker 2: No, not really. It wasn't, it wasn't as much a cultural connection from my perspective as much as it was a, a connection of teacher to student. I mean he understood, he was a good teacher. He understood how to teach junior high school kids. He understood how to deal with, you know, with teenagers with hormones running all over the place, and he knew how to make it fun and, and it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't as much a cultural connection-- Story_ID: 178179 Speaker 1: You went to high school [Lowell High School, San Francisco, California] and you started high school in what year was it? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]? Yeah, September of '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you were a little kid during the Civil Rights Movement basically. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did your family discuss that--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was very much a part of the house. My mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] was involved in it. My father [Paul Malveaux] was involved in it. They were both very much, the activists. Very much involved in rallies, and you know petitions being signed and the like. We were involved in it from the standpoint that there was campaigning going on or elections going on or we were leafleting, yeah we had to, you know, fold the leaflets and stuff 'em in the envelopes and take 'em around and bring 'em to the houses so we were hands and legs. We were labor in helping to get things done. So, we were very much a part of that. I remember the day actually that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died. Speaker 1: Where were you that day? Speaker 2: I was at home when we got the news watching TV. Wasn't supposed to be, we were supposed, we were supposed to be doing homework, but mommy wasn't home so we were watching TV, and a news flash came on that he had been shot, that he had been shot. He wasn't dead yet, and my mom always got home not too long after the news had started, so we'd always start, I mean, we'd always watch the news and we'd catch her up when she got home, so we could tell her what was going on, on the news. And so, she came in the house and we could see, we could actually where we lived we can actually walk outside and see, see her coming down the street. And we--normally we were on the lookout (laughter), so we could run in and do what we needed to do for a little bit, so we were on the lookout for her to make sure that we could tell her the news and also you know, make sure we were, got room straight or whatever, in the little short time that we had it would take her to walk those three blocks. But, she came in the house and we told her what had happened, and we didn't know who he was, so we didn't know the impact at first of, on the country and on the race. Speaker 1: You were about ten years old at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so we told her and she, her reaction was such a visceral reaction. She, first it was she was dismissing it you know you heard something wrong. Like no, no, no, so she went and watched the news and she fell apart and she started crying, she started I was gonna say screaming, but yelling in anger 'cause of what happened and, and, and so I remember that, started praying. And then I began to learn more about Martin Luther King after that because of her reaction to, to the news and then, you know, the, the neighborhood's reaction, the adults' reaction to, to the news. But, yeah the civil rights was part of our house and my older sister Julianne [ph.] she was in high school, I believe at the time or junior high at the time. Julianne actually was very, very, very much, a little bit more involved in civil rights, closer to it in age obviously than I was. She is 4-1/2 years older than me. Julianne started up Black Panther [Party], or tried to start a Black Panther party in high school was challenged by that. So, she was very much the militant at an early age. Her and my brother [James Malveaux] would read Mao Tse-Tung's little red book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung'] and they were part of the young Black Panthers in the Young Black Panther Party, and so that was around as well. Speaker 1: Did they have to go over to Oakland [California] or was there a chapter in San Francisco [California]? Speaker 2: No, there was a chapter in San Francisco, a very strong chapter actually in San Francisco, very much, very strong in the Western Addition [San Francisco, California]. But, no they, it was right at home, yeah right at home. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 178180 Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school [at Lowell High School, San Francisco, California]. Now, did you, were you involved in clubs and activities in high school or were you quiet? Speaker 2: I was more quiet. I wasn't as involved in clubs primarily because the interesting thing about our school is it was way on the other side of town [San Francisco, California]. I think when, when the school first started there had to be some, had to be some assumption that only, you know, rich kids were bright and because it was designated, Lowell was designated to be a college prep. It wasn't always--it was an old school in terms of history of the city, but it became a college prep high school, a very strong reputation. At the time that I went, it was one of the top twenty schools in the nation, high schools in the nation. The, but it was on--way on the other side of town so it would take me an hour and a half to get to school and an hour and a half to get home. Speaker 1: By bus? Speaker 2: By bus, by bus. So, there wasn't a lot of time for extracurricular activities because I was spending that time commuting back and forth. So I, you know, pretty much had my friends, had my classes, talked on the phone. I think that's also when there began to be, continued to be for me anyways a sense of more of a sense of independence out of a feeling of isolation 'cause I'd come home to the neighborhood [Bernal Heights, San Francisco, California]--there weren't that many kids in the neighborhood that went to Lowell. There were a few that went to Lowell, but now you're talking about for most neighborhoods, you're talking about kids from all over the city coming to this one school and then going back to their neighborhoods. And then it's hard to have those relationships because we were still then a very much a neighborhood city. You know, you functioned inside of your neighborhood and you did things inside of your neighborhood, so then it became hard to do things 'cause my friends weren't in my neighborhood, my friends were somewhere else and so I became, I started to become more, more of a loner, but also more independent in that respect as well. Speaker 1: Okay, well did you--now were you a pretty good student in high school? Speaker 2: I, I would say that I was an average student. I was pretty good when I started, then I had that spot with those grades and then I ended up good, but overall because of the spot that I had in terms of my grades. I was a little bit above average, I think, about a B student. Speaker 1: That, that was an accelerated school, so that would've translated out to A's someplace else (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah but I wasn't comparing it to anybody anywhere else (laughter). I was compared to the folks who were getting the A's (laughter). Story_ID: 178181 Speaker 1: I actually ended up going to junior college before I went to a four year college and that occurred also because at fifteen was when--well at thirteen when I was in junior high, my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] had gone back to school and that's when she went to UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to get her master's [degree], and she had decided to go back to school. And I remember the day she told us she was going to do that 'cause it was a hard decision for her. She felt that she was--I think she felt that she was relinquishing responsibilities as she had as a mother to go deal with responsibilities that she felt she had to herself, and she sat us down in the kitchen and she was crying about this decision that she had made about going back to school and, you know, some of us were crying 'cause she was crying, but you know going back to school was not a big deal and I used to go to classes with her sometimes and go study with her. Sometimes I'm studying my stuff, she's studying hers. And, but then after she, after she got her master's she worked for a year in the city and then she got this opportunity to go to the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] to Ole Miss to teach and she took it and then she asked us again if we wanted to go with her now you know. Julianne [Malveaux (ph.)] was in college; brother [James Malveaux] was in the [U.S.] Air Force, and it was just the twins [Marion Malveaux and Mariette Malveaux (ph.)] and I and we was like no, you know, who wants to go from San Francisco [California] to Mississippi, I don't think so. So, she went to Mississippi and we stayed home. Speaker 2: Now who did you stay with? Speaker 1: We stayed with ourselves, and our grandmother lived around the corner. Unusual, very unusual set up. Speaker 2: The oldest was how old? Speaker 1: The oldest was sixteen and I was fifteen, and I think that had an impact as well because there was a time when we didn't have parental direction about our lives, and I know for her that became a source of pain for her, in her life as I think she felt that she had abandoned us. The--my father [Paul Malveaux] took her to court for abandonment; she worked through that. Everything got sorted out. The--because she had provided. We had a guardian. We had a grandmother. We were good kids. There weren't a lot of parties going on. You know we lived, you know we lived within a good set of values and rules. We weren't alone, but we were alone in the house. When it came to school and asking for direction and asking about college, there was nobody to talk to as a parent in the house. But, and I think, I think that weighed on her and-- Speaker 2: It does seem like it would be a real tough decision for her to make. Speaker 1: I think it was tough for her to make, and I remember when she made a decision to come back home she was getting ready to, I mean we were in--she was home for summer and it was time for her to go back to school and she physically could not go back and she, I mean, her, her, her body took over and she physically couldn't, 'cause she got sick and we had to call the doctor. The doctor came home and told her that, you know, she needed to let go of the guilt and she needed to, she needed to deal with that and so she decided to stay home and not go to Mississippi, go back to Mississippi. Speaker 2: Okay so, she was gone for a semester--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: I think it was a year. I think it was a year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, a year or two years; I don't remember. But, you know I thought--what I applauded in her because like I said my grandmother, our grandmother lived right around the corner from us and Grandma Rose [Hawkins-Nelson] was very much a part of our daily lives. We were always at her house. She was always at our house, you know, she just, you know. Being around, right around the corner today may mean something different than it did then. We had, we had a guardian. We spent time with the guardian as well. So, for legal purposes we had that as well. So, I don't think, I know it was a difficult decision for her, but what I applaud always in my mom and what I applauded in her then and what I respect in her now is that she was pursuing a dream, and she had a dream, she was working on it. She was working hard for it, and, and she pursued it. And she was, she was trying to respect the fact that we were young adults. She was--she knew what Mississippi was like. She was trying to respect the fact that young urban children who grew up in a city like San Francisco may not appreciate being forced to going to Mississippi and living in Mississippi and may not want to live in Mississippi, so she actually gave us a choice that most parents would not give their children because they would, they, they would feel that their children could not handle the choice or should not have the choice. So, we had choices in our lives at an early age, where some may say it's not responsible to, to give children that choice, where I would say there was, there was a tremendous amount of respect of us on her part to take into consideration that a move to Mississippi might have far more impact, negative impact on us as children than a move, than having our grandmother around the corner would. Story_ID: 178182 Speaker 1: My mother [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] was only one of three African American professors at Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi]. Ole Miss was a very, still very much a racist institution and the city was still very much a racist city, and we didn't grew up in that kind of environment, not to say we didn't have race and racist things happening, but we grew up in a different environment [San Francisco, California] that was far more enlightened than Oxford, Mississippi was at the time. And so I think she, she weighed all those things in making, making her decision, and I respect her for it, always have. Speaker 2: Okay, well now she was, she went down in what year was it? Speaker 1: She went down in '73 [1973] or seventy--she went down in '73 [1973] I think. I think it was '73 [1973], '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]--now, she went down in '74 [1974]. She went down in '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Things had cooled off quite a bit by then. Speaker 1: They cooled--I mean as I said there were three Africans, she was one of three. I mean, she wasn't like the first one, but she was one of three African American professors on campus. Speaker 2: Things were in the process of changing--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: They were in the process. Speaker 2: They were, they were. Speaker 1: Right, they were in process (laughter) and they weren't there yet. Story_ID: 178183 Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother's [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] back from Mississippi and-- Speaker 2: Mom is back from Mississippi. I'm in junior college. I had just graduated from high school [Lowell High School, San Francisco, California], going to junior college, university, not university I wasn't there yet, San Francisco City College, City College of San Francisco, CCSF [San Francisco, California]. Spent two years there really trying to as most, I think, kids in college trying to figure what I wanted to do with my life, changing majors quite a bit. I think I went from psychology to sociology to physics, thought I wanted to be an engineer, yeah to physics, and then had my first physics class and decided nah I didn't want to be an engineer (laughter). But, thought I might like it 'cause I, I really loved calculus and did well at that. And then I actually quit school for about a semester because I couldn't figure it out, and I ended up working a lot and I ended up having three jobs and no time for school. And so I stopped, quit two of the jobs, worked full time, quit school and then for a semester and then got bored out of my wits. Very cognizant, I've always been pretty cognizant of the, the environments in which I, I function in in which I happen to be in and what's going on around me and, you know, I realized that even in the job that I was doing. I was at Bank of America processing credit card payments and very quickly became the fastest, best, you know, employee there and then threatened everybody around me because very quickly I was the best. And people who had been on track for promotion or whatever all of a sudden were concerned about well what is this young person gonna end up doing to the apple cart, and I was like don't worry about me I'm going back to school (laughter) 'cause this is not what I wanna be doing with my life, processing credit card checks and, and being concerned about, you know, whether or not I can move from processing the checks to batching the checks and running the computer that batches the checks. That's, you know, it was very clear to me that I needed to get back to school and so I went back and that's when I went to University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] and finished up there with a master's [degree], I mean an undergrad [undergraduate degree] in economics and, and then I continued to work while I was in undergrad, all through undergrad I, I left the house when I was nineteen. A week before I turned nineteen I moved out, moved in with three guys, friends of the family. So, I was very safe and, and my mom was very helpful in making sure that I had everything I needed to set up my household. And one of the, one of my roommates was actually a person who had followed my mom back, a young man that had followed my mom back from Mississippi. He, he had gone to Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] and he, he came out, asked if he could come to San Francisco [California] and would she help him come to San Francisco, which she did do. And so he was like a brother. His name was Arthur Lee Woods [ph.]. He's since passed, died of AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] a number of years ago, but he was one of my roommates and so, you know I had like big brothers looking out for me. But, I went back to school, I worked part-time, paid for my own tuition. By then, I had mentioned before my mom had an entrepreneurial spirit. My mom had started a deli with a friend of hers in Oakland [California], and so she was back and forth between San Francisco and Oakland, and before I had gone back to school I had taken over some of the, helping with the, the financial responsibilities of the house with her. So, after I graduated I worked full-time at Bank of America. Story_ID: 178184 Speaker 1: Now, now when you were in school did you, did you have a chance to get involved in the cultural life on the campus--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Not as much and again, which is you know this, one, this, this experience was not that different in terms of involvement, involvement with the campus than my, than my high school experience [at Lowell High School, San Francisco, California], but for different reasons. Now, I was working thirty-five hours a week paying my own tuition. Univer- University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] is a Jesuit university. Tuition was pretty expensive, still is, so I had to pay for tuition, and, and I didn't because my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] was trying to get the deli going I certainly didn't, didn't--I wanted her to do what she was doing and didn't expect her to help me in terms of get, getting the tuition paid for, though she was ready to do that. Didn't want, you know, we talked about the house and loans on the house and things like that and we didn't want to do that, so I mean I can work and, and get the expenses paid for. So, I didn't have time again to be involved in activities. I did get involved from a, from a project standpoint. You know I had projects that I would, that I'd get paid for in working with certain departments, but that still not extracurricular activities. So, you know, I was working. I was working. I was going to school and I was paying for my apartment and paying for school. Speaker 1: Now the cultural life in San Francisco [California] was so original, intellectual life and arts life in the black community--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, the city--for me it would have been different if I went to school outside of, outside of a place where I lived. What I did find for me, which was good in terms of my socialization while I was at school is because I was from San Francisco and San Francisco was an urban school--the University of San Francisco was an urban campus and an urban school the students that were there and some of the friends that I made, friends with, I was able to expose them to what was going on in San Francisco and so I may have gotten more involved in extracurriculars that way than I did in terms of what was going on, on campus, but, yeah. Story_ID: 178185 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were at Bank of America? Speaker 2: I was at Bank of America. I had started--when I was at univer- when I was at City College [of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], Bank of America was one of the three jobs that I had, and I quit the other two jobs and kept Bank of America. Then, when I went back to school to the University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] I continued to work at Bank of America. By then I had gotten a promotion. I had moved forward and now I was working in the collections department collecting on credit cards as opposed to processing the payments. So, I worked there in the evenings. Again, one of the strongest, strongest and best individuals in the, in the department and while I was at University of San Francisco my supervisor had, he and I'd had a conversation and he, he was pretty good. He was always looking out for--as opportunities came up he always made sure that he would talk to employees about putting them forward. And an opportunity had come up to be a student loan officer, and he sat down and talked with me and put me forward for that position. I said yes that's something I wanna pursue, and so I became a student loan officer which was a different kind of position then. Bank of America had created a position in this, in two branches in the city where there would be students who were trained to be loan officers and their portfolio would be student loans. They would also carry the title of student relations representatives, very much a community relations representative, and we would represent the bank at college campuses and high schools, and so I would go to high schools and talk to high school students about savings accounts and credit and banking, about student loans and how to pay for your education, how to pay for cars and what you might want for yourself in life, but primarily about savings and investments and loans and then I would also manage the student loan portfolio and, and extend loans to students. And so I was a student loan officer. And so I worked and went to school. Story_ID: 178186 Speaker 1: And then, after I graduated from the University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] I continued to work for American Express, I mean Bank of America. American Express is later, worked for Bank of America and then went to work in corporate treasury in headquarters which then was called flow of funds and I went as a research assistant and then was promoted to senior research assistant and then was promoted to financial analyst and then went to business school. Speaker 2: Okay, now by going to business school you're talking about going to? Speaker 1: I went to the Wharton School at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay right. Speaker 1: And so what-- Speaker 2: That's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 1: That was in Philadelphia and one of the things that, one of the things that I found when I was at Bank of America I looked around at what people were doing who were in management positions and what they had done to get there, and they were relatively young. And Bank of America from my perspective then is very, in, in the area in which I was in was a very progressive, very aggressive bank. It was the employer of, of record if you will. It was the largest employer in the state [California], larger than I, I believe at that time it may have been even larger than some of the, the state agencies in the state itself. You had a vast branch network and it started merging, and, and expanding and so I looked at what others were doing and I saw that most of them had their M.B.A.s and so I started exploring and researching the degree and trying to understand what it was about and what I needed to be doing to pursue it and so I applied to Wharton and I got accepted. I had in making my decision I get, I get to a point of being very anal sometimes, so I had chosen the schools I wanted to go to, to apply to that I was interested in. I took what little savings I had and went and visited each and every one of them, and I talked to them-- Speaker 2: How many? Speaker 1: Five, five of the top schools then. I went to Chicago [Illinois], which I didn't want to come to, but my boss talked me into it 'cause he had gone to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. I--but I looked at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I looked at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I looked at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I looked at Wharton, and I looked at Columbia [University, New York, New York], and I went and visited all the schools. I talked to professors. I talked to students. I talked to administrators and in some of the schools I sat in on classes and just got a feel for what was going on. I looked at it as an investment. I'm still paying on my student loans, so obviously it was going to be a long term investment of my money and which was a different approach that, that the people took and some of the people that talked to me, some of the administrators that talked to me thought I was so unusual to come see their schools. And I was like well I wanna be sure that, you know, I'm gonna get a return on my investment. It's not enough for me to say I'm gonna go to the Wharton School and know that I'm gonna get what everybody tells me I'm gonna get. I wanted to see it, touch it, feel it, so I was doing my market research. I wanted to make sure that if I was gonna leave San Francisco [California], which I had decided to do, I had, I was born and raised there, I grew up there, I had been there for twenty-six years, before I left, or twenty-six before I started the process, I wanted to make sure that I was making a good decision. I wanted to make sure I was comfortable with the decision that I was making. And so I went to these schools and I decide--I had a ranking before I went. I had a ranking after I went. I did the application at Wharton. I didn't apply to anybody else, which I was told again was very risky. I said well if they don't accept me then I'll apply to Harvard, but and then I'll go down the list, but I wasn't trying to rush myself nor was I trying to hedge my bets. I'd gone and, and was firm in my decision and was comfortable in my decision and I felt good about going to see the campus 'cause in meeting some of the administrators 'cause I think that did have, that did make a difference in their decision about admitting me into Wharton. And so I was accepted for the January '84 [1984] class, which then was a class of what they called January matrics, a smaller group that matriculated in the spring semester. There were a total of 750 students, and a hundred of us came in, in January. They no longer have that kind of structure, but they did then and I--my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] was doing the deli and, and I was supporting the household a lot more financially and I'd wanted to defer my admittance into Wharton so that she could stay more focused on the deli, and I asked Wharton if they would defer admittance, and they said no, their policy was if I didn't want--if I didn't want to come in January that I have to reapply all over again and then compete with a new batch of students coming in. So, I said well I'm in there I'd better go and so I went on and went to Wharton and had a good time. Story_ID: 178187 Speaker 1: Well who were some of the professors there [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or, or teachers, you know, or administrators that, you know, were useful for you? Speaker 2: There was my international finance teacher, La- Laurent Jacque. He was very much a professor that I liked in terms of how he challenged us and how he pushed us to really get a grasp of international financing. It was, it is not easy. It is not the easiest subject to learn. I, I was at a--I do think that I had an advantage to some degree because when I left Bank of America I was working in international treasury and so I, I had begun to get an understand--gain an understanding and a knowledge of foreign currency, of currency exchange, working in--I was working in an area where we dealt with a balance sheet in hedging the foreign currency that was on the balance sheet. So, I'd already begun to deal with international finance in practice. I may not have been dealing with it in theory but I was dealing with it in practice, and so when I went to Wharton and began to deal with it in theory it was easy, it was easy enough for me to begin to connect these things, to connect what I had been doing to some degree with what I was now learning and Professor Jacque recognized that. Here was someone who was grasping this very esoteric or very complex topic and so he challenged me quite a bit. He responded to that, I responded to him. He taught very much, used the Socratic Method in his teaching, so very much a back and forth in terms of questioning what, you know, what a student responds to and so in, in what he put forth. I did my dissertation with, with him and another professor because it was our advanced studies project, which was our dissertation. It was a study in international finance and multinational management. And the other professor was Professor Peal Mater [ph.] who taught global strategies and multinational management and very much focused on making sure that the students had an understanding of, that the students had an understanding of global business at a time when globalization was not even that much of a word on the radar screen for most of us in America as it is today. I, I loved, what I loved about Wharton at the time was that I was able to, and most students if you could, you were able to structure your degree. You were able to tailor your degree. Because I had a degree in economics, I was able to waive out of some classes, some economics classes that others had to take as their core curriculum, which gave me room to put other classes in there, and I was able to, to have a very rich curriculum in international finance and multinational management and, 'cause I was very clear that I wanted a global career and I wanted an international career and I wanted to make sure I got as much, I got as much international curriculum in my discipline as possible. Story_ID: 178188 Speaker 1: So when did you graduate from Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: December of '85 [1985], yeah. I worked for two summers. One summer I stayed--my first summer I stayed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and worked at Scott Paper Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and my second summer I came back home to San Francisco [California] and worked for Pacific Telesis [later merged, AT&T Inc.] in corporate treasury. And that was, that was important for me to be able to come back home for that summer because I re- I realized that, you know, life was changing and whatever decisions I made my life was now going in a different direction or enhanced direction--that the M.B.A., put you on a different level. It put you on a different path, and, and was that going to be a path that was going to be at home in San Francisco or was I going to be choosing to go elsewhere and that, you know, it was, just as choosing Wharton was important for me or in choosing my M.B.A. school was important for me in knowing that it was a decision that was gonna take me away from home and home has always been important to me, but it was a decision that was gonna take me away from home, I also wanted to make sure that I was making a good decision about whether or not I was gonna come back home or not come back home, and I didn't go back home, but I--going back home for the summer helped me validate and solidify in my mind that it was okay not to go back home that I would be okay choosing my path, whatever that path would be. Speaker 1: So what did you do after you graduated? Speaker 2: I went to New York [New York] and I worked for American Express Bank, which is an international banking arm of American Express. I worked in strategic planning. I was there at American Express for 5-1/2 years, promoted a number of times in strategic planning and ended up leading the strategic planning group as director of strategic planning and global marketing and had a fascinating time there. I traveled the world. I, as I had said I was very adamant that I wanted, very focused on having an international career. I had had a number of offers before I'd left school to, one to go back to Pacific Telesis, another one to go back to Bank of America and a couple of others to go to consulting groups, but none of them could promise me an, an international career, and American Express Bank was--there was no way I couldn't have a global career because it was a global company. It, it did international banking and so my first trip was four months after I joined the company. I went to Brazil, worked on country studies. Most, a lot of my work was country studies or product studies, but mostly country studies and then the strategic planning process of the bank itself and so the country studies took me to Brazil, Singapore, Turkey, Switzerland, Greece, Canada, Pakistan. Geez, where else did I go? London [England] (laughter), the U.K. [United Kingdom]. So, I, I had quite a, quite a few studies around the world. So, I was able to see the world, see different parts of the world that I probably never would have thought I was, I could see, broaden my horizons tremendously, went from like here to here. I've always appreciated--I think growing up in San Francisco really helped me appreciate different cultures and, and to interface with different cultures relatively easily and have an appreciation for them relatively easily. So, I worked for American Express and traveled the world and, and had a wonderful time. Story_ID: 178189 Speaker 1: So you said you, par- part of your responsibilities are marketing [at American Express Bank, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Global marketing. Speaker 1: Glo- global marketing. Speaker 2: Global marketing. The, the bank began to change, go through a number of changes, a number of strategic shifts and a number of strategic directions and right before I left we had worked on a new vision and we had McKinsey & Company as our consultants working with us. We worked on a new vision for the bank in terms of how we would reposition the bank and, and that repositioning went, was as thorough as redefining career paths for individual, not for individuals, for the workforce and, and restructuring the workforce, and global marketing became a fundamental--was becoming I should say, was becoming a fundamental discipline in the bank where as it really hadn't had a marketing discipline or marketing function per se. It had a sales function but didn't really have a marketing function. And so we'd just begun to bring that discipline to the table and I was, what was happening with my life is we were now in parallel. I was now on parallel paths for what was happening with the National Black MBA Association and what was happening with American Express Bank. At American Express Bank, I worked for the chief administrative officer, an, an individual who I thought and had a tremendous amount of respect for, but who I also thought was probably one of the more enlightened individuals at American Express Bank. The bank was at the time--the leadership of the bank was predominantly British. Most of those-- Speaker 1: American Express? Speaker 2: American Express Bank, right. Most of the individuals who were there had pulled themselves up by their bootstraps kind of folks. Didn't really have a lot of appreciation for people who were educated from Ivy League schools like Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There were a few of us there from Wharton or Stanford [University, Stanford, California] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but you didn't see as many M.B.A.s running around American Express Bank as you might see M.B.A.s running around TRS, Travel Related Services, which was the credit card and the travel part of the company, and, and a lot of that had to do with this, this, this perspective that the executive leadership of American Express had. It was very, it was a very tough culture because of the backgrounds I would say of the management. It was in a small--it was a small division, a small subsidiary of American Express relative to the other subsidiaries, but it had significant value to American Express because it held all the banking licenses, the foreign banking licenses that it--that American Express needed to operate in all these foreign companies. So, it, it was a little bit of a, of an anomaly, but a huge asset to the organization, but I as I was on this parallel path one of the things that my manager, George Carmany, he was one who mentored me and, and this is probably one time when I realized the benefits, when I was conscious of, of the benefits of mentorship, where I realized what, what was happening as I was being mentored. Story_ID: 174664 Speaker 1: I was with American Express [Bank, New York, New York] for five and a half years, yeah. And one of the things I think I was telling you--one of the things I was telling you about George Carmany, George would recognize my ambition and my leadership skills and often-- Speaker 2: Now he was the C, CE-- Speaker 1: He was the chief-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --administrative officer. He was the number two in the company, and the one who mentored me and he recognized my talents and my skills and recognized the leadership and gave me opportunity even against others' opinions sometimes. When I first came to the, to American Express Bank I worked for someone who worked for George and this individual didn't believe that, that I was ready, if you will, for the opportunities that George wanted me to have or the exposure that George wanted me to have and fortunately for me because, you know, he worked for George, George said, "I want Antoinette to be on the country study for Turkey. I want Antoinette to be on the country, on the team for the country study for Brazil. I want Antoinette to lead this," and so had it not been for George's direction--specific request that I do certain things than I probably would not have had that exposure and that opportunity to do them. That person left the company, the one that worked for George, retired early, left, and then George gave me the opportunity to step into the role of running strategic planning function and during that time we got--we actually did some wonderful things in terms of re-engineering the strategic planning process, being more inclusive, including all of the country managers in the process where before they really had not been in this process and really getting ready to set the stage for establishing this new vision for the bank, but George often would, he was very, he was very involved in the community. He of- often would sit down with me and say, "Okay Antoinette what are going be doing if, if you had a blank check what would you be doing?" And I told him I'd be running a, I'd be heading an African American nonprofit organization. And little did I know, but that's, that was, was inside of me. I had joined the National Black MBA Association, a volunteer, had become president of the New York chapter, had turned the chapter around. George was very supportive of what I was doing with the organization 'cause it did take a lot of time and sometimes it took time during the day to do what we were trying to get done and he was supportive of that and-- Speaker 2: Now, now when is the value of that or how, how, how does the CEO [chief executive officer] see that because I know there are some organizations and well corporations that want, don't want their employees to volunteer for anything outside of the company. They want them to keep their nose right to the grindstone in the company. Speaker 1: Well, I was supported both by George and by, when I first came I was, to the bank, I, I didn't belong to any group. I had pledged sorority Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] and where a lot of my leadership talents were also nurtured, but when I first got to American Express because of the nature of who am I tend to when I volunteer to jump head on into things and I immerse myself and I'm very engaged and so I said okay I've just got out of business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I don't want to do anything, but enjoy New York [New York] and go to work for a little while. Story_ID: 174665 Speaker 1: I was always one that was working and going to work, I mean working and going to school, and so I just wanted to chill for a moment and so I didn't do anything and I knew that I would choose one, one organization that I'd work with and then I chose National Black MBA Association, but my boss then who worked for George [Carmany], Andy [ph.], Andy was a Mormon, very involved in his church, so very much engaged in understanding of the value of involvement and the value of volunteerism and supportive of that. And in fact, it was Andy that uplifted the work that I was doing with the National Black MBA Association to, to George. And George then uplifted it because he also was very much engaged and involved in his community and very much involved in civic organizations and the like. So, they were supportive because they valued it. We went through a process actually that George actually was responsible for moving forward, and I worked very closely with him on that. But he was very much responsible for bringing the board of directors' attention to the corporate citizenship of American Express which American Express Bank [New York, New York], which began to then be a different way in which American Express looked at the involvement of employees and volunteer activities. And we actually went through a process where we went to all of our employees and gathered all of the information about what they were volunteering for and, and we put that information forward to the board of directors in the context of corporate citizenship and corporate social responsibility. So that George was very much from my perspective someone who either had the vision or knew how to articulate that vision in a way in which it was valuable to the organization, to the company, and became valuable beyond that. So, he was a very smart, effective executive that interfaced well with the board. He had a good relationship with [HM] Vernon Jordan who was on the board of American Express. Vernon brought in Lamond Godwin. I'm not sure if you've ever done him as a history maker. He's since passed, but Lamond used to work in the [U.S.] Department of Commerce, I believe, in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter administration and Vernon brought him in and Lamond worked for, Lamond worked for George as well and, and Lamond brought with him, you know, some of the relationships that he had with other organizations, and he worked with Leon Sullivan with the IFESH organization, International Foundation for Educational Self-Help. When he brought that to the table, one of the things that we were able to do and I ended up working on that project, George asked me to help on that, was developing a marketing strategy to, to take to other corporations because we had come up with a way of contributing money to Leon Sullivan's organization, which was a global organization had, had projects in different countries outside of the U.S. and there were assets, blocked assets that could not be repatriated to the U.S. So, if we had an investment in Costa Rica and we couldn't take the money out of Costa Rica and bring it back to the U.S. it just had to stay in Costa Rica because of the capital transfer laws that Costa Rica had. So, what, what we came up with was a way to donate some of that money to the organizations that Leon Sullivan had in Costa Rica, because as the currency was devaluing, the asset became no good to the bank, but in order to get some value from the asset it would donate, it's donate those assets to the organization in Costa Rica or whatever country it might be. So, we worked on a marketing strategy and I was asked to put that together to take to other companies, other corporations that also had blocked assets that could support Leon Sullivan's organization, and we were able to raise Lamond told me after I left the bank and had come back to visit with him, he told me that we were able to raise forty million dollars with that marketing strategy for Leon Sullivan's IFESH organization. So, you know, there, there, there are people who got it. You know George got it. You know Lamond got it. You know, you know while the American Express Bank environment itself I found to be a challenging environment, working with someone like George Carmany allowed me to develop as a professional, allowed me to get exposure to opportunities that I never would have had. Like I said I was very cognizant of the value and the benefit of the mentorship that he was providing for me, but also recognized the shared value that we had in terms of community and investing in community and leveraging our talents as well as our relationships for the communities that we cared about or the people that we cared about in their communities. Story_ID: 174666 Speaker 1: Your involvement with the National Black MBA Association begins to grow in the early '90s [1990s] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, after the late '80s [1980s] I joined, I joined in '86 [1986], late '86 [1986]. I became the chapter president in '87 [1987] of New York. I went on the board, I think it was in '89 [1989] and, and then came to a crossroads, and I had when I came to the board I was asked because of my background in strategic planning I was asked to take the organization through a strategic planning process. And up to that point, they hadn't had--they hadn't had anybody or too many people that I was aware of who, who was involved in strategic planning, who had discipline in strategic planning or experience in strategic planning, and you typically that's one of those parts of corporate America you typically didn't find African Americans in. You might have your little ghettos, but you, you typically didn't find them there. So, I took the, created a committee and, a strategic planning committee and my committee and I took the organization through a strategic planning process, and we took them through a process from start to finish, so we extended the process into--after we finished with the strategic plan got them into business planning and action planning so that we could really make sure that the, the plan was not just a piece of paper, it was not just something that we could hold up and say okay we got a plan, but we wanted to keep driving the discipline into the organization so that we could really focus and--on what it was we wanted to do and we could understand what it was going to take to do what we wanted to do, so we weren't as much of an organization that was full of talk, but one that could move to action. And when we got to the end of that process, we did some visioning with the executive committee, worked with a gentleman by the name of Horace Smith [ph.] who was an advisor to the group and he, he worked with me to do some visioning and with the executive committee and get them to a place of decision-making around what we were going to do with this plan and how we were going to take this plan forward. And so the decision was made that the organization would change, that it would build its own management capability. At that point, we had a lot of outsourcing managed by an association management firms and had just begun to bring some things in house and so they made a decision to hire an executive director, and they asked me and another person if we would do that and the other person decided--we were supposed to go in together--the person decided that he couldn't do it. He had a family, I didn't. The organization could not meet his expectation and his needs in terms of what he needed for his family. You know, I was either young and dumb or I had the angel sitting on my shoulder and I made the decision to go forth and, and it took us, but it took us about a year and a half to get through that dialogue and that discussion and get to that decision that I would leave corporate America and come head the National Black MBA Association. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But by the time that I had made that decision, George Carmany had left the bank [American Express Bank, New York, New York]. He was still with American Express; he had gone to another division of American Express in Boston [Massachusetts]. He had asked if I wanted to go, I said no. I was not interested in moving to Boston, and I wanted something different and this opportunity came, so I was at a crossroads and this was the opportunity that was put before for me at the time that, you know, things were moving. You know, they were moving at parallel paths and then they went like that and so. Story_ID: 174667 Speaker 1: So it was 1991-- Speaker 2: This was 1991. Speaker 1: --you became the operating officer for-- Speaker 2: Right, I was the director of operations [later, executive director]. The organization [National Black MBA Association] still was very much--functionally, it was still very much run, if you will--the executive decisions were made by the executive committee of the board. So, we went through a transformation. We hired a consulting firm here in Chicago [Illinois], RGMA, Ralph G. Moore & Associates to do an assessment of the organization. They, they brought that to the table, so we did all we needed to do. We did the assessments, the audits, everything, brought that to the table, made recommendations to the board about changing. We began to transform, and it was, it was critical for transformation because the organization was functioning with eighty people participating in their board process, so it was very cumbersome. It was very difficult. It was an old model that a lot of organizations operated with, but one that was inefficient in getting decisions made and in effectively managing the organization. So, my charge was to transform how the organization functioned, to reposition the organization, to make it a more viable organization, an organization with more credibility, and to, you know, basically put it on map to help it realize its, the potential and put it on a path of realizing the potential of its aspirations, because to that point it was not. Up to that point, we were a group of individuals who had a lot of talent individually, but had no process or structure to harness that talent so that collectively we were doing something to move the organization forward. So, my twelve years at the National Black MBA Association was spent harnessing that energy, transforming the organization, changing structures as we needed to change them, evolving structures as we needed to evolve them, expanding the organization, making sure the organization was reaching out. One of the issues-- Speaker 1: Now, you actually tripled the membership-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from what I've read. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: From, from-- Speaker 2: I did. The membership tripled-- Speaker 1: --1800 to 5000. Speaker 2: Well actually-- Speaker 1: At one point anyway, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that was old. It was actually past six thousand, and we established relationships in the U.K. [United Kingdom], had affiliated relationships in the U.K., and eventually had our own presence in the U.K. which exists today. We established that in, in '99 [1999], 2000 and so you know as, as, as an African American with a global perspective I always felt that it was very important for African Americans and I still feel very important for African Americans to have and broaden their perspective about the world. Our perspective tends to be very insular. It tends to be one that is very much about America. We don't travel as much, for work or for play, outside of the country. When we travel for play outside of the country, most times it's to the Islands or to Mexico. It is not to Europe. It is not to Africa. You got more going to Africa, but not as many. It is not to Asia. It is not to India. It is not, you know, in the world. Speaker 1: Yeah, you can pretty much count the historical figures that had a global interest-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --you know, there weren't many. Speaker 2: Exactly, there weren't many. Speaker 1: You got [Frederick] Douglass, Martin Delany. Speaker 2: [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had a bit. Speaker 1: [W.E.B.] Du Bois. Speaker 2: And Du Bois's-- Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey of course. Speaker 2: Du Bois is buried in Ghana. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, during my time at National Black MBA Association not only did we establish our presence in the U.K., but we, we also, I was also able to take a delegation of members to South Africa and a delegation of members to Ghana. We had invited the president of Ghana to speak at our conference in '98 [1998], and he in turn invited us to lead a delegation, which I led with our then chair, Michael Mobley to Ghana. Speaker 1: Was this Jerry Rawlings? Speaker 2: That was Jerry Rawlings spoke in '98 [1998] and then we, we went to Ghana in '99 [1999] and brought a delegation to Ghana in '99 [1999] and, and I just feel that we need to stay focused and stay connected and understand not only the value and benefit in the connectivity, but the power in the connectivity as well. Story_ID: 174668 Speaker 1: You increased the chapters [of National Black MBA Association]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You branched out. Were there any other branches of the National Black MBA Association other than the U.K. [United Kingdom]? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and you asked what, what, what occurred under my tenure domestically is we grew from twenty-five chapters to thirty-nine chapters, and all of those chapters are volunteer driven. We, we also added a host of programs that provided more depth and meaning to the organization and viability of the organization. So, we added employment programs and what someone told me on my way departing out the door, 'cause I stepped down in December, on my way out the door he said, "Antoinette one of the things that you've been able to do is make the National Black MBA Association part of the DNA of corporate America," and so by doing so the way that I was able to do that was through the work that all the teams that I had and all the volunteers that I had working together to drive value into the organization and drive value into the relationships, so the employment programs that we created were created in such a way and when I use the word we hardwired it so that when corporations would come to the table they knew that they were gonna come to the table and gain access to talent, not necessarily--it, it wasn't about gaining access to black talent, although that is one of the key values, but it was gaining access to talent and that happened to be black. And so we wanted to make sure that corporations came to the National Black MBA Association 'cause they knew they were gonna get some value and at the end of the day the members did happen to be African American, but the decision was being made on the value proposition, which will last far longer in terms of investment in the organization than the decision on investing in race, and so we drove value into the organization and thereby drove through its programs the employment programs and thereby driving value into the relationship. One of the, the, the programs that I'm most proud of in terms of what we were able to accomplish as an organization with our members was our Leaders of Tomorrow program, which is a program that reached out to our high school students. We as an organization when I first joined had been accused of being very elitist, of caring only about ourselves, of not doing things only for ourselves, and it wasn't that we didn't care it was that we didn't have a structure or process to, to be able to bring forth and implement our ideas and so as we put those structures and processes together and, and began to, to create real service, product service programs around the ideas that would come from the membership, the Leaders of Tomorrow program bubbled up from our New York chapter then we were able to make it a national program. By the time I left, we had gone from having this one program as an event in our conference to having this program in twenty-four of our chapters nationwide and continuing to have this event in our, in our conference and bringing kids from the U.K. to participate in it as well as bringing our kids to the U.K. to be exposed to programs over there. And I believe that the true investment and the true legacy rests in the generations that come behind us and it is for those reasons that I feel most proud of and, and most connected to that Leaders of Tomorrow program. We were also able to create a case competition, national case competition for our M.B.A. programs which showcase their talent in a different kind of way than what they were being showcased for in anything in their lives and they would present a case to judges from corporations and it would be a real business case and so they would be bringing real time solutions to real business issues that these corporations were having and we would have as many as forty schools, teams, participate from different schools, so forty different schools participating including a school from South Africa. We'd want to make the case competition global, and we began to do that through, through the help of one of our corporate partners and brought a team from South Africa. The corporation paid to bring that team in and support them in that and so we were really pleased about that and, and, and in this competition not only are the students receiving scholarship, but they're receiving job offers and corporations are seeing African American students present phenomenal talent in a way that they're not able to see most students you know, black or otherwise present their talent. So, the case competition was also another real program. It was a real solid program that we put in place. Story_ID: 174669 Speaker 1: Okay, now most black people in the community would think that black entrepreneurship was on the decline. They were just looking at their communities at all the stores run by Koreans and Arabs from different countries and so forth, but from what I've read it is actually on the rise right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: There are about eight times as many now than there were ten years ago. Speaker 2: I think, I think that if you're looking, if you look at pockets of the community--I mean you really gotta look at the stats, but, and the statistics, I think if you look in certain aspects of the community you will assume or surmise that it might be on the decline, but you have today, you have a number of different factors occuring. You have a number of people in corporate America reaching retirement age or retiring early who really aren't ready to retire. They are starting businesses. You have, you have African Americans leaving corporate America; they're starting businesses. You have young African Americans coming out of business school who, who don't have the same perspectives and are functioning within a different paradigm than when I came out of business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] fifteen years ago they're functioning with a different paradigm seeing that corporate America is not the end all and be all, and they're going into business school saying when I come out I'm coming out headed towards entrepreneurship or I'm going to business school so that I, so I can work on this plan, I can figure out how to make it happen. So, the, the mindset has shifted, some out of necessity. You have an economy that is forcing people to think differently about how they earn their income and for those who are entrepreneurs or have entrepreneurial aspirations or want to be entrepreneurs the, you have a, you have an economic factor that is pushing them to help them, pushing them into entrepreneurship or pushing them into helping them thinking about how they move forward in entrepreneurship. You have far more support from organizations like the National Black MBA Association, Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Save Humanity], Black Enterprise that have programs and have a focus through programs that they have to help support the African American entrepreneur, whether it be through technical support, whether it be networking, whether it be from direct pressure like a Rainbow/PUSH, puts on certain corporations to open their doors and provide contracts and with National Minority Supplier Development Council. So, you, you have you know, organizations that have been in existence for entrepreneurs and are also evolving in their programming for entrepreneurs. Story_ID: 174670 Speaker 1: Well this is a question that I don't how to quite phrase it and you don't know how to quite answer it, but we'll (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but there are more--it seems that there are, that the perception that there aren't, that, that black business is dwindling is really not true, but the businesses that black entrepreneurs are involved in now are not as visible as they used to be in terms of being identified as, such as black hair products. You have [HM] George Johnson went out of business, Soft Sheen got gobbled up by somebody, you know, but we see these things in the community. Panic sets in, where are our black businesses going? Even black funeral parlors are being gobbled up now, you know. Speaker 2: They're being sold as well-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but there, there's a couple of issues. Yeah there are hidden, hidden economies, hidden businesses that yeah the, the typical consumer will not see if you expect to look in your neighborhood or you expect to look at what you do on a day-to-day basis and see a black entrepreneur behind it and you don't see it then you may think, well what, what's going on here and that, while that is a valid concern, it's not one that should go away, you do have, you do have African Americans going into other aspects of business that consumers typically would not see. You have to think about companies that are supplying to other companies, and there are a number of companies focused on supplier diversity. You may see for instance if you look at any company focused on supplier diversity take a [Walt] Disney World [Resort, Orlando, Florida] for instance, and we [National Black MBA Association] had an opportunity to work with them so was able to begin to see the different aspect of entrepreneurship in terms of how the corporation interfaced with, with their suppliers. But, people providing T-shirts, you know, providing merchandise to, supplying merchandise. They're not selling it in the art festival. They don't have a booth in the art festival. They don't have a store on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] where they're selling merchandise. They're supplying merchandise to a Disney World to sell in their concession stands in Disney. You have other companies supplying goods, products and services to corporations and doing it on a wholesale basis. You have a number of, particularly now in this economy, you have a number of African Americans that have gone into, is setting up their own consulting and doing consulting. Some of them may be, you know, mom and pops, that are, excuse me, it's one person, or people working in association, but they're hidden, if you will, from the typical consumer because the customer is a different customer. So, you have those pockets occurring. You have those pockets occurring. Story_ID: 174671 Speaker 1: Now what about entrepreneurism in the U.K. [United Kingdom]? You, you had some-- Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the things that we [National Black MBA Association] found when we began venturing out into the U.K. we, we began a working partnership with other organizations over there and were learning about the marketplace while we were doing that. You don't have as many blacks with, African Caribbeans, with an advanced degree. You don't have many Europeans with advanced degree period. The degree, the advanced degree in business is becoming more popular now in Europe than it has been in the past. But, what we did find in the black community in the U.K. is that they are far more entrepreneurial oriented than in the U.S., and, and they're far more entrepreneurial oriented, oriented because of the, the challenges that they face in getting into corporate U.K. Speaker 1: Is there also a cultural dimension to this too? Speaker 2: There, there is a cultural dimension to it, but there are, there are some very clear racial dimensions to it that have a strong impact on the community. It just like--it's very similar to the, to the African American community right after Reconstruction and in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], and '50s [1950s] where we had our own communities with lots of entrepreneurs because you couldn't go anywhere else. We had our own doctors. We had our own insurance brokers. We had our own bankers. We had our own nurses. We had our own hospitals, et cetera, et cetera, because you weren't allowed anywhere else, so, there, there is very much a racial aspect to it as much as there is a cultural aspect to it. But, what, but what-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but what there is not yet is a, is a larger class of educated blacks at a, at a, at a advanced degree level and so as we began to venture into the U.K. we found that in order to develop economic wealth, which is part of the mission of the National Black MBA Association, that we were going to need to begin to work with entrepreneurs and we began to work with black entrepreneurs in the U.K. through a two million pound [currency] grant from one of the agencies in the U.K. to help us do that. Story_ID: 174672 Speaker 1: Okay, but the cultural dimension I, I guess I'm just looking at--in the history of this country it's not, not new, but usually when people come here from Granada or Jamaica or some place or even from Nigeria or some place they seem to be more entrepreneurial and more willing to do whatever it takes to make money or somewhere along that-- Speaker 2: Well, I think the cultural aspect is that they're coming out of more homogeneous environments than we as African Americans happen to be operating in, so if you go to Jamaica you're gonna see a whole lot more black folks running businesses and owning businesses in Jamaica than you are in, relatively than you are in the U.S. and the same if you go to Barbados or anywhere else in most of the islands in the, in the Caribbean and so if, if you compare a homogeneous environment to a homogeneous environment you might find something different. Just like our environments were far more homogeneous by force. That's why we had, we had to deal with integration, but our, our environments were far more homogeneous by force, not by choice, but by force because we weren't allowed to do, to go, to participate in certain aspects of the greater economy, so we had, we created sub-economies and we had our own economies. I mean we had our own Wall Street in [Tulsa] Oklahoma that got bombed years ago. I mean we create 'em out of necessity, and so I think what you see culturally when we talk about the cultures that come from, from the Caribbean is that they're coming out of a cultural context, a context where there's, there's a lot more opportunity to acc- there's a lot more opportunity that they can access a lot easier to be entrepreneurs than there, than there is here. Speaker 1: I think the reason why, the reason why I raised the cultural aspect of this is because many black people in every day talk in the street can tend to condemn the, other black, black Americans as being ignorant or not, not having, you know, the gumption to start a business and to do those kind of things, and I think it's done, you know, in, without really a good examination of history-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: --and the dynamics of it, and it's not, it's, you know, and I mean it's nothing--there's nothing here, I think, that makes us inferior or anything-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --it's just a, it's a different cultural-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --approach to it based on a history-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --of, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, totally. Speaker 1: --that's all, that's all I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: Totally. Speaker 1: That people come with, if you have a history of entrepreneurial activity it's passed on and refined through generations. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And when that's broken down and you can't do that-- Speaker 2: And if there's no one to pass it on to you sell it. Speaker 1: --it tends to get lost. That's all I'm just preaching. Speaker 2: Yeah, if there's no one to pass it on to you just sell it and that's where as you said funeral homes getting gobbled up. Somebody's--there's gotta be another generation to pass it to, someone who's interested in doing it in order to keep it in the race. Otherwise, it's gotta go somewhere or wind down. Speaker 1: But even in the-- Speaker 2: It's basic economics. Speaker 1: --on the lower end where pe- people are, are broken in despair, you know where the family is not intact, I mean, there's nothing, there's nothing being passed you know-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --pretty much, yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's all. Story_ID: 174673 Speaker 1: That leads us to a question we ask everybody and that's what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: My hopes are that we become far more willful, far more, in order to be far more powerful, to better our lot, if you will. One of the things that I fundamentally believe in and one of the things that I think we were taught as a family is that at some point in your life, at many points in your life, you will face racism. There--don't kid yourself that it won't happen and it's a matter of time when it happens or that it happens for the first time or you're in situations that happens. However, knowing that you still have responsibility and you still have power over the choices that you make and the places that you take yourself and the aspirations that you have and, and it is within your power as an individual. Just like my mom [Proteone Marie Alexandria Malveaux] said to me when I brought those grades home if that's the choice you wanna make, that's the life you wanna live, that's your choice. Now I could have chose to keep on hanging out and, you know, hanging in the cafeteria and playing cards or I could choose to do something else. My hope and my aspiration is that we make different choices and that we control the controllables a lot better than we have because I don't delude myself that racism will go away. Do I wish that it would, yes. Do I believe that it will, no, and so my hope and aspiration is that we function as a race a little bit more effectively for the, for the good of ourselves and for the good of our generations to come. I, I hope that we believe in legacy and we believe in creating legacies and we believe in investing in ourselves and investing in our children and whether they are our own or somebody else's and investing in our communities and investing in our future. Those are the hopes that I have. The concerns that I have is that we'll get lost in the shuffle. The concerns that I have is that we won't do it. Just as I have my hope, my concern is that we'll lose sight of the struggle. And the one thing while, you know, I was on the tail end of the Civil Rights [Movement], so not really old enough to have it in my blood, but come by it honestly through having parents and a big sister [HM Julianne Malveaux] who have it in their blood. But, one of my concerns is that struggle is something that we don't see the beauty in, and you can read all the, the poetry and listen to the real rap of the '60s [1960s] and hear the, and hear about the beauty of the struggle, and there is beauty in the struggle because the beauty of it is what comes out on the other side of it, and the beauty of it is, you know, what, what you create out of, out of a struggle, and, and what you're able to accomplish through going through a struggle. So, my concern is that because we still are in a struggle, my concern is that we, we will give up on struggling, and my concern is that we won't see the beauty in the struggle and we won't, we won't try to deal with it. Speaker 1: There's an old, I think an old black spiritual that goes when we will get paid for the work we've done ['When Will We Be Paid for the Work We've Done?']. You know I, there's, I mean, and, I think kids are saying now when do I get paid, you know. But-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, and that, and that's the hard thing because you know you may not get paid. You get paid in the generation coming behind you. You get paid-- Speaker 1: But will the struggle ever stop, the struggle will ever stop. Speaker 2: No it doesn't stop, but that's okay. I mean that's okay as long as your life is being improved and as long as the life of those coming behind you is improved and you know to have an expectation that it stops, that's, that's my concern and that's my fear. That's, you know, is that to have an expectation that it will stop is the wrong expectation to have and so you give up and say well, you know I'm tired of struggling, so, you know, yeah I'm gonna sit on the doles or do whatever or I'm just gonna work for myself and be more concerned about my little part of the world, and I'm not gonna be concerned about nobody else's part of the world. And I see that happening more with people of my generation and people of generations coming behind me because we get so disconnected from the reality of the struggle, from the history of the struggle, from what the struggle is about and what we should be struggling for and it's not just about ourselves, it is about those around us. One of the things I think we learned growing up our household was always open in a sense that my mom was always bringing somebody into the household back from Mississippi to come, you know, help take care of us and then move on back. You know, Arthur Lee--Arthur Lee [ph.] who was like a brother to us came back from Mississippi after my mother had come back because, you know, he wanted, he wanted to be there and his cousin and her sis, and her brother came as well. There was very much a conscious effort to help others move forward. You see that in other cultures today, and I am not sure we have that value as strongly as our parents had that value. I don't see it as much around. I just don't see it as much. It doesn't mean it's not there. It just means I'm not seeing it. Story_ID: 174674 Speaker 1: Now what do you plan to do in the future? You're still young and you got all this-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm still, I'm still climbing mountains. I'm still slaying the dragons. Right now I'm, I'm doing some writing and I am shaping a course on strategic management of nonprofit organizations, which I hope to be delivering and teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. So I'm very much interested in taking my accomplishments and my learnings and, and the learnings from my mistakes forward and sharing that and helping to create a discipline around that. I'm, I'm keenly interested in corporate social responsibility. I've just gone on the board of University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California], my alumni, as one of the board of trustees. So, I'm looking forward to that. And, as I said I'm keenly focused on corporate social responsibility and going into that arena and trying to make sure that I can do my part in helping the companies that I would work with or the company that I would work with being a better corporate citizen, but being a better corporate citizen in a way in which they're very much engaged and very much participating in supporting the communities in which they work, in particular the communities in which I care about and the communities that are of interest to me. I believe there's a tremendous opportunity, which others have seen and have worked with but a tremendous opportunity in sharing the wealth, if you will, and having a stronger ethic around sharing and making sure that corporations that take out of communities give back to communities. So, I got, I got a few mountains to still climb and, and to move, and a few dragons still to slay. Story_ID: 174675 Speaker 1: And, and at this point though as you look back at everything and you've, you've had to struggle, you haven't had everything handed to you or anything really handed to you, I mean, but, what would you see as your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: What is my legacy? I think--what is my legacy? I think my legacy is a legacy of giving and sharing. I think a giving of my talents. I think my legacy is a le- legacy of building, building an organization and an institution [National Black MBA Association] that has a lot more meaning and a lot more positive impact on people's lives than it did before I got there, that there's something--I think my legacy is a legacy of creating something of substance that people can touch and feel and know that it's real. It's not rhetoric, it's not talk, it's not dreaming, it's not, you know, aspirations, but it, it is something real and something live and it is something making a difference in people's lives. Story_ID: 174676 Speaker 1: Okay, and finally this is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who was given a lot and lived up to the expectations to those who much is given, much is expected. I would like to be remembered that way. And I would like to be remembered as someone who either made it to the moon or is walking among the stars. Someone who gave 150 percent and probably achieved 99 (laughter). That's the way I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you sir..