 Story_ID: 10411 Speaker 1: K-E-R-R-Y, J-A-M-E-S, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L. Speaker 2: And I want you to state today's date and where we are and your profession. Speaker 1: Today's date is January 4, 19--whoa!--2001 and we are in my studio at 3828 S. Indiana Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]. I am a visual artist, primarily a painter, but I shoot video, film, do sculptural installations also. Speaker 2: Now, the other thing, let me have your birthday and birthplace. Speaker 1: I was born October 17, 1955 in Birmingham, Alabama. Story_ID: 10412 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food is smothered pork chops (chuckle). That's my favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color, green--dark green. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, summer. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation place? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation place, I don't take vacations so-- Speaker 1: How about favorite place in the world? Speaker 2: Given the places that I've been (chuckle), in one way I would say--can I hyphenate it? Can I make it two places in one? Speaker 1: Hm, mm (yes). Speaker 2: New York is one of my favorite places and I'd have to say New York and California. Only because and I say those only because in both of those places there are very significant things that have happened for me and in places that I enjoy. I enjoyed a lot of things that I did in. Although I've been elsewhere in the world, I enjoyed Italy too. Rome was exciting, but it's hard to pick a favorite place for me. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Actually one of my favorite phrases or favorite quotes is something that Cecil Taylor said once and it was in response to questions about how he understood--how he felt about the success he achieved. His line was, "Nobody asked me to do this." So that's my favorite, my favorite saying. Story_ID: 10413 Speaker 1: But I'd like you to give me your father's name and talk about him and what you know about his family and his background. Speaker 2: Well my father's name was James Marshall, which is--my middle name is James. About his family, I actually didn't know very much at all. My father's father left his family when he was three years old and so he actually never really knew his father. And for his whole life, actually never saw his father again, although they communicated with each other by mail periodically, from the time I was a child until his father died. But for some reason, they never found it necessary to actually see each other face to face. And I knew that that was a source of trauma in a way, for my father. Although he never expressed it openly, but I got a sense of it. I especially got a sense of it when he got a letter from a relative that his father had passed away. But, my father was raised by his mother and his uncle--my grandmother's brother, who is Uncle John in Birmingham [Alabama]. He had two brothers, one of whom ended up living in Chicago [Illinois]. His brother's name was William and then a younger brother named Calvin. And Calvin I knew--William I didn't know, because William left Birmingham when I was four years old, or at least he had left before then, but I only knew him around the time I was four years old, got to see him maybe once or twice when he come back to Birmingham for a visit. But he moved to Chicago when he was nineteen, after having gone to see his father who moved to Detroit [Michigan]; who had sent a train ticket for my grandmother to come to Detroit to visit him, but she didn't want to go, so she gave the ticket to her son. Said, "Look, here's a ticket to Detroit, why don't you go and see your father." But when he got to Detroit, stepped off the train, he said his father was waiting there at the station said, "What are you doing here. I didn't send a ticket for you, I sent a ticket for your mother. So you might as well get on the train and go on back home." And he said, "Well I didn't want to go back Birmingham, 'cause there was nothing going on there," so I told him, "Just give me a train ticket to Chicago." And he says, "I left, got on the train and went to Chicago, and been in Chicago ever since." So I saw--so that was a story he told me. So I hadn't seen him since I was four years old; had spoken to him maybe once or twice on the telephone, but when I drove from California to New York to do my residency at the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York], I stopped in Chicago to see him. And that was the first time I had seen him really, kind of as an adult, to know him. And he told me all of this, all of this then, how he ended up in Chicago. But that was my father's family. Now I knew my Uncle John, who's the man who raised my father and my grandmother, you know, because we lived nearby when we were in Birmingham, but didn't know a lot about him. Knew that his father--my father's father was an amateur photographer, because periodically he would send--my father would send photographs that he had taken, snapshots to Detroit and my grandfather would enlarge them and then send us back big prints. So he was this mysterious guy who sent big pictures back from Detroit was all I knew about him. Had only see one photograph of him the he sent to my father. Story_ID: 10414 Speaker 1: With your father [James Marshall], did he share any stories with you about growing up? He grew up in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: He grew up in Birmingham. But I actually didn't hear a lot from him about what it was like when he was growing up. I know that he didn't graduate--didn't finish high school, but went into the [U.S.] Army. Was in the Army during the Korean Conflict. Went overseas--he told stories about what it was like being in Germany, what it was like being in France in the Army, but even some of those stories were not all that in-depth or that detailed, so I knew some things about his, his youth. I know that when he came back from the Army, he went back to school to get his high school equivalency. Studied auto mechanics and things like automotive repair. So he had a pretty solid mechanical, a pretty good mechanical aptitude and I think that mechanical aptitude he had was something that I feel like I was the beneficiary of. I think there are a lot of things about the way my father approached a lot of things that I've incorporated or parts of who I am. One of the things, he had a sense that anything--he used to always tell me that, "You, you--that anything another person could do, you could do. There isn't another thing a human being can make that you can't also understand and be able to make yourself." And so that if you look at anything that a person put together, if you figure out how you can take it apart, then you can reassemble that same thing. And so he would alw-, he, he was (pauses) undeterred by how complicated anything seemed to be on the surface. And so he would take a stab at dismantling and repairing just about anything. And I think I adopted--I developed a character or a sense that there wasn't anything I couldn't do. And lot of that I think was because my father seemed to approach things like that. There didn't seem to be anything that he couldn't do or at least, wouldn't try to do. If you try to do it enough times, there's almost no way you're really gonna fail. I mean you eventually figure out how to make it work. So I think that's something that I learned from my father. I used to spend a lot of time with him working on cars, because that was something he liked to do. He also did--was a handyman around the house and did a lot of plumbing and stuff like that. So I always sort of watched him do things like that. And I think it was the first--my early interest in mechanical processes and things like that, I think came from the experiences I had with my father. As a person, he wasn't, he wasn't quite--he wasn't as expressive a person verbally. And I think some of the way he was, in that regard, is the way I am too. Neither he nor my mother [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] were really gregarious or particularly outgoing people. Story_ID: 10415 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your mother. I'd like to have her name and can you describe about her family life. Were they also from Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were also from Birmingham. Yeah, my mother's name was Ora. Ora Dee Marshall. Ora Dee Prentiss is her maiden name, but Ora Dee is her name. Yeah, her family, they all from Birmingham. Her family is originally from--at least her mother's family was originally from Scooba, Mississippi, which is a little town that was just on the border between Mississippi and Birmingham. Not Birmingham, but Mississippi and Alabama. When I was growing up, I knew my mother's mother and my great grandmother on my mother's side in ways that I didn't know any of the people on my father's side of the family. I knew my father's mother and my great uncle, his Uncle John, but I didn't know anything about many of the other or any of the other people on that side of the family. Now my mother had five sisters and all of them were in Birmingham at the time. One of whom, we lived across the street from when I was a child, her older sister and her husband. They had two children. They lived directly across the street from us when I was three, four, five, six years old, actually almost until we left Birmingham. So we had a closer relationship with my mother's family than we did with my father's family; partly because all of my father's siblings [William and Calvin Marshall] had dispersed from Birmingham early. Whenever family gatherings and things like that occurred, it was always around the family that was centered on my mother's side. We did spend--we seemed to spend a lot of time with them early on. Speaker 1: I was just asking about her growing up. Are there things that she shared with you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, I actually had talked with my mother more about those things. She talked a lot about what it was like living through the Depression. She talked about some of those things. Talked about what her mother and her grandmother did. They all, as a lot of families experienced, a lot of their parents worked as domestics. My mother's mother worked for a woman named Mrs. Britton and then almost everybody else in the family ended up working for that family too, so part-time and on the weekends and stuff like that. I actually remember when my mother worked for Mrs. Britton, going to pick my mother up from work with my father, which is kind of an interesting experience. You're taking a long ride to a neighborhood where there were bigger houses with greener lawns and things like that. She told us stories about things that happened in the houses that she worked--other people that she worked for. She told the story about a woman who had a pet monkey in the house and how the monkey had gotten out of the cage and got loose in the bedroom, tore up all the pillows and stuff, with their feathers and stuff flying all over the place. Just stuff like that. She talked about some of the problems they encountered growing up at the time--growing up in Birmingham at the time, where young black--where black people walking on the same side where whites were supposed to step off on the curb and let white people pass. She talked about things like that. Talked about how they subverted some of those rules and things too. A lot of stuff like that Speaker 1: Let me ask, how did you--did your parents ever tell you how they met? Speaker 2: I actually don't--my mother told me how they met, but I don't remember that story. I actually couldn't relay it in a way that would make it make sense. Story_ID: 10416 Speaker 1: I know you're the second oldest child, give me the names of your other siblings in order. Speaker 2: Well my older brother's name is Wayne. Then I'm second oldest. My brother and I were both born in October. He was born exactly a year and nine days ahead of me. His birthday's October 8th [1954]; mine's October 17th [1955]. I have a sister Jennifer who is six years younger than I am. Then my brother Travis who is probably five or six years younger than Jennifer and then my youngest sister's name is Valerie. She was born in California. Of the siblings in my family, my brother Wayne, myself, and by sister Jennifer were born in Birmingham [Alabama]. Travis and Valerie were born in Los Angeles [California]. Story_ID: 10417 Speaker 1: Are there other memories that you'd like to share with us about this sort of family life or things that sort of stand out. Speaker 2: Well a number of things that I think were, seemed significant in my memory of that time. It seems amazing to me sometimes that for a kid who left the place at eight years old, we seem to have crammed in a lot of living in that eight years. It certainly seemed like a different time where, as a five year old and six year old, a seven year old, we were out in the world in ways that I don't imagine five and six year olds to be in the world now. We went places on our own in a way that you just can't imagine kids going to places now. I mean, we were always--we lived in Ensley, which was a neighborhood of Birmingham [Alabama]. There were creeks and ditches and things like that where we used to run off as kids, you know, to collect tadpoles from the creeks and the ditches and things like that. We used to go into fields where--there was a mulberry tree in a field somewhere, not far from where we lived, to collect mulberries to bring home. My mother [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] would make a mulberry pie or something like that. But we did a lot of this stuff by ourselves, or me and my brother [Wayne Marshall] and a couple of other kids in the neighborhood. So there were a lot of things like that I remember. I remember walking to school. We went to Holy Family [School, Ensley, Alabama], which was a Catholic school. But going to school, going to kindergarten by ourselves, walking--it wasn't just around the corner necessarily. I also remember living across the street from my cousin, Jerome was his name, who was older, who was in school when we weren't in school. I remember being really impressed by him and the big cousin, going to school and having a book satchel and things like that. We used to go down to the corner when we knew he was getting out of school, to meet him on his way from school, so we could carry his book satchel home and things like that. That's the kind of stuff that was really important. It was really important having cousins, I think and relatives right across the street. So we were always back and forth across the street. Now the one thing that was interesting about the difference between our families in a way and I think I recognized some of this when I was a child even, was that their family was more solidly middle class than our family was. My Aunt Julia, my mother's oldest sister, was a nurse--she was a nurse at Holy Family Hospital [Ensley, Alabama]. Her husband Jerome worked in the steel mills, which was one of the best jobs you could get in Birmingham or probably in a lot of places at the time. So they had things that we didn't have. My mother really never worked full-time, not regularly and my father, when he had a job, was working in the kitchen at the VA [Veterans Administration] Hospital, which wasn't paying all that well, I don't think. So they seemed to have more things than we had. You know, he, my cousin Jerome had like all of the Army men and the cowboys and Indians and the jet planes and the trucks and the cars and all that stuff. So he had boxes of that stuff, but we got to play with it, because we were just right across the street. They had bicycles and things like that before we had bicycles. So it always seemed like they had more things than we did. So they were a little bit better off. They remained sort of solidly middle class and moved from--once they moved from Ensley into a house that they bought and owned on Bush Boulevard. It was always--it was a more solidly, middle class kind of life for them. So that was always something that I was aware of. Now the other thing you had to deal with when you have a relative who's a nurse and especially one who lives across the street from you, is that they always giving you treatments for things. You know, so annually we had to go across the street to get our shots for colds and things like that. We had to get our castor oil and things like that. That was always sort of the one drawback to having an aunt who was a nurse. We got a shot practically every year and didn't like it at all. Or when my mother was trying to give us some castor oil, she'd have to call my uncle from across the street to come and hold us down, you know, so she could give it to us. So that was the kind of--some of the stuff that I remember from those days. The other thing I remember is when where growing up as kids, there was one little white kid who lived in our neighborhood. His family owned the store that was on the corner of the block. It was where we used to play and hang out, you know, during the day, if my parents were at work or whenever we'd go out, we'd just end up down there. 'Cause we all had our tricycles and stuff like that. So we'd end up running in and out of the store and playing with this kid. So that's, I mean, that's a lot of what I remember as a child. Other things--I mean you--things happen. There are a lot of--I have vignettes of a lot of things that I remember from the time. Some violent and traumatic; some just the kinds of things that go on in a neighborhood. 'Cause when we (pauses)--you know, Birmingham, at least where we were in Ensley, was kind of on a flood plain in a way. And sometimes when the winds--when the rains got really heavy, the creek--and there was a creek that ran actually directly behind my grandmother's house--would overflow and there'd be some flooding in the streets. So I remember things like that. It was also--the South--that part of the South is also kind of a tornado area too. And so I remember one year when there was a tornado and it ripped up a fence post in the back of my aunt's house. I guess it was in their backyard. But at any rate, it came through the wall with this huge mound of concrete on the bottom of it and hit the washing machine. It pushed the wash-, my aunt and her daughter were standing in the back, in the pantry I guess it was, but this thing came through the wall, hit the washing machine and pushed the washing machine all the way up to where they were standing. So I remember stuff like that. Story_ID: 10418 Speaker 1: How did you end up going to Catholic School? Was your--were your parents part Catholic? Speaker 2: No, but--my parents weren't Catholic, but there was always this notion that Catholic school education was a better education than the public school education. And since my--both my cousins, the ones who lived across the street, both of them were in school at Holy Family [School, Ensley, Alabama]. They actually ended up going to school at Holy Family from kindergarten all the way through high school. So I don't know, maybe my mother's [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] doing what her sister was doing, so she put us in school there too. So we ended up going to Holy Family until--I stayed at Holy Family until second grade and when we moved to--when we left to go to California. Speaker 1: So tell the story about the California. You know, how you--you know you were starting to tell it, but tell that story. Speaker 2: But let me tell you one thing about Holy Family that I think is relevant to who I am now and to how I became an artist. Because I--there are a couple of things about, about that experience. We weren't Catholics. We weren't anything, basically. My aunt, my aunt was Baptist and so we had this, this strange sort of combination of being in school at the Catholic school, but going to Baptist churches on Sunday. You know, having the experience of going to Mass at the Catholic school, but then going to the Baptist church again on Sunday. So we would do both of those things simultaneously. But, when I was in kindergarten at Holy Family, I had an experience that really defined who I was going to be for the rest of my life. It was an experience that helped me decide that being an artist was what I wanted to do with my life. And my kindergarten teacher kept a scrapbook of images that she'd clip from magazines, Christmas cards, postcards from all over the place, ads from newspapers and magazines and things. So she kept this scrapbook of all of these images. And it was this book that she let the kid who was the best behaved that day, look at, while everybody else was taking their nap after recess. And it really was looking at that book--the day I got a chance to look at that book changed my life. It made me know that I wanted to make pictures like the pictures I was looking at in that book, to make pictures that affected other people the way those pictures were affecting me. I decided right then, there, that that's what I wanted to do. I mean, even at the time, I didn't know it was called being an artist, but I knew that some of those pictures looked like they had been drawn by people, as some of them were obviously photographs that had been taken. And so I know that's what I want to do. I want to make pictures like those, that affect other people the way these pictures are affecting me. And literally, from that moment, I'd been completely focused on becoming a visual artist. And most of it, almost all of it actually, I can locate directly in that experience, in that moment, on that one day, because I don't remember ever seeing the scrapbook again after that, but that changed me. Speaker 1: That's amazing. This was in kindergarten. Speaker 2: This was in kindergarten, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you--were you drawing--did you remember drawing before that period? Speaker 2: I don't remember drawing before then or even thinking about it in any particular way. But what we used to do, my brother [Wayne Marshall] and I at a point, was to entertain ourselves, we used to draw with each other. Some of this comes from having seen the toys that my cousin had, the airplanes and things like that. So we would draw warfare with each other. So we would draw--he would draw an army; I would draw an army. I would draw a man to shoot his man; he would draw another man to shoot mine. He would draw an airplane to drop a bomb on my army. So I would draw a plane to shoot his plane down. So we were drawing things like that, to keep ourselves--to entertain ourselves. It was just the kind of fun we had. So I think some of that, all of those things coming together at the time, I think led to the developments that, that made me the artist I am. Now a whole series of other events had to take place later on. But the other thing that I think was really important was that if you look at the way Catholic churches are organized liturgically and also the spectacle of a lot of Catholic churches with these big stained glass windows, all these statues of saints and things; all this gold, all this silver; all this--the pomp and circumstance. I mean, I was really captivated by that stuff. When I was in--like you couldn't go to Mass until you were second--you had to be in second grade to get to go to Mass. So kindergarten, first grade you didn't, but they would let you look in the door sometimes. Your class would go by and they would let you look in. And when you look in and you see how amazing that space was, I mean how the--how high the ceilings were; how clean it was; how much gold it was; how much silver; how much, you know, the lace and all that stuff on the altar. Well, I was just completely impressed and captivated by it. So having that image in my mind and then the images in the scrapbook, seeing that this whole visual world seemed to suggest so many possibilities that I wanted to be a part of it. I mean, I even wanted to be an altar boy, not because I was all that interested in the religion per se, but I wanted to wear that outfit they got to wear, or I wanted to be the guy walking down the aisle with that incense ball, you know, swinging that thing or have that candle snuffer. All that stuff looked so cool to me at the time. I wanted to do it, to be one of those, to be one of those people, just to be a part of it, the pageantry of the whole thing. Story_ID: 10419 Speaker 1: The elementary schools seemed to be all--it was all--I only know black students there. There were only black kids there. But it was right across the--Holy Family [School, Ensley, Alabama]--the high school was predominately was almost all white. It was just down the street, actually and not and actually not far from where my mother's [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] mother lived. So we'd sit out on the porch and all the white kids from the high school would be going on their way home, passing by my grandmother's house. Speaker 2: Now back to the question about what images you saw there and how they--you know, what were those images and how they--? Speaker 1: Well a lot of the image, I think I was mentioning there were Christmas cards, Valentine's [Day] cards, all kinds of holiday cards. There were ads from 'National Geographic' magazine, things like that. It was all kinds of things like wild animals, scenes from places around the world. You have images from Japan; images from China; images from Africa; images from Greece and Rome. You know there's suits of armor, horses, and zebras and giraffes. All of that kind of stuff. I mean, it was stuff that you--there was (pauses)--things that were so extraordinary when it comes to the things you could see in your neighborhood, you know, the things you experience every day. I mean, it created--they all seemed to be really fantastic things, that were so unusual. And I think it was part of that, that really captivated me the most. Say even if you take images from Christmas cards, well I mean, that's a fantasy land that's represented in those. And there was something about being swept away, being transported by the magic that those images created that I found really satisfying, you know, thrilling even. And it had its--I'm sure it's directly responsible for me having taken an interest in fairy tales, mythology, science fiction, things like that which became a really important avenue of transcendent experience, in a way, for me. Anything that so takes you outside of--beyond the ordinary was something that I became really fascinated by. Actually spent a lot of time studying children's literature when I got into college [Otis Art Institute, later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California], had wanted to be a children's book illustrator. And to be a children's book illustrator for the same reasons that I was saying I wanted to become an artist because there was something about having access to this imaginative or imaginary realm that seemed key to me. Maybe it seemed key to me as a young black kid in Birmingham [Alabama], because the reality of our lives in Birmingham seemed compromised somehow. I'm not saying that because I understood that there was a lot of prejudice and discrimination at the time, because as a child, even in a place like Birmingham where the world is still, it's just an amazing world. You're seeing so many things for the first time. Almost all of the things you experience are phenomenal to you. Just like going down to the creek is a phenomenal experience. You have no real sense of how the lives of your parents are restricted by the kinds of discriminatory laws and behaviors that exist in an environment. You don't have any sense of that as a child, per se. And so when I saw my parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall], I never saw them as people who were deprived of anything. They were just my parents and the experience that I was living didn't seem to be an experience of deprivation, because we had all of the things that we wanted. And if we didn't have it ourselves, well we'd go across the street and my cousin has it. It's like, well they had all the toys and stuff. Well our Christmases were not impoverished Christmases. We got stuff and it was stuff that we wanted. So it's that kind of imagery, that kind of fantastic imagery was something that I found a way of experiencing things that were more than mundane, more than the everyday. I think that was what really captivated me by it. Having a life of the imagination was really attractive to me. Story_ID: 10420 Speaker 1: I was just wondering what kind of child you were. Speaker 2: I think I was definitely a daydreamer. And I think I was always (pauses)--I consider myself--I would say I was a loner in a way and not just a loner, but an observer. I think, although we did a lot of insane things when I was a kid. Insane things just to see, you did things just to see what would happen, sometimes. We would say, "Well you get on top of a house and jump off," kinda to see what that was like. So we used to experiment with ourselves. "Well, how high can you go up on something and jump off without getting hurt?" (laughs) So we did stupid stuff like that. But the thing is that since my and this is since my brother [Wayne Marshall] was a year and nine days older than I, somehow or other, that one year was--created a vast difference between us. In the sense that--well we were close enough together to seem to be alike, but he had one year's experience over me all the time. So he had always done some things before I was in a position to do them. So I ended up following him a lot. So that all of the peop-, most of my friends as kids, were actually his friends who were all older than me. So it's like they were always a step or two ahead of me. I was always a half a step behind. I think I always felt myself being a half a step behind because if we were running to the treehouse to climb up, I was always the last one to climb up. That's the last one to climb up or the smallest one in the group. I could be pushed around a little bit. So I always felt a certain amount of tension between myself as a younger, smaller, slower kid; in relationship to my brother who was bigger and a little faster and stronger than I was. So being in that position, I felt like it, in some ways I felt like I could never compete and never catch up. So I always had to find another way around things to be a participant. So I ended up watching a lot of what other people did, to try to get a sense of how things ought to be done, so that then I could find my way to participate in some of those things. So that's, so I think I developed this personality where I would watch a lot of what people did first and then see how I could put myself in it later. Because I don't think I ever felt like I could approach any of those things directly at the time, because I would always come up against the strength they had, the speed they had, I would always come up a little short. So I had to--I was more strategic about the kinds of things I did than they did. I mean, they would just kind of do stuff. I remember, I had (pauses) I wouldn't say that I was particularly fragile at the time, but I had, I guess maybe because I was trying to keep up with what they were doing. I had actually some traumatic experiences when I was growing up. So I got hurt a couple of times. I mean I broke--when I was five years old, I broke my arm. But I broke my arm swinging on the clothesline, because they were swinging on the clothesline. And so they--but then it was one of those things where you say, "Okay well, you can't swing so hard by yourself," so you get somebody to push you, to get you to swing, to see if you could swing flat out. This bigger kid was pushing me, so I could swing and as I swung flat out, of course, I couldn't hold on. So my hands came loose from the clothesline--pfft--went out and broke my arm. So now I'm incapacitated. Another incident where I'm chasing behind my brother and all his friends and we running to this treehouse they had. So they all get up in there first and I'm trying to climb up behind them. But while I'm trying to climb up, they're dropping matches, lit matches on me, from above. (laughs) So then I dropped down out of the tree, but I fall down on a nail that's sticking up in a board. So now they carry me home 'cause I've got this big nail stuck in the bottom of my foot. So it's like stuff, those are the kinds of experiences I had trying to keep up with the older kids. This is one of the things that helped me develop this sense that, "Well maybe I won't be able to compete with them directly, but I have to find a more indirect way of doing it." And in some ways this kind of--through drawing and through working through your imagination in your mind, you can figure out all of these ways to--there were ways to excel. There were ways to do things in your mind, that you might not be able to do with your body. So I think some of that had a lot to do with the way I developed as a person; as a personality also. It had a lot to do, I think, with the amount of--the intensity of focus I was able to bring to trying to develop myself as an artist, as a person who worked through the imagination, creating images and things like that. Story_ID: 10421 Speaker 1: I want to go to California, the move and how that occurred and, you know, what--how that world differed there from here in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Well (pauses)--going--Well here's the thing. Let's see in Birmingham we were actual--I'll tell one more story and this will lead us directly to--because we lived, when we lived across the street from my relatives, we were there until I was about seven; six or seven. Then we moved from that house into a housing project they built in Birmingham. So now we were no longer across the street from my cousin the way we were before. That move we made was just prior to the family getting ready to move from Birmingham to California. So early in 1963, my father [James Marshall] left to go to California because one of my mother's [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] sisters had already gone ahead, had been there for a few years already. Then we went to establish a household to get a job and then he would send for my mother to come later. At the time, another of my mother's sister's family was also going to move to California. So we had planned to move, to all go together. We had train tickets actually to go on the same train from Birmingham to California. So we were all excited about that. We all made preparations and when we got to the train station, there was some complication. They had oversold the train, so there was no room for us on the train. So my mother's sister and her kids went on ahead and we ended up having to stay for another week and a half or two, I think. We ended up staying back again with the cousins who lived across the street. But the train ride was actually an amazing experience. A three and a half day train ride from Birmingham to California. You know, you've got a woman with three kids; two boys and a daughter, a girl who's one and a half or two years old. It was really an interesting adventure because this was in--part of another wave of migration I guess out West from people from the South. So there were a lot of other people on the train and there was a lot of other kids on the train. So we actually had all these kids you can kind of hang out with. And we met a bunch of kids who we'd stay up late at night telling jokes with and stuff while we were on the train. And then there were kids who would tell you these stories about, "Well, when you go to Texas--when you go through Texas in the middle of the night there were these giant lizards out there. If you're not careful, they'll attack the train," and stuff like that. So we're sitting up late at night looking out the window, once we got through Texas, trying to see if there were some monsters out there. (chuckle) But getting to California was--I mean it was--the first thing you notice when you get to California though for us, was that the light was so different. Not only was it different, it was bright; but it hurt your eyes. It's like, when we got to California your eyes immediately started running, like tearing up. Part of it--it was because of the smog in the air that we weren't used to there. So that was strange. Then you see in these strange--not only was the light strange, but the terrain was spread out in a way that was unfamiliar. These strange palm trees, these tall skinny things that were really, really high. So that was odd to us when we arrived. When we got there, we also met my cousin Pam, who is the daughter of my mother's sister, who had--my father had gone out to stay with, whom we had never met before actually. So when my father came to pick us up at the train station, Pam was in the car. So here's this strange girl that we didn't know, who was a relative of ours, who we hadn't met. So we were a little--there was a little bit of trepidation, you know, about meeting this new person and being in this new place. But there was some excitement about seeing this strange town. We were excited about that. The drive from the train station was really quite an experience for us. So that was the thing that--initially the things that--the initial reaction we had to Los Angeles [California], that it was just a strange, unusual place, with strange vegetation. And we moved--we were living in--my father had gotten a place in the Nickerson Gardens [Housing] Projects in Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles]. So that's where we went when we got there. It was just--it just seemed to vast in a way. It certainly seemed more modern than Birmingham. Because I--when we were in Birmingham, my father's mother lived in a set of courts they called 'Court P'. It's a set of houses, like bungalows that are together, in which she didn't have--there was no running water, no hot water. We're boiling water on the stove to put in a tub, to take a bath or to wash and things like that. So--and the bathrooms, there were bathrooms outside. So that's part of what I was used to, even though we had indoor plumbing at the house we lived in, but it just seemed--it wasn't unusual to go to a place that didn't have inside plumbing and then come into California where almost all of the houses just looked so much more modern than any of the things we had seen before. And Nickerson Garden Projects, the project we lived in was right next to the field and the gymnasium in there. So as a playground, in the sense you had like three hundred yards of grass out there that you can run around in. There seemed to be more space between the houses and stuff like that. It was all different and everything was low, too. So that was how we felt when we first got to California. Now this was in the late summer, so we had that part of the summer to adjust some before school started. You're always a little apprehensive about everything, especially as a child and starting school in a new place. You know, being in a town where you don't know anybody. So there was a little bit of anxiety about what it was going to be like to start school in California. Story_ID: 10422 Speaker 1: What school were you attending then? Speaker 2: I went to 111th Street School [later Lovelia Flournoy Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] when we got to California. I was in second grade and we stayed in--we moved there in '63 [1963]. We were out of Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles] by 1965. When I was in third grade, we move to, up into South Central L.A. [Los Angeles]. Now the one thing I would say about--so quickly as a kid, you kind of get into the life of the neighborhood, especially at that age, at eight years old, nine years old. You kind of get into the life of the neighborhood. So we met a lot of people really fast and we had friends and ran around. It was the first place that we also encountered gangs. There was an incident where--as kids, we used to play with slingshots, like a lot of other kids do, shooting at bottles and things like that. But there were some other kids who lived on the other side of the field, some bigger kids. There were supposed to be a gang, I guess, but we didn't know much about that. But we were out one day and the group of these kids came after us, our little group of kids. We were all much smaller. So everybody ran and they chased us around, but they caught my brother [Wayne Marshall] and beat my brother up. So that was the first time that we had ever experienced any violence like that sort of directly. And it changed, it changed a couple of things, I think, about--I don't know, about--it changed some things about us--about my relationship to my brother too. Partly because, I mean, I got away, he got caught. And then it actually--and then he became actually a tougher kid after that, than I did. I was sort of, I never became this kind of tough kid, because I was always sort of on the periphery of violence and things like that. This is a part of some kind of observer character that I think I developed early on. So then I actually became--I sort of developed--after that incident where it seemed like I couldn't do anything to help my brother. I became even more intensely kind of a watcher, just to kind of observe it and to look in--I was sort of looking out in a way, looking out for him to make sure nothing--just sort of seeing what was happening, what was going to happen, make sure nothing happened to him. Or even if there wasn't anything I could do, that I would at least know what was going on, so that I would be able to tell somebody. Speaker 1: How did you change your relationship with him? You said it changed your relationship with him. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think some distance, we started--some distance started to open up between us. It has something to do with this whole idea of becoming a tougher kind of person or a different kind of a person or experiencing things, experiencing things more directly than I do. I mean, where I was sort of always looking at things sort of from the outside, he was a little bit more on the inside. So I think that's--so he went out more. He actually became a lot more--he was a lot more outgoing all along, but in some ways, I think he became more so after that. And I think I--in some ways had--I became a little bit more withdrawn after that. So it opened up this space between us, where we actually didn't have (pauses)--there was less and less that we were experiencing together from--it seemed, from that point on. Speaker 1: And what ages were you at that point? Speaker 2: We were eight and nine at that time. Story_ID: 10423 Speaker 1: So you moved to South Central L.A. [Los Angeles]. Is that where you lived until you were in high school [at Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California]? Is that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in--we moved up to South Central L.A. in '65 [1965] and I stayed in South Central L.A. until basically until I got to college [Otis Art Institute, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Now you hear a lot of stories about growing up, how was that as a place to grow up? Speaker 2: Well and the thing is, it's like any other place. There's a completely different perspective on the social situation that children are in and the situation their parent's are in. If we go back to the Birmingham [Alabama] experiences, I didn't have a clue to what was going on at Birmingham in 1963. My parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] did, but they didn't talk about it to us at the time. Now the reasons--what reasons would my father have for leaving Birmingham to go to California? Well one of which is working in the kitchen at the VA [Veterans Administration] Hospital make a dollar and twenty-some cents an hour or something like that, you know, as opposed to a relative, my aunt [Julia] as a nurse and my uncle [Jerome] as a steel mill worker making a really solid income. There were fewer opportunities. So for my father, this was one of the things in Birmingham, if you didn't get a job at the steel mills, there weren't a lot of opportunities; there weren't a lot of avenues to the middle class from that. So now my father, not being a high school graduate, so to having a high school equivalency, not being able to get a job at the steel mill, working in the kitchen, you know, just didn't seem to be--there didn't seem to be much of a future there. So he left to go to California for that. Now as a kid, I didn't have any sense of what they might have been struggling with economically or socially. Same thing going to California, as a kid you're really trying to negotiate your generational milieu. You're trying to get along with the other kids in the neighborhood. You're trying to avoid the ones who are trouble and find some that you can have some common ground with. And then just get your work done in school, because that's your job at the time and do whatever, do all the other stuff your parents tell you to do, your chores and things. So that's what we were doing. So when we moved from Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles] to South Central, you know, it was just another period of readjusting to a new neighborhood and a new set of people in the neighborhood. It was more comfortable then. Well in some ways, I can't say that it was more comfortable than the projects were, because at the time, in 1963 when we moved to the Nickerson Garden Projects, I mean, they were pretty idyllic in a way. There were a lot of wonderful things going on out there. We lived next to the gymnasium where you can go in and play--they had a office and a rec [recreation] room and things where you could, if you lived in the projects, you can go in and check out toys and keep them for a week at a time. They had a warehouse like full of toys and you go an pick the things you wanted. You give them your address and you take it home for a week and then you bring it back the next week. So you get games, books, toys, baseball bats, gloves, all of that stuff, you can just go and get it. So you didn't have to buy any of that stuff, but you could still have access to it. So it was really kind of a--an interesting place. When we got--when we moved to South Central, we moved into a house with a front yard and a back yard and a neighborhood. It was rented from a black man who owned it, who had a barbershop. Mr. Walker was his name. He had a barbershop. His brother lived in the house that was in back of ours and Mr. Walker would come and cut--the landlord, would come and cut the grass every two weeks. My brother [Wayne Marshall] and I would help him rake up the grass and edge and stuff like that and he would pay us a few dollars to do it. Since he had a barbershop, he also invited us to come over, taught us how to shine shoes. So we can come over to his barbershop and sweep up the hair after he made cuttings and then, perhaps shine the patrons shoes and make a little extra money. So he gave us a job in a way. So that was what it was like when we moved to South Central. But it just was a bigger neighborhood, less institutional. The houses were much different and there were a lot more kids in the neighborhood too that we eventually came to know. Story_ID: 10424 Speaker 1: I started school at 49th Street Elementary School [Los Angeles, California]. We lived on 48th Street, 48th and McKinley [Avenue], so I started school at 49th Street Elementary School, which was off 49th and McKinley in third grade. My third grade teacher was a woman named Mrs. Foley, who became an important figure in my development as an artist too, because she was the teacher who was in charge of doing all the bulletin board decorations and things for holidays. I used to spend--since I seemed to have an interest in drawing and things like that, she would always ask me if I wanted to help her do that stuff. So I'd stay after school a lot of times and help her do the Valentine's Day bulletin board and the Thanksgiving bulletin board. And she showed me a lot of things. Once we'd finish working on things, she would show me things, 'cause she had wanted to be a painter--liked painting flowers. And so she would teach me how to paint daisies and how to paint pansies and what kind of--how to mix the color to do it, how to handle the brush and things like that. So she was really an important person for me. And since there didn't seem to be a lot of other kids who were interested the way I was, you could say in some ways, I was obsessed. So even when I graduated from her class, into fourth grade and into fifth grade, she would still ask me to come back after school and help her. And I remember during that whole time that I was in school, at 49th Street School, there was only me and one other kid who seemed interested enough in art--to always be there when she needed some help with any of those bulletin boards. And we were the two that she always asked for a drawing or for something, when it came time to make those things. Story_ID: 10425 Speaker 1: My mother actually knew the mother of one of the girls who was killed [during the Watt's riots of 1965, Los Angeles, California], but they didn't--they just didn't talk about it to us. I don't know if they talked about it to amongst themselves. I think they had to have been talking about it, but they didn't talk about it to us. So and that was that summer, that was that police dogs and water hose summer too, so all of that stuff was going on. And--I know my mother later on told me--she had gone to hear [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] at a rally once, but they weren't activists; they weren't involved in that way. Story_ID: 10426 Speaker 1: You were talking about this--you know, that you were with this kid [at 49th Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], you can't remember--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, I can't remember what his name was, but we were both obsessed with drawing. So much so that we had, had--a certain point we became obsessed with tracing things. Not just drawing things, but tracing then things because we had discovered that those little sheets of toilet paper they had in the dispensers in the bathroom made great tracing paper and you can get that free. So he and I used to excuse ourselves to go to the bathroom periodically and we would go in and load up our pockets with those little toilet paper squares. And you'd come back and you'd sort of hide behind your history book and trace images from the geography book and the history book and stuff like that. So we actually became kind of obsessed with not just with tracing, but acquiring the material. So you see, you can take a hairpin and you can pick the lock on those toilet paper dispensers pretty easily. So we would go to the bathroom and we would come back with stacks of toilet paper like this, in our pockets, sticking out like that. We would sit around and we would trace these images out in history books and then compare them with each other. "Oh, look at this one I did." "I got the suit of armor and stuff." So we were doing stuff like that. The other thing that was interesting back in those days, and this was when I got to 49th Street School, at the end of the year the teachers would clean out the closets and they would get rid of a lot of the old workbooks and get rid of the old assignments and stuff that they might not be using again next year. So they would occasionally have some kids help them with that. For me, it was a gold mine, because you'd come home from school with stacks and stacks of paper, you know. That was all--I got into this mode where I was into accumulating materials. Materials that I could work with. So kids used to make--we used to make paper airplanes by the hundreds and stuff. So you'd get all these workbooks that had perforated pages that you could tear out and stuff. And we'd just get--collect that stuff, so we can make airplanes and all kinds of folded paper crafts and stuff like that out of--and then get blank paper that you could draw on. Then you get these old boxes of broken crayons and things like that, so you could accumulate a lot of art supplies at the end of the school year for the summer and you'd have the stuff to take you through the summer to work with. So I became obsessed with collecting materials like that too. But when I was at 49th Street School and I think it's around fourth grade probably when they first take you to the library. They introduce you to the library and they teach you how to use the card catalog and the Dewey Decimal System and all that stuff, so you can find books. But going to the library--you know, and I saw in the library that they had this section of art books and literally--I actually ended up never using the card catalog really to find anything in the library. I just went into the library and I just walked down the stacks and looked at every single book that was in there. In the art books, I literally looked at every single book in the art section of the library. As a result of that, I got this sense really early on of just how vast and how varied the possibilities in the art--in making art was; where you can see all of these things from every part of the world, from every era, up to the moment, by all kinds of people. I just became so captivated by it. I actually thought of spending a lot of time in the library and end up checking out practically every book they had, trying to do all kind of things. Learning how to do Japanese brush painting; trying to do, checking out books on cartooning and stuff like that; just trying to learn how to do all those things. So I was always into books at that point, once I became familiar with the library. First you get the library at school, then they take you down to the public library on a field trip. Then once you go to the public library, then you can get a library card. So I'm taking whatever the maximum was all the time, at that point. Because I discovered that in the library, you can find out how to do anything you wanted to know how to do. So I became obsessed with acquiring information that would enable you to do things that you couldn't at the time. So I became really kind of obsessed with knowing how to get things done. So that was largely my, a part of my experience there. Speaker 1: Did you have art classes? Later? Speaker 2: Well not in elem--in elementary school you had art periods where you did art things. But it was also in elementary school that I became acquainted with comic books, especially by fifth grade. The degree to which I was obsessed with things can be demonstrated and the degree to which I, as a loner, a person who--at a certain point I became so--I was so determined to do what I wanted to do, to get the information that I wanted to do, that I would do just about about anything and I would do it all by myself. There weren't a lot of kids who were interested in art. That one guy that I was telling you about was one of the few people that I knew when I was in school, who seemed sort of as interested in art as I was, but he wasn't quite as obsessed as I was. I was truly obsessed and because I was--because there were few partners to play that art game with, for me, I was doing it alone a lot. And so being alone doing it just didn't seem to--wasn't that big a deal for me. It wasn't an issue. I'd really gotten used to it. So I would do anything by myself, even at the time. So I was frequently in the library by myself, you know, 'cause there were few people who were going and especially interested in what I was interested in. But I'd gone with my brother [Wayne Marshall] and I and another guy who knew about this store. I think this guy's name was Louis Jones who was a friend of ours. He had found out about this used magazine store that was in Huntington Park. We lived in South Central in L.A. [Los Angeles], but Huntington Park was about fifteen miles southeast of where we were. So he told us about this store where you can find early editions, early issues of these Marvel [Entertainment, Inc.] comics and we had become obsessed with collecting Marvel comics. So we were trying to collect the whole set from number one, all the way, so you had to find some store that sold back issues. He found this place and he said, "They got these great back issues." So we all went on our bicycles one day to this store and it did have really some interesting stuff, you know. But true to form in some ways, I was taking things one step further than any sane kid should have been taking it at the time. So one day, I had to make sure that I was able to get access to these books before other people did sometimes. I left school--I may have been in fourth grade, may have been fifth grade, but I think it was probably closer to fourth grade; but after lunch I hid out on the school grounds after lunch, when everybody else went back to class. I climbed the fence and I walked the fifteen miles to Huntington Park. I didn't have any idea of where I was going. Had no idea, but I wanted to get back to that store and I wanted to get back to the store by myself, so there wouldn't be any other people to compete with to get these comic books. So I climbed the fence. I didn't go back to class after lunch and I walked to--I knew the streets that we had gone down, but I didn't know exactly how far it was going. So I ended up walking and I got to this store probably about four in the afternoon and I waited and I bought some comic books. I had my money with my allowance and everything, I bought these comic books. Then I had to walk back home. So I didn't get back home until 8:30 [P.M.] (chuckle), almost 9:00 o'clock that night. Then I had to figure out some way to explain where I was because I knew my parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] were going to be asking where I had been all day. I couldn't come in with the comic books, because then she would suspect where I was. I had to leave the comic books outside in the bushes and then I come in and figure out a way to explain to my mother where I had been all day long, because like school let out at 3:00 [o'clock P.M.]--I'm coming in at almost nine. I don't know what I made up, some crazy story about staying after school to do something. Then apparently it worked or something, but then, like I had to leave the comic books out there over night because I couldn't go out and get them until in the morning because otherwise, she would have known that I had left them out there. So anyway, they got damaged because the dew fell on them, so they got wet. But anyway, it just sort of demonstrates in a way the level of obsession I had achieved towards not only getting information about things, but acquiring things that I felt were important to me or significant to me. In particular, significant to my development as an artist. I really--we were copying these characters from Marvel comics and they seemed to represent the epitome of what could be done in cartoon drawing or character drawing. I wanted, not only wanted to be able to do it, but I wanted to possess it. At that point, I would do anything to get it. The same way in being connected with the arts in some way; I would do almost anything. Here we are still in like stacks of toilet paper out of the toilet paper dispenses, so you'd have material to trace pictures with and stuff like that. Story_ID: 10427 Speaker 1: In school, were you a good student or were you more--was this whole thing your wanting to read and draw and all of that, something that pretty much took you through your school year? Speaker 2: Well it became--that was the dominant interest in my whole life at that point; being able to do this really well; to do it to the degree that people who I'd seen in books were doing it. I was lucky enough to have a pretty good aptitude for things. I learned well. My brother [Wayne Marshall] and I were both reading before we went to school. So we started, my mother [Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall], when we were in Birmingham [Alabama] my mother was getting books and things. People, this is when people were coming through door to door selling encyclopedias and things. Now we never got the encyclopedias because they were expensive back then, but you could get these other supplemental books, supplementary books and things. So we had this book called 'The Children's Guide to Knowledge' and they were books of fairy tales and things like that. Then my cousin [Jerome] across the street had a lot of the Dr. Seuss [Theodor Seuss Geisel] books. Then my mother took a subscription to some of these Dr. Seuss books too. So before I started kindergarten, we were already reading. My mother used to read to us and then my cousin and stuff like that. So we were already kind of in there. So I had a pretty--learning wasn't difficult for me. So I didn't have to really try hard and I didn't really try all that hard. I was not a good student in the sense that I studied a lot. I did my homework the night before like everybody else, like a lot of people I would say, not like everybody else, but I did my homework the night before, sometimes in class. I always did really well on tests without having to study. I didn't spend a lot of time--somehow I never developed good study habits because some of it seemed to come just easy enough. In some ways I was doing--I did enough to get by when I was in school, just enough to get by. The things that I was most interested in, I spent a lot of my time focus on just those things. I think I, going through some of the experiences I talked about earlier as a young kid in Birmingham and my father's [James Marshall] approach to learning how to do things. I developed a pretty independent sense of myself and what I was able to do and what I could acquire on my own and that stayed with me all my life. Even, like if I look at my experiences through high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California]--I think, I learned how to make the school system work the way I wanted it to work, rather than following the program that was already set out and established. I had set it up so that when I, in my senior year of high school, I only had four classes. I left school at lunch because I structured it so that I could--I went to summer school a couple of times and took all of the academic requirements I needed to, so that in my last year I could do all the things I wanted to do. So I had two drafting classes, an art class and one academic class in the senior year that I graduated. Then I was leaving a half a day almost, while everybody else was in school for the rest of the day. So I learned that you can makes things work the way you wanted them to work kind of early. I never saw a counselor once when I was in high school. In some ways that was a handicap for me, because what I had encountered the Otis Art Institute [later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] and decided I wanted to go to school there. If I had known you couldn't go to school as a freshman at Otis, straight out of high school, I would have known that you had to do two years of junior college someplace else and transfer. You had to do two years of college somewhere else and transfer into the junior. I would have known that before the last day of school, but I had this vision in my head that when I graduate from school, I was just going to go straight to Otis Art Institute. If I had spoken to a counselor sooner, I would have known better. But I just thought, you go to school, you take all the classes that are interesting to you. You take the ones you have to and then you take the ones that are interesting to you. But mostly, you're interested in taking the ones that are interesting to you. Story_ID: 10428 Speaker 1: What were your parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] saying about your--this whole focus on arts during that time? Speaker 2: Well the thing, I was left alone pretty much to do it the--to do what I wanted to do. I wasn't given any particular encouragement to do it, nor was I discouraged in any way from exploring it. My mother would come with my from time to time if I was in a competition and I had won an award. 'Operation Bootstrap' [a Los Angeles, California manufacturing venture] was going on in L.A. [Los Angeles] back in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. I won a second prize at a competition, art contest that 'Operation Bootstrap' did and my mother came with me to the ceremony. So she was like a lot of mothers. She was there for open houses and PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] and things like that. So there was no discouragement, but no particular encouragement. We were given a lot of things that kids growing up at the time were given. We took piano lessons because we wanted to for a short time until we got tired of it. We had a piano in the house. Now my mother--I never got a chance to explain some of the things about my mother and this is where there are similarities between my mother and my father in two ways. My father was not a very gregarious or outgoing person, not very talkative. My mother neither. My mother you could say, is very shy, sort of withdrawn kind of person, but very pleasant. But they were both ambitious in a way. I mean, they both had interesting interests for, you would say, well for people who lived in South Central [Los Angeles] I guess or for people who lived in Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles]. Now my mother's ambition had always been to be a singer or a songwriter. My father collected fine watches. He loved buying and selling watches. And he--from his experience in Europe I guess, he had come in contact with Piaget and Patek Philippe and Baume & Mercier [brands], all these sort of Swiss watches. So he was, that's what his thing was, so he'd be buying--he'd scour pawn shops all around L.A. and buy these watches, have them reconditioned; then put an ad in the paper and sell them. So yeah, he had a lot of white guys coming into South Central at our house, to buy these watches from my father. So he got into this network of exchanging watches with people. So I'd go to school sometimes, he would loan my brother [Wayne Marshall] and I, here you got an ultrathin Piaget watch that cost maybe $1500. You're going to school at [George Washington] Carver Junior High [School] in South Central L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--nobody else had a clue what these watches were or what they meant, but this is where my father was. He passion was really collecting and selling watches. Then my mother wanted to be a singer and a songwriter and actually done some. She did a recording with a group called the Bonnettes once and then wrote a song called, 'That Loving Feeling', not the one that the Righteous Brothers did, but a song that was recorded by this guy and a girl named Lonnie and Vicky. It got her into ASCAP [American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers] and, you know, was really a special event when the producer--the publisher and the singers came to our house to pound out the melody on our piano and record--do a demo recording and stuff. So that's how I--those are the parents I had. They both had aesthetic ambitions, even though neither one of them ever fully realized them. So even though they didn't give me any particular encouragement to be an artist, they weren't resistant to the possibility. Because I think they both had a really deep interest in aesthetic experience and also objects themselves. This was some passion they really had. Seeing that I seemed passionate about it, they just let me go. They just let me go and do it. Story_ID: 10429 Speaker 1: I was wondering why you wanted that block of four hours [outside of high school]. What else were you doing the other four hours. Were you working or--in your senior year? Speaker 2: Oh--. Speaker 1: Hanging out? Speaker 2: Well I hung out. (laughs) I was hanging out. But I could--see, I was hanging out and I could spend that time in the library. I mean, I'd go to the library. If I wasn't waiting for friends to get out of school, so we could go to the pool hall together--because I spent, in my senior year, I actually, actually not my senior year, in my eleventh grade year and this is this thing with my brother [Wayne Marshall] too. Since he was always a year ahead, he always sort of got it; he went to junior high [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Los Angeles, California], got all the friends first. I came along and because I was his brother, they sort of brought me into the group. The same thing in high school. So I hung out with my brother's friends almost from tenth grade and eleventh grade. And he knew a lot of guys who wanted to be hustlers and things like that, so we spent a lot of time at the pool hall. So I actually didn't really spend time with people in my own class until my senior year, which was after my brother grad-, and all of his friends graduated, so then I was kind of alone there again, so I had to get to know the people I should have been hanging out with all the time. But I had already--by then, I had developed this reputation of being the kind of art kid, 'the art guy'. So people would ask me to draw stuff for them all the time. And when I was--for all those guys who wanted to be hustlers and things like that, when I was going to high school, I went to Thomas Jefferson High [School, Los Angeles, California]. It's on 41st [Street] and Hooper [Avenue], but there's some other events and stuff that I'll tie in, like the Black Panthers and then the Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles, California] Riots--we sort of never dealt with the Watts Riots thing from '65 [1965]. But these guys who want to be hustlers--when I was going to high school, we had people going to high school who were having their clothes tailor-made as tenth and eleventh graders. So this was the thing at the time. So it was fashionable to have your clothes made for you and to design them yourself. So I used to do the drawings sometimes for a lot of guys. So you do the drawing, get your fabric and then take it down to Fifth Street downtown to the tailors and they would make these clothes for you. So everybody was into the kind of 'Superfly'-like kind of stuff. Pants would look, all kind of elaborate flaps and pleats and stuff like that. So I became this--I had two nicknames. One was 'Gumby' and the other was 'The Professor', because I was into the art and stuff like that. We used to gamble a lot too, when I was in high school, just shooting dice. So we developed this gambling game called 'Propositions' where you try to make up games of odds. Some people would say I was The Professor because I was coming up with all these odd sort of patterns of games you could play and stuff. So that was my position. But I was really--there were things about this hustler's life that were really attractive, that I wanted to see how it was, but not be in it too deep at the same time, because there was also a lot of trouble around that. But I love shooting pool. I loved hanging out in the pool hall with everybody else. It just was a great scene. So in particular, in my eleventh grade year, I spent actually, probably every single day--some time, in a pool hall somewhere. We would all meet at school some time to go to the pool hall instead of going to school. So we would be in the pool hall from ten o'clock in the morning when the pool hall opened, sometimes until nine o'clock that night. It was fun to do and gambling was fun, even then. So we'd take our allowance money and just sort of gamble with each other. Shooting one pocket was a favorite game that we played then Story_ID: 10430 Speaker 1: Now when I was in fifth grade [at 49th Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], I had to do a book report during Negro History Week at the time. I had this book called, 'Great Negroes Past and Present'. In that book there was a biography of this guy named Charles White who was an artist. Now I had seen a drawing or two of his in another book called, 'Negro Art' that I had seen in the library. But I read this biography and I did my report for Negro History Week on Charles White. So that was in fifth grade. When I got to junior high school [George Washington Carver Junior High School, Los Angeles, California] in seventh grade, I met--there was a teacher there who knew my brother [Wayne Marshall] because my brother had gone the year before; his name was Mr. Romitti. Now they had a program, drawing classes for junior high school kids at the Otis Art Institute [later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] and he, since there--they were supposed to be for upperclassmen, you know, somebody who's in eighth or ninth grade. But since there didn't seem to be anybody who was interested in going, he gave that scholarship for that drawing class to me. That's how I first encountered the Otis Art Institute. The first time I knew there was a school you could go to that specialized in teaching people how to do art. Now the teacher who taught that class for junior high school kids was this guy named George DeGrotte. One day he took us down to the lecture hall and he had a book called 'Images of Dignity: The Drawings of Charles White' and he--on the opaque projector, projected those drawings from that book on the wall and was showing us, talking about drawing, talking about Charles White's drawings. He showed us that stuff and then he said, 'Well, you know, Charles White has a studio on campus. He teaches here at Otis and he said it was okay for us to come up to the studio to see the work he's doing." He took us upstairs in that building. Charles White had a studio there and he showed, we went in--he wasn't, Charles White wasn't there, but he showed us the work that was in progress on the easel there. That was the most amazing thing I have ever seen. Not only was there work that was finished, magnificently, but there was unfinished work--work in progress, so that you can see how it moved from this stage to another stage. And that was the part, some of the information that I was always trying to uncover from the books that I was going to the library to get, trying to figure out, "How does it--the work looks amazing in this photograph, but how does it get that way?" So anyway, seeing that Charles White thing. Then I went down to the class, I took the book and I was copying an image from the book, a big drawing of Frederick Douglass that Charles White had in there. And Charles White walked into our classroom and it's like--that instant I decided when I graduated from high school, I was going to go to school at Otis because I found out he was there. Now having encountered him in the 'Great Negroes Past and Present' book, I thought since it was a history book, that Charles White has been somebody long since dead. But to find that he was alive and not only alive, but in Los Angeles, teaching at the Otis Art Institute was a revelation for me. And it was another one of those things that sort of became going to school at Otis and being around Charles White became another obsession for me. I mean he, that work was so unbelievably magnificent I wanted to do just like it, to be just like him in a way. So that's the fast-forwarded kind of version of it--how all of those things in my experience tied together from fifth grade, all the way up through junior high and then into college when I finally graduated from school--I spent two years at L.A. [Los Angeles] City College [Los Angeles, California] and then ended up going to school at Otis because Charles White was there. Story_ID: 10431 Speaker 1: This whole notion of possessing the thing was obsession. And so--I mean, I als-, going to the library though, I was also--I was that kid who was respons-, I was stealing images from art books too. Now, you know they used to make those art books where they had tipped in illustrations--where they just had these two spots of glue kind of holding the picture in the book. So I used to go--because I wanted to have those pictures. And as a kid, I didn't know how to get them otherwise, you know, so I'd go in with a little fingernail file and stuff and I was, I was (laughs) taking those pictures out of the books. The rationale I used to justify it, was that nobody else seemed to be checking these books out from the library, so "Nobody else seemed to want them, nobody else was going to miss them." So I sort of justified it in my, in my mind that I needed to have them. They were meant for me. Story_ID: 10432 Speaker 1: What was so ironic about my experience that Charles--since [artist] Charles White was originally from Chicago [Illinois], now it seemed--it was odd that I ended up in Chicago, but I came through Chicago. The only reason I come through Chicago in the first place, going to--I was on my way to New York and I drove from California to New York. I stopped in Chicago to see the uncle who I hadn't--who had never seen me. He had throat cancer, he was dying of throat cancer at the time, so I got to see him only that once and then I went on to New York to do my residency at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]. And in that year after I had come through to see him, he died. So I didn't know anybody in Chicago. Well then I get to New York and I meet Cheryl Lynn Bruce who is my wife, who is from Chicago. So I was planning on staying in New York; or if not staying in New York, going back to California. But she and I got together, developed a relationship and she had always promised her daughter that she wouldn't have to go to high school in New York. And she--they were alone, you know, with no other family there and so they were all, her family's all here. So she was gonna come back to Chicago, so her daughter could go to school. So I just came on back with her. But when I came back to Chicago, I ended up living in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on 50th Street and Indiana Avenue. Now the uncle I had come to see lived most of his life in an apartment building on 47th and Indiana Avenue. So I ended up moving into a place three blocks from where the uncle who I had never seen and only saw once as an adult in my life, lived. So that was a coincidence. Then the first studio I got in Chicago was on Wabash Avenue. I was there for seven years and then I bought this building here, which is back again on Indiana Avenue. So Indiana is just, I don't know, for some reason I can't get far from Indiana Avenue. But when I bought this building, I came in and going through all of--it had been a roofing company--Tall Man Roofing Company was one of the oldest black (phone interruption)--so anyway, this whole, here my odyssey to Chicago and its relationship to Charles White. So anyway, it all comes full circle, because I end up in Chicago. And then when I got this building, I was going through the materials. It used to be a roofing company, Tall Man. This is one of the oldest black owned businesses in Chicago apparently. But they left all of the stuff that was in here, in the building. I was going through a desk and in the desk drawer, the desk drawer in this building was a copy of that book, 'Great Negroes Past and Present', which was--and it was like from the era. I had never--I hadn't seen that book again since I saw it in fifth grade [at 49th Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] and it was in the drawer of the desk in the building, in this building here, which was, the whole thing sort of come full circle in a way, which was uncanny; really uncanny. Story_ID: 10433 Speaker 1: Were you under his [artist, Charles White] tuteledge sort of, or did you seek him out? I was just wondering what kind of relationship you had with him. Speaker 2: Well the thing was, when I found out he was teaching at Otis [Art Institute, later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] during that period when I was in junior high school [at George Washington Carver Junior High School, Los Angeles, California], I sort of never forgot it. So I actually started hanging around at Otis after that. And one day--you know, he taught in the evenings, he taught a Tuesday and Thursday evening drawing class. And when I--so I came up to--I started coming up to Otis. Actually after that, after I had that first junior high school experience, when I was in the eleventh grade [at Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], I won a scholarship to go to what was Chouinard [School of Art, Pasadena, California], which was a commercial arts school, but instead of taking that, I ended up spending my money and paying to take a painting class at Otis on Saturdays. And it sort of--to get me back at Otis. But I also started to come in the evenings. One evening I came and sort of slipped in through the door of Charles White's drawing class and kind of hid myself over in the back, trying to be as inconspicuous as I could. Was sitting there, had a little bitty sketch pad about that big. So I'm going to sneak in and do some drawings. He came over, he saw me back there; he came over and said, "You can't see anything from back here. What are you doing back there in the back?" So he took my stool and everything and put it right on the front row. Said, "Come up here so you can see." So I went up and sat there and did some drawing. When they took a break, he came over to talk to me again. He did a demonstration in my book, how to set up drawing a head, faces and stuff like that. He told me, "Anytime you want to come by, you just feel free to come on it." So I started just hanging out with him. So we became friends, actually before I even got to school at Otis as a full time student. I knew him and would come up and talk and he would show me things; he would tell me things. We actually, from that point, sort of established a friendship and a mentorship, because I still, he was still one of the most amazing draftsman who lived. We stayed friends all the way up until the time he died. Not only just friends with him, but I'm still in touch with his son Ian, who's an artist also. I was always in touch with his wife Fran [Frances B. White] up until, she just passed away a month and a half--well actually more than a month and a half ago. Probably about, yeah about a month and a half ago. But we stayed in touch all along. I actually took his son Ian and some of his friends out to a championship wrestling match for his sixteenth birthday. Speaker 1: Now what about, did you like his work? Speaker 2: Charles White? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And why did you think he was--you know, you said you thought he was a great draftsman, but what else about his work spoke? Speaker 2: Well the one thing I learned from Charles, the subject of his work and it was in history was an important subject for Charles White too. Now one of the things that was interesting about the way he was as a person, the way he conducted his class and the things that happened around him. Now when I was, as a kid, as a teenager, I think I was sixteen, seventeen hanging around--actually sixteen first, but hanging around in his class. Whenever they took their breaks in the middle of class, everybody would go down to the lounge. The lunch truck would come and people would buy coffee and pastries and doughnuts and stuff like that. Then they'd go out into the lounge and they'd sit around, these discussions they had about history, about politics, about culture, about all kinds of things were some of the most amazing discussions for me, as a kid, I had heard. It was so amazing--I was there sort of sitting in the periphery again with no experience, no real knowledge, just fascinated and amazed by how much these people seem to know; how much they seem to be able to talk about. Wanting to participate, but not having enough information, enough knowledge of my own to add anything to this discussion. So he also made me know that, in order to be an artist, you had to do more than just be able to draw something well or paint something well, but you had to know something. That the work had to be about something that mattered to people in a significant way. There wasn't anything in my experiences that seemed to matter more than the history that black people were experiencing in America. Story_ID: 10434 Speaker 1: We had come from Birmingham [Alabama] where there was an incredibly traumatic political and social situation for people; moved to Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles, California], and then from Watts into South Central L.A. [Los Angeles] in '65 [1965]. So the Watts Riots which started down on 100 [100th Street] and--may have started on 112th [Street] and Imperial [Highway], came up to where we were and went several miles beyond. So we were right there in the middle of all of that and it was quite a moment of history. I was ten years old at the time and so, even for that, didn't have a context to really put that whole event in. So I didn't really understand the significance of it, or the impact that it would have ultimately, but when I was ten years old, you're hearing on the news that there was a riot going on down in Watts; then stepping out on the front porch and looking out and seeing smoke in the distance, then all of a sudden you see two or three people run by your house, then two more people, then two more, then ten, then twenty, then a whole lot of people running, then you look down at your corner and there's a fire down there and you look that way and there's a fire down there, well it was just chaos. But it seemed at the time more like a carnival than a tragedy because there were people yelling and hollering and running, but they didn't seem to be any real anxiety in the air. There was just--it seemed it was excitement in the air. It was just like a maelstrom of energy and you didn't know what it meant. Stuff was just happening. It was just exploding. Then the next thing you know, your neighborhood is on fire. So my brother [Wayne Marshall] and I were actually at home alone at the time. My parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall] were both away. My father was at work and my mother was gone someplace else. So we wanted to kind of--we were watching the house. We didn't have a key to lock the door, so we'd take turns. We lived, yeah, Avalon Boulevard was the west corner; Central Avenue was on the east side of us, so, you know, I sit there wait at the house and my brother would go up to Avalon to see what was going on, you know. All of the stores--and he'd come back and tell me what was happening. "Oh" he said, "Everybody--people are hollering, 'Go in there, get everything you want because we're going to burn it down in a minute.'" So people were going in and taking stuff and then somebody throw a molotov cocktail in and set the remainder on fire. So that was all going on, that's what we were in the middle of. Later on my father came home and then my mother came home and then we all got together and went over to a friend of their's house who was closer to Central Avenue--actually I don't know why we were going over there. So we were over there. We spent the night. By the time my parents came home, you can see there was a lot of tension in the air, you know. So this was like nothing--nobody ever experienced anything like that before. It was like everything around you, it's like--the business thoroughfares on Avalon and then on Central everything was on fire. So I just remember sitting in the window at my parents' friend's house looking out over Central Avenue and there was a Jack-In-The-Box [fast-food restaurant] on the corner of Vernon Avenue and Central. That's when they used to have the big Jack-In-The-Box on the tall pole. It's like this one image is sort of vividly; I can see it even now, this Jack-In-The-Box clown sort of rotating slowly against the wall of flames sort of behind it. It's like everything else pitch black, there's fire and here's this clown sort of rotating. So there's something incredibly absurd about all of that and especially that image in the middle of all of that. I think that to me, that's the most vivid image of what the Watts Riots represented for me at the time. I think it encapsulates in some way, the degree of absurdity I thought, accompanied all of that, because it's like the people who were--we were off 48th Street. The event that triggered the Watts Riots took place down in Watts on 111th, 112th Street and Imperial. The people who were in my neighborhood had no idea what was going on down there, but they were swept up in this event and experience, based in large part on misinformation. There's something somebody heard, something somebody said, none of it had to be true, but it just sort of took on a life of its own. So here we are sitting there and all of this stuff is going on, but we're over here at my father's friend's house. Then my father and his friend and a couple of other guys, they go out that night looking around, I guess. Basically sort of picking over the leaving and stuff. They come back home a little bit later on with boxes of shoes and stuff like that. But nothing that was worth anything anyway. So that was my experience of the Watts Riots. Then the aftermath of that, you go out and then the next day you started to see, they had martial law, so you couldn't--the curfews and stuff-so now you can't go out. They're shooting people on Central Avenue. So then you go out the next day and then you realize, "Wait a minute, we don't have a grocery store now (chuckle) down at the end of the block." Like none of this, not only the grocery store burned down, but all the mom and pops are gone. You'd go to Central Avenue, there's no place now, the Kresses [Samuel H. Kress & Co., discount store] that used to be there is no longer there. There's no Jack-In-The-Box down there. There's no fast food places. It's like, "What?--Where?--What's?" Like the end of all of that. Now we gotta drive like five miles to go to the supermarket. So all of that stuff starts to come to--you start to see all of this stuff after the fact. And for weeks and weeks after that, people are kind of picking through the rubble at the stores trying to find anything they didn't get completely destroyed by the fire and all that stuff. I'll tie this with another event and then we can move on. Now that was in '65 [1965], but in '69 [1969] I was at [George Washington] Carver Junior High School and then [Thomas] Jefferson High [School, Los Angeles, California] was the high school I went to, which is on 41st [Street] and Hooper [Avenue]. Carver is on, right at the corner of Vernon [Avenue] and McKinley [Avenue]. So between that and Jefferson on Central Avenue on 43rd Street was where the Black Panthers headquarters in Los Angeles was. So in '69 [1969] everybody, the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] and the Black Panthers had a shoot out back then. We were in school at the time and the LAPD used the playing field at Carver Junior High as the staging area to send reinforcements back and forth up to Central Avenue. So you've got gunfire from morning until night. It sounded as much like the Vietnam War--As close to the Vietnam War as you can get. This is all going on right outside the school while you're trying to have class. It was an amazing experience to see it. This whole thing with [artist] Charles White and history and events and work being meaningful, it all comes out of that--well these are the things that I had some direct experience with. So it seemed like the only thing I was going to be able to do is to try to find a way to make some sense of that, all of that stuff I had experienced through the work I was gonna make. It's difficult at the time, because you haven't completely internalized all of those events, so you really don't understand anything about them, you just experience them. So it took some time for all of that stuff to start to find a shape in my mind and in my experience, connected with other things that I was to learn later on, so that it all started to become fully flashed out. So that's how, having met him and seeing how he approached his work, the things he talked about, that's how I understood what my responsibilities as an artist were going to be through his work. Not only did it have to achieve the level of refinement and sophistication in terms of its technical articulation, but then it had to find something to attach that technical virtuosity too, so that the work became more than just a demonstration of skill, that it became some--a reflection on some--a meditation on some significant events in history presented in such a way that all the people could understand it or have some sense of what that all could have meant. Story_ID: 10435 Speaker 1: You graduate from Otis Art Institute [later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] and then what are your thoughts at that point? Speaker 2: Well I had always--because of the way I learned about art history, you know, reading the lives of artists and things like that, I always--I never really expected to make a living as an artist. I was really, always assuming that I would get all of my satisfaction out of simply being able to things well. You read stories of artists well underappreciated in your time. Most of them don't get any recognition until after they're dead. I read all of that stuff and I had bought all of that stuff whole. So I thought that's what I was going to do. I would do what everybody else did. You graduate from high school, you get a job. You work, make a living, and do your work on the side. But when I was in school, now I went to school at Otis because I really wanted to learn something. I had been given--I had been made to understand that the course of study at Otis was intensive, rigorous and in-depth. That you could go to school and you could learn how to make paintings. This was something that I learned from Sam Clayberger whose painting class I took that summer when I was in eleventh grade. He showed me what the curriculum, the course of study was for painting students and it was that really, rigorous analytical course of study. But by the time I got to Otis in 1977, almost all of that was finished. They had, to a degree, they had stopped that real academic program teaching, so people were just kind of doing stuff and then people would sit around and talk about, give their opinions about stuff. So in some ways you could still count on somebody like Charles White, he taught drawing class. Well he taught drawing. You either can draw or you can't draw. And so that was still in play. And there were still some other professors who were teaching, technically teaching you how to get things done or how to understand the way things work. But for the most part, conceptual art was developing as a real strong academic force at the time, and the people who were connected with conceptual art, who had come through minimalism and through abstract expressionism, were anti-academic training for artists. So they were actively trying to get rid of all of the teachers who were teaching like that because it wasn't contemporary, it wasn't avant garde, in a sense. So there was this odd tension at Otis at the time where a number of the people who were considered more traditional were intimidated by the people who were more avant garde. Because at that time, you know, people who were more avant garde had greater standing culturally. So you could literally go through school at Otis and come out after not having learned anything, I thought. So I felt, at the time I graduated from Otis, that going on to get a, a masters degree in a program was absurd. That the whole educational system for teaching artists was a fraud. So I said, "Well, I can't justify participating in something that I find ethically bankrupt." And I decided not to go to graduate school after I left Otis. But I also decided that--I challenged myself to prove that it was possible to do all of the things that a person who had an MFA [Master of Fine Arts] could do, without going to school and getting an MFA to do it. And then I would try and see if there was a way you can demonstrate how being good at what you did, mattered more than whether you had a degree in that area or not. I understood at the time that there were a lot of people who were getting MFAs who seemed less capable than I and/or a lot of people who were in school and didn't seem to know a whole lot more either than I or a lot of other people who were in school. So this is where I had a whole lot of problems with the way MFAs were being given out, I thought. This is where I developed the idea of MFA is like a door prize in a way. Anybody who comes through the program gets one. There's no way of measuring--there seemed to be no way of measuring what people knew or what people could do. Those things seemed to have no relationship to what they were--to what the degree they got seemed to suggest. So I said, "I'm going to prove in some ways that you can do--that being good at what you do is better." So I spent a lot of time learning as much as I could about what I wanted to know. Meaning, if you want to learn how to make a painting, you've got to know what it means to make painting. Then you've got to have some standard by which you can judge whether the work is succeeding or whether it's failing, whether it's good or whether it's bad. So I spent a lot of time trying to find out what that was. So then, anyway, that's what my experience at Otis was like in a way. Speaker 1: So--but you said that you never thought of being--you know, that an artist can make a living, so what were your--after you finished the list--you decided you wanted to go get your MFA, so what was your thought at that point, or were you--? Speaker 2: Well, two things. One is--I mean, I really did think I would just do my work. I'll get a job; I'll work, because I didn't have any problem with my work ethic. I could do that and be satisfied doing my work on the side. But I also had this other ambition, and the ambition really was to be able to find a way to get paintings in particular--that foregrounded representations of black people into the museum alongside the work that I was going to the museum to admire by other artists. Because now--there was an interesting phenomena with black artists and it still persists in some ways, although it's getting a little better now, but when you go to the museum, you rarely saw work in the museum that existed on the same level and on the same scale that all of the old masters' works and even contemporary masters' works existed in. And the thing that--what you started to see as a pattern, was that this work never found its way into exhibitions and things unless it was there to serve some social or political function. Meaning that museums who couldn't find black artists to show year-round--always seemed to find some when February rolled around, you know, for Black History Month. So there would be these special shows in Black History Month. But when you look at the body of our historical documentation, these artists were never integrated into or incorporated into the general body of art historical knowledge. So I said, "I want to figure out if there's a way of getting this work into these institutions, into the museum, so that it existed on the same level that all this other work existed there under, and that it would demand to be dealt with on aesthetic terms, as well as on the social terms that its content presented. Meaning that you would be able to talk about the work as painting, at the same time that you could talk about whatever the work presented as content. Because there was always this separation--I mean, black artists' work was political, white artists or mainstream artists work was aesthetic. So I had--figure out a way to balance those two things, so that neither one of them was privileged over the other, but that they worked in harmony with each other. That the aesthetic asserted itself as strongly as the representational imagery of the work did. So that was my goal. Speaker 1: Has that remained your goal? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 10436 Speaker 1: I want to understand from Kerry James Marshall's perspective and what you see your role as an artist. What do you--I mean, is it that balancing act--are you, with each thing that you're doing trying to make some social commentary and put something in perspective? 'Cause you had said, you had described yourself almost as a history painter. Speaker 2: Well that's, when I say history painting, in that context, it's two things. There's a genre of painting called history painting, which is a certain tradition of narrative--large scale narrative paintings. That's what history painting is. Now the subject of paintings can be historical in terms of subject matter, but if they don't do it in a certain format, on a certain scale then they don't become history paintings. So that's one thing, they're paintings about history than they are history paintings, as objects; or as an object of study. So I call mine history paintings, because they do--they take advantage of all of the conventions that the grand--large, grand-scale narrative paintings that we call history paintings take advantage of. But the other part of the proposition an artist has to be responsible for is that not only do you have to demonstrate your ability to put those conventions in play at the same level that everybody else does, but you also have a responsibility then to assert some new proposition or some change in the way that form or that format has been understood or can be understood. You've got to do something different, otherwise there really aren't any reasons why people should spend a whole lot of time kind of thinking about or talking about or worrying about what you're doing. If you're not proposing some alternative view of a thing, then you simply become one of a whole army of people who are doing the same kind of thing. Then what are you depending as, what are you depending on to establish distinction between you and them? I mean, is it--are you saying then that your subject matter, your content is better than somebody elses content or subject matter? Well you can't argue with people on that level, because that's a really subjective thing to do. But what you can argue with is how, formally how you put those things into play. That's where almost all of the significant changes in the way artworks are perceived or experienced by people occur. It's not in the subject matter, because there are millions of people who have the same subject matter. But some of them put it into play in a way that it is more provacative than others, that seems more poignant than others, that even seems more--that makes it seem more alive, vital, or relevant than others. So that's where the significance between--of works come in. Speaker 1: So, you don't believe in art purely as an aesthetic is what you're saying. Speaker 2: Well it's, but it depen-, what do you mean by aesthetic? Because I've sa--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You said white artists are the aesthetic and the black artists--and I was just--. Speaker 2: Well yeah. And I'll say that in a sense that when I say aesthetic, what I mean is that there's work that privileges formal development, formal innovation over subject matter and content. And that's a difference between--there's a difference in a way between where black artists find themselves in the historical arena of making art, as opposed to where a lot of white artists find themselves. Now your black artists in America are coming into a tradition that's already--a pattern and a tradition that's already established. And in some ways you come late, not knowing what the rules of the game are always. Not knowing where the values and significance is determined, or not even--or being--the problem with a lot of black artists is that there's so--we're so keyed towards inserting the black voice into a dialogue and trying to establish a certain legitimacy for the voice, that figuring out how to--figuring out imaginative ways of articulating that voice takes a secondary role in the work that we produce. And when you're just trying to get representations of yourself in the public domain, it's hard to do what other artists have already done, which is to challenge--which is to take those representations and unravel them, turn them inside out, turn them on their head, completely reconstitute them into a new kind of thing. It can be a new thing that's problematic and disturbing in terms of the way human beings understand or value representations of the human body. So (pauses)--you know, I don't know, that's a part of the problem is that there's--it is true that black people are really first trying to get themselves established, to get themselves recognized and established just on the ground. Once you get that going, then you can start figuring out how you want to treat the representations you're presented. For black artists in the visual realm--because, because the institutions that support visual artists are not dominated by black patrons, black historians, or black theoreticians (pauses) the work black artists do is reactionary in a lot of ways. It reacts to things that are already present and it reacts to them in a way that doesn't necessarily challenge the conventions that exist. It reacts to--its reaction to the resistance of the conventions to include the participation of black artists. So that's the kind of work that a lot of black artists had been doing, especially up until the 1960s. Now the next level of work that has to go on after--so after you open a door of opportunity that allows people to come in to play, then you have to figure out ways to reconfigure and reconstruct the game. And it's the place where you're reconfiguring and reconstructing the game where what's really valued and what's really significant takes place. It's like, it's not enough to play--you look at the way basketball was played before black players were brought into the game--like nobody played above the rim before then. Well, being able to play above the rim significantly changed the way the game was played at that point. That's why you find black players dominating the game after a certain period. The way you move in and out, all the players on the court, there's a different dynamic between the way black players use their body in that space and the way white players were using their body in that space. So that significantly changed the way the game was gonna be played from that point on. None of that's happened in the visual art world just yet. Because by the time a lot of black artists were starting to play the game, some significant changes had already taken place in the way the idea of art had been conceived of and thought of. Since 1917, the very idea of the art object had been called into question by artists. So that's where--the momentum was going there. It was going away from representation, away from the idea of the art object and as a thing in its own right. So you had people coming in who are in the '60s [1960s], who were just trying to get representations of themselves in the game, when everybody else has moved beyond representation. Well, what does that mean for your participation? How can you achieve a level of significance in a game that's already moved beyond the level at which you're entering the game. So that's sort of how I see this--the dilemma? Now after the 1970s, after minimalism, after conceptual art had kind of run its course in a way, but what started to happen again was that artists started to reinvest themselves in an interesting representation. But now, through the mainstream you've got representations that have a political function and a social function now because people had assumed that all the formal parameters of the art--of the consideration of the art object had already been kind of laid out, had been dissected, completely deconstructed. Now, figuring out a way to reinvest that work with social, political psychological and emotional significance started to become a factor. That's the reason why you're seeing a lot more representations of black artists in the art world now because there's a shift in emphasis in the word now, so that it accommodates social and political and psychological content again, in ways that it hadn't before. Story_ID: 10437 Speaker 1: I would like to get to your career as an artist and therefore I'd like you to sort of paint your development from the time you graduated [from Otis Art Institute, later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] to the present, because every artist has their periods where they're focused on this and that and there's the transitions of the phases in their life. So that's what I would like. I want to get back to the theoretical, but I need to lay out your career as an artist and the things that were important milestones along the way. Speaker 2: Yeah, well I'd say starting out--just kind of a loose timeline at first. We started out copying from comic books and things like that; so that was interesting. Copying [artist] Charles White's work early on was interesting. Trying to incorporate into my own work, characteristics that made--that I had thought made Charles White's work really powerful. Then going through that, also copying works by Rembrandt [Harmenszoon van Rijn], Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo [Buonarroti], Raphael [Sanzio]. They're really interested in artists like [Jacques-Louis] David and [Jean-Auguste-Dominique] Ingres and [Theodore] Gericault, being interested in Impressionists' work. So I'm--so experimenting with all of those things, but also I had encountered, when I was in high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], I saw an article in a magazine, 'Art in America'--Artist--'American Artist' was the magazine. They had a profile of Andrew Wyeth in there, who's the artist who painted in egg tempera. Well I was completely fascinated by that. So actually I ended up spending--I wanted to learn how to do egg tempera painting and I spent a lot of time collecting--I collected every article that I could find on Andrew Wyeth. Not only Andrew Wyeth, but his father who is N.C. [Newell Convers] Wyeth who is one of the great American children's book illustrators and Howard Pyle, because at the time I was really interested in becoming a children's book illustrator. And having read those--there was a set of books that [Charles] Scribner's [Sons] published called 'Scribner's Classics' that were illustrated by Howard Pyle and N.C. Wyeth, that whole Brandywine [Creek Valley, Pennsylvania and Delaware] School [arts movement] of American illustrators. So I was copying and emulating that work. Looking at Arthur Rackham, all the great book illustrators from England and from the United States. So I was copying that work and I was learning how to do egg tempera painting, trying to collect all the information I could on Andrew Wyeth and all of the books, all of the articles from every magazine. I had gone to the library and gotten this 'Readers Guide to Periodicals [sic, Periodical Literature]', where they list all of the--the 'Art Index' lists all of the articles that were ever written. So I was simply spending time trying to acquire skills because I didn't know ultimately what I was going to be able to do with them later on, but I knew I needed to have them, so that I could make the kinds of choices I would need to make. When I got to school at Otis, I was doing drawings that were based in part--I was doing paintings that were based in part on Andrew Wyeth paintings--mean I was doing a lot of still lifes, some in egg tempera; doing drawings that were loosely based on some techniques that I've learned from Charles White. I was also trying to teach myself to read and write hieroglyphics at the time, because I wanted to use hieroglyphics in some work that I was doing, but I didn't want it to just be meaningless pictorial things. I wanted to know that was actually saying something, so they had some English hieroglyphics lexicons at the library at L.A. [Los Angeles] City College [Los Angeles, California]. So I was xeroxing stuff from there and sort of learning the patterns. I started incorporating--even though I never learned how to really write in hieroglyphics, I took some aspect of that as a language system and I was applying it so some drawings I was making while I was in school at Otis in Charles White's class. And this is where I was trying to figure out a way to do visual representations of some ideas that I had. I had--and there were ideas about spirituality and ancestor worship and things like that--sort of coming into it. So I had developed this notion that when you're walking down the street sometimes and you get the sense that you've seen something out of the corner of your eye. But when you turn and look, there's nothing there. I had decided that what you were actually seeing was the spirit of some individual, some person moving from the visible plane into another dimensional plane. You just happened to catch a glimpse of it out of the corner of your eye. And so I tried to develop some drawings that embodied that concept that--where this figure that was sort of present and absent at the same time. Some of that was developed based on the techniques that Charles White was using doing charcoal drawings. So I started working out a series of charcoal drawings using that, but using the eraser as a device to make--as a drawing tool as much as the charcoal is a drawing tool. So I'd do these drawings and then the erasing of the drawing became as active a part of the drawing as the figure that I had done. So this is where I could have aspects of the image that was present and then aspects that were absent, but the thing still had a certain kind of solidity to it. So that's what I was doing until my--I was doing that until my last year at Otis, and then I started making collages that were loosely based on Romare Bearden's collages. Betye Saar was teaching at Otis at the time too, so I knew Betye and--over one summer I had done these collages; I was looking at a lot of Joseph Cornell and Kurt Schwitters and then Betye Saar and Romare Bearden. So I had made these collages over the summer, so that was what I was doing. Making the collages was a way of allowing me to work out--to study and analyze composition without having to spend time developing drawings--drawing figures. You could just clip figures out of a magazine and piece them together and that way you can focus on the structure of the picture and not just the imagery. You also didn't have to mix paint and stuff because the things already had a color. So I was doing that. Then I graduated from Otis in the year that I was doing those collages and those big charcoal drawings. And immediately after I left school I actually stayed with the collages for a while. When they began, they were really figurative collages, but over time, they became abstract collages. Now I had had a certain resistance to abstract work for a period because I--it--because I understood that it really took a long time to master drawing a figure. It seemed a lot easier to just work with shapes and color and texture and things like that. So I wanted to make sure, before I went on to other things that seemed simpler, that I was able to do the thing that was hardest first. You get the chops together on that, then you can move on and do other things. So I spent a lot of time doing drawings, but then when I graduated from school, I spent a lot of time doing these abstract collages and mixed media. Taking found paper and then casein and just doing them--they were just moving around shapes and stuff basically; shapes and texture, working with color and tone. I did that for--well I graduated from Otis in 1978, so for the next two years actually, I did nothing but these little abstract collages. Until--I had gotten to a point with that work where I felt like I had exhausted all of the possibilities that that work could show me. I think I had learned all of the things that I felt like I needed to and I was looking for something to complicate the work again. And for me, it meant returning back the figurative work, but returning the figurative work with all of the knowledge and information I had gained from going through that period of abstraction. 'Cause one of the things I had learned in reading some of Andrew Wyeth's sayings and things is that, "The paintings will never work--representational paintings will never work unless they work as abstractions first." So I was trying to put all of that into practice and then trying to figure out a way to use some of the information I had gleaned from analyzing Renaissance paintings; meaning this kind of classical geometry that they used to build the compositions around. Story_ID: 10438 Speaker 1: I was reading Ralph Ellison's book at the time, 'Invisible Man', and was really struck by his characterization of the condition of invisibility as it relates to black people. This kind of dovetailed with this idea that I had been working on, this presence and absence thing with those earlier drawings. So then I started trying to find a way to get that same sense of presence and absence, but using these black figures. At the same time I was working with a friend of mine who teaches Folklore at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]--on a Folklife Festival for South Central L.A. [Los Angeles]--she was doing some research. So I had become really interested in black folklore and was reading a lot of stuff, and was reading stuff on minstrelsy and things like that, that I hadn't really spent any time researching before then. And reading some black humor, you know, some of the jokes and things that came out of folklore. This idea of--Ralph Ellison's idea of invisibility as a kind of psychological--a perceptual condition that people in the mainstream had, a psychological condition where you can be present and--be visible and invisible at the same time became a problem for me to solve. And I seem to find an answer to it in some of the folklore that I was reading. When you read the jokes about people being so dark you can't see them at night and things like that. So that seemed to be a key, so I tried making visual representations that did that thing, where I put a black figure against a black background, but have a slight change in the color temperature that would affect the perceptual change in the thing you saw, whether you saw the image or whether you didn't see the image. So it would be flickering in and out. And so I worked on that for a while. Now I also had come in contact with some--there was a show at The Egg and The Eye [museum], which is The Craft and Folk Art Museum in L.A. and they had this Black American Folk Art show was touring the country and this is the first time I'd seen work by Sam Doyle, by Bill Traylor, you know, by people like Minnie Evans. The Bill Traylor stuff in that show really hit--had some impact on me. Seeing that and seeing the William Edmondson sculpture and things like that. So then I started trying to figure out a way to incorporate some of the characteristics of this folk art into the paintings that I was doing and especially around this development of this black figure that I was trying to make, that was part minstrel image, but also not. Because what I didn't want to do was to re-present that same sort of stereotypical image. I wanted to try to find a way to take--to claim it, to take charge of it and to do an image that was reductive and simplified and stereotyped in a certain way, but not, instead of stereotype, archetyped. So I was trying to figure out a way to reinvest that stereotypical kind of 'darky' image with some density and with some dignity again. So that was a part of my problem at the time. So I started doing a series of paintings that was trying to hover right at the border between utter simplicity and a papable kind of density in the figure. So those early figures, I was trying to see if I could make just the blackness of the shape have a certain resonant density without having to do any representational features on it. The only thing that really remained in all of those figures was the teeth, the smile and then in some of them, the eyes. But a number of them early on had no features at all. So that was what I worked on for a long time. I was working on that when I went to--well actually, let me connect this to something else. I also have a really deep interesting rural country blues, delta blues and particular pre-war blues. My cutoff point was sort of the late Chicago [Illinois] Blues, you know, once it became really electrified it started to lose some of the kind of raw idiosyncrasies that I thought of a lot of the earlier blues have. I was also trying to make a visual art that was the equivalent to the kind of idiosyncratic, but haunting kind of music that people like Robert Johnson, Son House, Charley Patton, like, Howlin' Wolf even that move up even further. Have a visual equivalent to the kind of music they were making. So it's like a blues--can you make a blues image that functions and resonates the same way blues as a musical form does. So I was trying to do that. So now I'm trying to bring all of these things together in a word. That was my challenge all the way up to the work that I'm doing, that I was doing recently, up to, say the last show I had at the Renaissance Society [of the University of Chicago] here in Chicago. But what I found after a while was that it wasn't quite possible to get the kind of--the qualities I wanted, the kind of density I wanted and the kind of majesty, in a way, that I wanted in the figures, but keeping them completely silhouetted, you know, by not putting any features in or any details in things. And so I ended up having to develop the figures a lot more. Now that came later, so for the first five, oh I say for the first five or six years, up until say 19--oh, actually longer than that I guess, I made the first image called the 'Portrait of the Artist as a Shadow of His Former Self', which was the first black silhouetted figure in 1980. And I didn't start putting more detail and density into the figures actually until 1992, I think. So about, for now almost twelve years I was still trying to figure out a way to keep this figure as simplified as I could, but then have a lot of other things going on around it, that foregrounded the idea these things being paintings. It all really started to come together (pauses) when I--in 1992, 1993 and I did a group of works that were still based in some ways on this blues ideology. I did an image called 'When Frustration Meets Desire' [sic, 'When Frustration Threatens Desire', 1990] and it was a black magician levitating a woman's figure. The title of that came from a phrase in a book called 'Blues and the Poetic Spirit,' by Paul Garon. He said, "Magic is invoked when frustration threatens desire." So that painting became 'Frustration Threatens Desire'. It was one of the ways I tried to incorporate from the whole African Diasporic system, these emblems of the seven African powers, using emblems from Haitian Voudun services and things like that, incorporate that into a kind of Afro-American spiritual system to--and then connect that with the Western sense of what magic and things like that are about. So that was the image that became the most completely resonant for me. It was the most detailed. It had all of the qualities I was looking for. It had some of the stuff that Sam Doyle's stuff had; had some of the stuff Bill Traylor's stuff had; it had some of the stuff that contemporary artists working with sort of abstract symbolist imagery and things had. I mean, it had all of things going at once for me. And that was the beginning of the development of my--what I consider in some ways my more mature work. Which started to come together again, on the scale I wanted it to when I did this group of paintings called 'The Lost Boys.' Story_ID: 10439 Speaker 1: I was in a show called 'Newcomers 1979', the year after I graduated from Otis [Art Institute, later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California]. And I was doing those little abstract collages at the time. I that show--I was in that show and then I was in a show following that at Mount St. Mary's College [Los Angeles, California]. Now, one of my professors at Otis, his name was Arnold Mesches who was one of those people I learned a lot from. He's actually taught me how to look at paintings in a way that nobody else taught me how to look at paintings and really understand what made them work. So he introduced me to this guy who ran the gallery at Mount St. Mary's, and he was putting together an exhibition of 'Three Artists in L.A. [Los Angeles]'. He saw my collages and he liked them and he wanted to use them in that show. And that show was reviewed in the 'L.A. Times' [newspaper] by Suzanne Muchnic and it was--that's the first exhibition and the first review. The review of that show was actually--it was the most important review I had ever gotten because it goes through explaining the show and it mentions, comes to my work and it says, "In these small collages by Kerry James Marshall elegantly composed, nice subtle colors--blah, blah, blah, blah," all just described them; said, "They were really nice works, but they fade into masses of other things that look just like them." That was, if you say, there's a wake up call you can get, that was the wake up call. Because then it made me understand that it's not enough to be--to do work that's as good as everybody else's; that kind of looks like everybody else's; that has all of the same qualities that everybody else's, that you've got to find something about the thing you do that distinguishes your work from what everybody else is doing. And so that moment right there--I had already sort of seen the limitations of working in that manner, but it really crystallized for me, when I read that review. And from that moment on, I had--the goal was not to--I understood that your goal as an artist is not to be expressive, per se, as to express yourself. That's not artists do. What important artists do is change the paradigm through which people are able to see things. So it made me understand that this--what your job is to fine the way to do something that's remarkable. That people, when confronted with it, can't see things like that the same way again. So I actually started looking at that point. This is when I started to do that figure, to develop that black figure, try to figure out, "Well what's not present in the institutional, in the art world now? What's not there?" What I saw as not being there was representations of black people that foregrounded their function as paintings at the same time that they represented the social and political concerns that the artists had. I mean, you can find--there was a lot of really dogmatic, rhetorical work sort of going on, at the time. In the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], everybody was after the Black Power Movement, the black aesthetic; people were trying to develop that. There was a lot of what people called 'Protest Art' at the time--and I saw a lot of it. Long on rhetoric, short on appeal--short on visual appeal. So I said, "Well, this is a problem and it's a problem that's gonna always position the work of black artists in a certain kind of political ghetto in a way." Where the work is an illustration of a series of political concerns and ideas, but it makes no attempt to try and reformulate the aesthetic paradigms under which work should be experienced. And so I set out to solve that problem and this is where that whole question of, "How do you get artworks by black people into the museums, so that they exist on the same level and are dealt with on the same terms that other work in the museum is?" Well you do it by understanding what the institutions that value art actually value. What are they looking at? When they say somebody's work is significant, what are they saying about it? What part of it is significant? And that's how I understood that when you go to the museum--so you look at artists in the Renaissance, everybody was painting the same subject matter. (laughs) Story_ID: 10440 Speaker 1: I was invited to have a show at L.A. [Los Angeles] Southwest College [Los Angeles, California]. Out of that show, I got a job teaching at L.A. Southwest--I got a job teaching a drawing class. During the '70s [1970s], the CETA [Changing Education Through the Arts] Arts Program was developed in L.A., and I got a job as--Brockman Gallery Productions had an artist's apprentice program in which they would pair a young artist with an established artist. Betye Saar and Alonzo Davis were the architects of that program. And so I got a, I got a position in that program as a studio assistant for Arnold Mesches, which was the guy who was a professor of mine [at Otis Art Institute, later Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California]. But during the course of that experience at Brockman, the guy who was the curator of the gallery got another job and was leaving to do something else. He had seen my work and actually like the work I had done and asked me if I would be interested in taking his position as a curator at Brockman and I did. So I became the Visual Arts Coordinator for Brockman CETA Arts Program. And this was in 19--this was '81 [1981]--'80 [1980], '81 [1981]. So that was a pivotal experience. I mean, and these are all people I had known actually, you know. Alonzo Davis--Brockman Gallery was the first black-owned gallery in Los Angeles. The longest-running black-owned gallery in Los Angeles. When I had that 'Operation Bootstrap' contest, the exhibition was held at Brockman Gallery. So as a result of that, I got to meet a lot of people through the CETA Arts Program. And we were talking--Ben Caldwell who was a filmmaker was one of the people I met. And through Ben Caldwell, I ultimately ended up meeting A.J. [Arthur Jafa] who is a cinematographer on 'Daughters [of the Dust]' and through A.J. meet Julie Dash to get a chance to work on 'Daughters of the Dust' [1991]. But I was just making my work and I had an exhibition at Pepperdine University [Malibu, California] in the art gallery there and Ellie Blankfort who was the wife of Peter Clothier. I had never met her really, but Peter Clothier had been the dean at the Otis Art Institute. Ellie Blankfort was consulting these people, Marti and Alan Koplin, who were trying to start a gallery in L.A. She saw my show at Pepperdine University and told the Koplins that they should go and see it. They went up and saw the show and I got a phone call from them. They asked me if anybody was showing my work in L.A., and at the time, nobody was. I had had a show with a guy named James Turcotte who tried to start a gallery, but he--it didn't work out. The first gallery space he had, had a lot of problems. He had a lot of problems with the owner of the building, you know. My first show, my first commercial gallery show was in his space and he had this--elaborate upholstered walls and everything, fabric and stuff. Owners of the building he was having some feud with and they were doing some repairs on the roof. Took the roof off and there was a huge rain storm, so it rained on my show in the gallery. (laughs) So that was my first show, but that show got reviewed, (chuckle) although it didn't stay up long, because the space, he had this linen walls. Once that water came through the ceiling, that was finished. But that show got reviewed and then I, I don't know, just all of a sudden people were looking at what I was doing. It seemed like everybody who encountered what I had done found something interesting about it and they would introduce it to somebody else. So I had a series of shows that were, because somebody said, "Oh, this guy's doing some interesting work. You should show his work." So when Ellie Blankfort sent the Koplins to see my show up at Pepperdine, they called me and asked if anybody's representing my work. I said, "No." But I wasn't really looking for a gallery to show my work. I was still in this mode where I'm simply just trying to figure out how to make the kind of work I really want to make. But they wanted to show the work. So they asked me if I would give them some works to try out, you know, in the back room. One of the things I gave them was that thing I had just started working on, that 'Portrait of the Artist as a Shadow of His Former Self'. Like immediately after the work got to the gallery they called me the next day and somebody was interested in buying it and buying other things. So they sold almost all of the things they took in, almost immediately, and then they wanted to schedule a show. So that was my first major commercial gallery show was that Koplin Gallery [Los Angeles] and it was in 1984. So that was sort of the beginning of it all. Now I was still not sure of myself in a way. I hadn't gotten to where I wanted to go, but I was still, I felt it was the right time to kind of participate in that show. And so I did and it was received really well, it was reviewed well. Actually it was not reviewed all that well. It was a lukewarm review in the '[Los Angeles] Times', but since I had met this writer [Colin Gardner] who was writing for the '[Los Angeles] Reader', he had included me in this 'Six Emerging Artists' article he had done in the Reader. So the show I had at Koplin was reviewed in the 'Times' and it wasn't reviewed as, it was a lukewarm review. But the guy who wrote for the 'Reader' wrote a review of the show in response to the review that the 'L.A. Times' writer wrote. So it set up this argument between him and another person who was reviewing, where he's telling this person they missed the point. So that's, I don't know, it's just one of those things where somebody thinks--it's exactly the position you want to be in as an artist, where two people are debating the merits of your work between themselves and they're both supposed to be experts on the work. None of the discussion about the work had anything to do with the subject matter. And for me, that was important because it then suggested to me that you're moving into this realm where it's not--where being black is an aspect of the work, but it's not the dominant issue in the work. I mean, the subject matter is one thing, but the way the work exists as painting was another thing. And I'd always wanted to work to get into this realm of discussion where people talk about what it's doing as painting and then they talk about how the way it is as painting is supported by the content that it has. So that was important for me. Now getting that job teaching at L.A. Southwest College was also an important milestone because it began to do for me what I had always claimed I could do when I left Otis without getting an MFA [Master of Fine Arts]. Meaning that if the MFA was supposed to make it easier for you to get a job teaching, well I had gotten a job teaching without it. The only problem with that, at that level, not teaching full-time, you can only go up to a certain limit in the L.A. [teachers] union system without an MFA. So I was still limited to a degree in where I could go, but I was still convinced that there was a certain level you could achieve in the perfection of your work that would even over ride that. So I had that one show at Koplin in '84 [1984] and all of this stuff happened around it. Then in '85 [1985], I got the residency to go to New York [New York] for the Studio Museum in Harlem Show--a residency and I took that and went. It was six years before I had another show at Koplin Gallery, but they had so much faith in what I was able to do that they sat around and waited for me, stayed in touch all that time. But going to New York--I didn't even go to New York looking for exhibition opportunities or shows or anything. I just went to New York to be in New York and it was great being in New York meeting a lot of the people that I met. I had met Carrie Mae Weems in Los Angeles when I was working at Brockman Gallery because she brought an exhibition of Roy DeCarava's photographs and other black photographers' photographs to me as the Visual Arts Coordinator to try and organize a show at Brockman. So I got to meet her and then through her--it's interesting how the chain of events and people sort of fall together. She was going to school at Cal Arts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] at the time and when she graduated from Cal Arts she went down to UC [University of California] San Diego and her roommate at UC San Diego was Lorna Simpson. So all of these people sort of come together. Now I had already known Houston Conwill, Kinshasha [Holman] Conwill who became the director at the Studio Museum at one point--all of those people were in that milieu. It's like all these people were hovering around Brockman Gallery, because Brockman really was the epicenter of all that, everything that was going on in the arts at the time. David Hammons, Timothy Washington, all these people were hanging around at Otis at the time. So I sort of found my way into that network as one of those people, and you just sort of know them. So going to New York, the same thing happened when I got to New York. Story_ID: 10441 Speaker 1: Carrie Mae Weems gave me Dawoud Bey's phone number when I went to New York [New York] on a trip. So I got to meet Dawoud through that and a couple of other people. And then through them, you sort of meet all these other people. Then I ended up meeting Charles Abramson, the whole series of people, Tyrone Mitchell. Actually, Tyrone Mitchell was the first artist I met when I got to New York for my residency at the Studio Museum [in Harlem]. I had come to New York with my Volkswagen van [automobile] loaded with all my possessions, to drop them off at the Studio Museum, but they wouldn't let me leave my stuff there because I was early for the residency. I met [actress and wife] Cheryl Lynn Bruce who was the Public Relations Officer. She took me up to show me the studio. She was the first person I met, Tyrone Mitchell was with her. So through Tyrone, I was introduced to a whole lot of other people in the New York scene, so I was just there kind of, as a part of the whole New York scene. I participated in a show that was curated by, oh, I can't remember who the ultimate curator was, but there was a George Mingo and a whole group of artists. We did a show at the--there was a union hall in Manhattan [New York, New York] that had an exhibition space. Charles Abramson and George Mingo and a couple of people curated a show of collaborative works between black artists. So I got to meet a bunch of artists as a part of this collaborative group, and we did an exhibition there in New York. But that was the only exhibition I did in New York other than my show at the Studio Museum. That show at the Studio Museum was reviewed in the 'New York Times'. Story_ID: 10442 Speaker 1: I was contacted by Arthur Jafa who was the cinematographer for 'Daughters of the Dust'. They were getting ready to go down to South Carolina to do some preliminary work and try to shoot a little bit of footage, so they can put together a trailer to use to raise some money. So it happened to coincide with the time I was going to come to Chicago [Illinois] with [wife and actress] Cheryl [Lynn Bruce] who was from Chicago. So we went down--came to Chicago, dropped off her stuff, went down to South Carolina for three weeks and shot a few--you know, some footage and they put together a trailer and used that trailer to raise the money to ultimately get a budget for doing 'Daughters [of the Dust]'. Working on 'Daughters' was actually a pivotal event for me, not only did I, just in terms of meeting a lot of people and working on the film and finding out a lot about what was happening in that region. It was South Carolina on the Sea Islands, but I made enough money working on 'Daughters of the Dust' to not have to work again for a year when I came back to Chicago. And so I took that year--and this is why you have these moments when you say to yourself, "If I'm ever going to make any kind of a difference as an artist, I've gotta--," you've gotta give yourself the best shot you can. Which means, you've got to be able to spend at least a year doing nothing but your work, you're putting everything you got into it and seeing what you got and then presenting that. And I spent that--with the money I had from working on 'Daughters', it afforded me a year of not having to work and I spent all of that time developing a body of work that I used to show a show at Koplin Gallery [Santa Monica, formerly in Los Angeles, California] in 1992; either '92 [1992] or '93 [1993]. The work that I showed at Koplin, I applied for an NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] Grant--I got a $20,000 NEA Grant. And with that NEA Grant, I got a studio. The first studio I had in Chicago. Prior to that, I had been working in my room at the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], which was only six by nine [feet], and then the work I did for the Koplin show I did in our apartment, we were living in Hyde Park [neighborhood in Chicago]. But I got the studio on Wabash [Avenue]--the scale of the work immediately grew to whatever size the space would accommodate. It was with that scale and that work that I was doing in that studio, that all of the work that I became really well recognized for started to come together. Once you get the space to do what you got to do, you know, you take advantage of it. I think I really took advantage of having that space and I made that work. I had sent out some slides to the [Chicago] Cultural Center here and to the State of Illinois Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]. I figured, I just wanted to get a sense of what people thought of some of the things I was doing. So I would send out a couple of feelers to some of the non-profits and see what the response was. I got a call back from Debora [Duez] Donato who was the curator at the State of Illinois Gallery and I talked to her about the possibility of doing a show. But then I simultaneously got a call--well shortly after that I got a call from Lanny Silverman at the Cultural Center, who was interested in the slides I'd sent and wanted to talk about a show. But I had told him that when I spoke to Debora Donato. She said, "Well if we've gotta do a show at the State of Illinois Gallery, you can't show anywhere else in Chicago until after that." So when Lanny called, I said, "Well I just had this conversation with Debora Donato, she said, well if they are thinking about doing the show, you can't show anywhere else in Chicago. They have to be the only one." So he said, "Maybe there's a way we can work something out where we can both do a show, but do different things. Maybe they'll show some paintings, we'll show some drawings." So he called her up and said, "Look, you know, I heard you're going to be doing this show, blah, blah--let's see if we can work something out where we can do--you do one thing, we'll do another thing." Well she was offended by that actually, that I had even talked to somebody else. So we had--she called me and said, "I heard you're having a show at the Cultural Center," and said, "I guess that means you don't want to show at the State of Illinois Gallery." I said, "Well no, that doesn't mean that at all really." So anyway we had this confrontation--it turned into a confrontation, where she was sort of offended that I would even think to talk to somebody else when she was thinking about having a show. So I said, "Well we hadn't even set a firm date for anything, we're just in discussions about it." So we had this long discussion in which she--at a certain point, she had tried to figure out a way to cut me down, you know, because I had sort of overstepped my position and gone ahead and talked to somebody else without her approval. So she was trying to figure out a way to undermine the work that I had done. She was interested in it, but all of a sudden she wasn't interested anymore because there were too many different kind of things going on in the work, sort of all over the place. "You've got collages; you've got prints; you've got paintings; you've got drawings, what's all this stuff? This is too different, you know." So I said, "That wasn't the problem a while ago." So anyway, that show at the State of Illinois Gallery never happened. So I ended up doing the big show at the Cultural Center. Story_ID: 10443 Speaker 1: That [Chicago] Cultural Center show [1992] had everything to do with establishing a reputation for me in Chicago [Illinois]. As a result of that show at the Cultural Center, I was asked by Phyllis Bramson who teaches at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] to take--she was going on sabbatical and she was looking for somebody to take her position for a year at UIC. As a result of that, I was in--she saw that show and asked if I would take her position at UIC. I had never even met Phyllis Bramson and didn't even know she was thinking that until the Corcoran [Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.] Biennial was being curated and Terrie Sultan was in town to see my work for the Corcoran Biennial. When I finished with my meeting with her, she asked me if I would drop her off at Carl Hammer Gallery, because she was going to meet this other artist named Phyllis Bramson, who I didn't even know of. When I walked into the gallery, she said, "Well you know I picked you to take my job when I'm on sabbatical at UIC." I said "Well, first I heard of it." We've never even met before. So that's how I got my--the position at UIC first. So it was a one year sabbatical replacement. Then after that year was up, Judith Kirshner who was the Director [sic, Dean of the College of Architecture and the Arts] at the time, they liked the way I was--the way I am. Sort of what I knew, what I could do, the way I taught and asked me if I would be interested in staying on part-time. I took a part-time, teaching one class a semester. And then I also was kind of a mentor, kind of counselor for a group--they had a program called the Polk Brothers Scholars Program, where they were taking disadvantaged students who had an interest in art and giving them a chance to go to school. So I became the, the mentor coordinator for that group. So I was doing that and teaching my class. Then they were trying to figure out a way to keep me there. 'Cause when I came to UIC actually, Martin Puryear had taught at UIC for ten years, I think it was. When he got his MacArthur [Foundation] Fellowship, he quit--moved to New York. And so they were--they weren't looking to fill his position because he was in sculpture and I was in painting. But there was no black presence at UIC after Martin Puryear left, and I seemed to be perfectly suited for that job. Everybody respected what I did and they respected the way I thought about the work. So they asked me to stay on as a part-timer, you know, doing one class. Then they figured out a way to get me hired full-time. Story_ID: 10444 Speaker 1: In '95 [1995] everything just sort of exploded in a way in 1995. Madeleine Grynsztejn curated the show at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] called 'About Place [Recent Art of the Americas]' and I did the paintings, the 'Garden Project' paintings for that show. Everything opened up. I mean, it had opened up with the 'Lost Boys' show and paintings. That was the most successful body of work I had done in total. The 'Lost Boys' paintings, including the big painting and in the painting called, 'This Style', those are the paintings that I--when I said, I had always--my ambition was directed towards making those paintings. When I made the 'Lost Boys' painting in the style painting, I had finally begun to make the kind of paintings I had always imagined myself being able to make. Those were the paintings that did it. The 'About Place' paintings--the 'Garden Project' things, they were just a further development and refinement of all of things I'd been working towards up to the time I did the 'Lost Boys' painting. And at that--at the point when I did the 'Lost Boys' painting, I had reached another plateau in my development as an artist, where I was so sure of myself at that point. I understood precisely what I needed to do in every circumstance, so that I had fewer to almost no missteps in the work that I was producing at that moment, and once I'd crossed that threshold, everything else was clear to me that I was gonna do from that point on. And I had no--I seemed to have no trouble getting what I needed to get done. Story_ID: 10445 Speaker 1: I had reached another plateau with the 'Garden Pro-', with the 'Lost Boys' paintings. Then that development just is--been refined since 1994 into what I'm doing now. Now because my--now I had achieved all of the things I set out to achieve. Here's the thing. When I did the 'Lost Boys' show, the 'Lost Boys' paintings and the 'De Style' painting, I had that show in Los Angeles [California]. With that show, I had actually achieved everything I set out to achieve, because from that show, the painting, the 'De Style' painting was bought by the L.A. County Art Museum [sic, Los Angeles County Museum of Art]. The L.A. County Art Museum was the first museum I'd ever gone into as a child, when I went on a field trip with my school and that was the place where I'm saying, "What do I have to do to get work that foregrounds representations of black people into this space that exists on the same scale that all of the other work that's in the museum occupies that space?" That was the painting that did that. Once I had done that, I had actually done everything that I set out to do. Because here now was a big painting. The painting was ten foot square, bought by the L.A. County Art Museum. It's in the museum; the first museum I ever went into; the museum I used to hang around at, all through my teenage years and when I was an adult, up until I left L.A.--it was the museum I went to all the time. So that was, for me, a significant accomplishment to have a work of mine hanging in that museum amongst all those other paintings I used to go see. So in essence, I had done everything I had set out to do. Subsequently, all of the work that I did after that show has found its way into museums everywhere, from the Whitney Museum [Museum of American Art, New York, New York] to the Denver [Art] Museum [Denver, Colorado]--it's all over. Now it's out there. Not only is it out there in the museums, but it's also found its way in the general discourse of art history, so that when the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] bought the painting they have and it's included in their 'Master Paintings from the Art Institute' [sic, 'Master Paintings in The Art Institute of Chicago'], that's where you want to be, where your work--there's a book somebody--an institution publishes a book they call 'Master Paintings', and you're in there amongst all those other painters that they call masters, well that's what you're sort of striving for as an individual. I also got some--and this is the kind of confirmation you're always looking for, that people recognize what you try to do and saw some value in it. This is people who know about art and ten that the work also affects people who are just a part of the general population because it's, when I walk into the Art Institute and all of the security guards recognize me from having been in that show and they all feel comfortable enough coming to talk to me and they tell people who I am. They telling other patrons of the museum, "Oh, he's such a nice guy. If he was in here, he would tell you all about that painting and stuff." So that's the kind of perception of myself I always wanted people to have. And then I was--the best confirmation of what I felt was my success came in an article in a magazine. There's a magazine called 'Frieze' that's out of London [England]. There was an article in it by this artist named Dan Graham who was one of the early, sort to prototypical conceptual artists in the '70s [1970s]. Conceptual art and video art. So he wrote this article called, 'Ode to Discernment' [sic, written by Dan Cameron], which was about three painters, none of whom were me, actually. But at the end of the article, the last two paragraphs of the article, he mentions my name. So the last two paragraphs are about me and he talks about what these paintings that I've done that--he talks about them as the kind of narrative, a certain kind of pseudo-narrative painting, that advanced this idea that certain social conditions are just unacceptable. But in doing that, "They bring unchecked paintily beauty into the equation as well." That one little phrase right there is the key to everything that I tried to do as an artist. To have somebody recognize what the work is socially--means socially and politically, but at the same time say that, "These are beautiful paintings too." This is where there's a tension between those two things and the work. And for somebody who is not inclined to like paintings, to recognize that and to articulate that as a value in the work was in some ways another one of these sort of, ultimate achievements. Here's a person who everybody--whose ideas and opinions as a theoretician of art, are respected. Saying that about the work is, that's the kind of recognition you really want to have as an artist, where people who are in the know, not only understand, but can articulate a value in the work, even if it's not stuff that they're inclined to be interested in generally. Story_ID: 10446 Speaker 1: From this point on, what do you really want to accomplish as an artist? Speaker 2: I think a lot of what I want to accomplish is pedagogical, as a teacher. I was tenured as a full professor at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago]. In three years, which and this is sort of, you take my original objective to prove a point that being good at what you do is more important than having a degree of any kind in some ways. But being good at what you do doesn't mean that you reject or dismiss the academic dimensions of the thing that you're a part of, that you got to know it. You've got to know it in some objective and concrete terms. So having achieve what I did--to find my way now--so to having achieved sort of the most that you can achieve in the academic environment, like people have been spending twenty years trying to become full professors at university. To come in, the way I came in on the strength of my work. It's like everything I've achieve came on the strength of my work, not on social connections, partly supported by my personality because I'm interested in what I do. So my reason for going back into school was that I thought everybody who goes to school should come out equipped the way I feel like I'm equipped. To make the kinds of choices that I felt like I've been able to make because of what I can do and what I know. And that it's the responsibility of people who teach, not to tell people what they should or shouldn't be doing, but to help them to know how to get what they want to get done; done the best they can. So I'm in school. My contribution is actually, that's my primary contribution, I guess, to exist as an example of what knowledge of your area can bring you. To exist and exactly how to do it on your own terms, but your own terms as constructed through the terms of excellence, established by the area you intend to operate in. This is the thing, it's like, if you want to be a musician, the best musicians, the people who--there are a lot of good session people, but then there are people who play sessions and there are people who make sessions. It's better to be a person who makes a session, than it is to be a person who plays a session as far as--that's my idea. So I think if my life is exemplary in any way, it should be a demonstration of first, how hard you've got to work, how much you've got to know, and what kinds of skills you have to have, in order that you can put yourself in a position where your work is considered alongside the best things that are being done in that area. Story_ID: 10447 Speaker 1: I've wanted to know if compromise played a role, but it sounded at the end that it was more strategy. But you know--but you were at one point, I thought you were talking about the fact African American artists inherently were compromised in order to be able to make it in the mainstream. Speaker 2: Well, in one way you are, to the degree that--if there's no clearly articulated philosophy of a black aesthetic that can function competitively against what we see as a European model of aesthetic excellence, then the only way you can achieve--here's where black people--you've got to demonstrate two things at once. You've got to demonstrate a certain mastery in understanding of the Western European tradition, at the same time that you're trying to create a new alternative tradition or aesthetic of your own. So you've got to come through that other one in order to achieve a certain kind of legitimacy. That's double work and it's hard work to do. Having to do that hard work, it does compromise the ability of a lot of artists to achieve that, because you grow up in a situation where your circumstance and conditions force you to have to do certain kinds of things. Whether you like it or not, you've got to make a living. A lot of people, starting late--see, I was fortunate enough I think, to start early, but starting late means you've got to get to the goal faster. I think it makes people take shortcuts. It's a luxury to be able to focus purely on the acquisition of knowledge and skills without any other affecting situations and circumstances. You can only really do that if you're a kid. You can't need to pay the rent or support a family and do that at the same time. I just don't think you can. I was lucky enough to have done a lot of that hard work when I was being taken care of by my parents [James Marshall and Ora Dee Prentiss Marshall], when I was a child and when I was a teenager. People who--and I didn't start this whole thing with an artist as a career objective. It wasn't meant to make a living for me. I was only in it to achieve a certain level of competence and a level of--certain stature alongside other artists, you know, not to make a living. But when you have people now, graduating from school, going to college and then going into programs where they can get a degree in, and you get a degree only because you think it's going to help you get a better job. Well you don't have the luxury of spending the kind of time it really takes to develop yourself, to internalize the--to internalize all the values that are relevant I think, to the development of innovative (pauses) and risky kinds of work. Because for me, doing figurative paintings--starting out doing figurative paintings in the 1970s was a risky proposition, because there was no evidence at the time that anybody was going to be interested in what seemed to be relatively conventional, kind of traditional figurative painting. That was already kind of over for a lot of people and so there was no evidence that that was going to ever be a viable path of expression. So I had the luxury of trying it out as a younger person. I think one of the things we fail to realize is that for most of the people who made significant contributions to whatever discipline they were a part of, they started out with that as a goal when they were really young. It's like, Charlie Parker was dead by the time he was thirty-five or thirty-two years old. I mean, look what he had done and he had developed the tendency towards doing what he did with bebop and things like that when he was eighteen, nineteen. Miles Davis playing with Thelonious Monk and people like that when they were, they were young. So it's like, when you start late, you're already compromised, I think, already compromised. Speaker 1: Okay, so are you an artist first or an African American artist first, or is there not a different (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, the thing I'm--you're--I'm an African American first and then I am an artist because those things like, I can't be an artist and not be an African American. So that's--I'm that first. Any artist, you can only make work out of the experiences you had in your life. I can't make art like anybody else. This is the thing. This is where the whole question of black aesthetic is problematic I think, for a lot of people. You can't not make work, from a black perspective, even if you want to. The attempt to do so is consistent with your position as a black person in America. The fact that you can formulate that as a problem, as a possibility, is consistent with the experiences that people have had historically in the United States. It influences what that work is going to look like, just the attempt to try. The attempt to do so is also based on an imaginary set of certain conditions that you think this other thing has. You could be completely mistaken by it, because you're not coming at that from the inside. You're looking at it from the outside. You've taken the set of characters that you think are typical of it and you're trying to construct something that circumvents who you are (chuckle) and then takes advantage of who you think somebody else is. Well that's a completely--can't--nobody else can do that, except somebody who's outside the culture that they're trying to emulate. So it's an absurd--on some levels, it's an absurd proposition and it tends to handicap people into constructing the kinds of really amazing things they really have the potential to make. Because in order to, once you establish a set of limitations in which you work, you come up against a series of conflicts, because anything that starts to not look like what you think it's supposed to is a problem and you've got to figure out what to do about that. How could I possibly? There's no such thing as a neutral position from which anybody can operate. There's no neutrality. Everything is historically-racially-gender-determined. You work inside of your experience as one of those things or combination of those things all together. It's like [Nehemiah Curtis] 'Skip' James--Skip James is a blues musician; had another one of my favorite lines. He says, "I've been and gone from places you'll never get to," so there's no way anybody else has the same experiences or perceptions that I have of anything. All of my experiences come out of the ones that I've had. What else have I got to work on. I said--Leonardo da Vinci too, say it's--artists, you can neither love something nor hate something until you've known it really. You can't make work from a position you never occupied. (chuckle) Story_ID: 10448 Speaker 1: What is your obsession? You've used your obsession quite a bit. What is your obsession? Speaker 2: Well my obsession really is to get--my obsession actually is knowing how things work, knowing why people make the decision they make, why people are inclined to do--to choose some of the things they choose. My obsession is actually with undermin-, with exposing hypocrisy and inconsistency in institutional judgement. That's an obsession of mine. I'm obsessed with getting people to articulate exactly what they mean when they say they like something; or when they say there's something good to say exactly what the terms under which they've determined it to be good. That's an obsession of mine. My obsession is really with knowing how things work and why. Story_ID: 10449 Speaker 1: The role you think art plays in society and why you think that's important. Speaker 2: See, I have an odd position. I actually don't think art is important, particularly important. It's an interesting thing to do. It's interesting to consider. It's interesting to think about, but in terms of importance, I can't say that I feel that is all that important. The reason for that is, because--artists don't do much that other people don't do or think about things in ways that other people don't think about them. The only thing that's unique about the arts is that and visual arts in particular, is that we use visual language to communicate the things we do. Like there isn't anything I made work about that everybody else sort of, hadn't thought about. Whether they're trained or untrained in the arts. So that's my thing. It's like when--so what makes that important. The only thing important, if one could say that without the things that I've done, the lives of people in the world would be substantially depressed or there was something--something would be substantially missing from the experiences that people have in their lives if I didn't make the work that I was making. I can't say that that's--I don't believe that that's so. It's a fascinating--I find art to be a fascinating set of problems to solve and the problems of--"How can--What are the most interesting ways in which I can use visual language to communicate any set of ideas that I might be interested in? It's like, "What's the most interesting way I can do that?" In particular, given the incredible inventory of visual representations that already exist in the world; what's the most interesting way I can do that now? I'd say, 'cause my father [James Marshall] actually, for almost all my life, my father actually was never at one exhibition that I did. He didn't really start to understand any value--he can only access the value of the work I was doing in relationship to how much money people were willing to pay for it. In some cases, what social milieu it allowed me to get into. The most important experience he ever had with me around my work was the chance to meet Marcus Allen [professional football player]. Marcus Allen saw a painting of mine at Koplin [Gallery] and wanted to buy it, but somebody else had already bought it. He tried to buy it from them, and they wouldn't sell it. So he called me and asked if I would make another one like it for him. (chuckle) I did that painting, a variation on this painting and made it significant to him, you know, put some information that was relevant to his career and to his life and things. He met me at the gallery to come and take a look at it. My father wanted to go with me. (chuckle) Going to the gallery, meeting Marcus Allen and seeing how me and him and then Paul Winfield [actor] who's bought paintings of mine and stuff like that, that meant a lot to my father. Had nothing to do with the work idea, but it had everything to do with what it means to be in that milieu. I couldn't say that my father's life, that that was--that his life was one of any kind of deprivation because he wasn't interested in my art of anybody else's art. Because he had other outlets for his interest in things of beauty and things that had meaning. So for me to say that, "Yeah, if you don't go to galleries or the museum, your life is sort of worthless." It would be to devalue or diminish what I think that's an important (pauses)--important levels of experience in the lives of all of these people that I know, all of the people in my family. The ones who come to the gallery and they all love--your family, you know, they come to the museum and everything you do is wonderful, because you're part of the family. They don't even look at the pictures on the wall sometimes, they just know it's wonderful. But that's, that's meaningful and they all have meaningful lives, independent of their interest in the art world the way--I'm interested in the art world because I'm in it, but I don't expect everybody else to be interested in it to the same degree that I am. My father--I can't tell you whether my father ever went to a movie at a theater. In my entire life, I don't think I ever know him to have gone to a movie theater. I know once, he went to see, 'Norman...is That You?' at the Ebony Showcase Theatre [and Cultural Arts Center] in L.A. [Los Angeles, Calilfornia]. They went to see a play, but that's the only cultural event like that I think I've ever--I could honestly say that my father ever went to, but I learned a lot from my father, nonetheless. I got a lot from him. He taught me things that nobody else would have taught me. Story_ID: 10450 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My legacy. (pauses) Actually, that I made some work that made a difference and that I brought a lot of--I showed some other people the way to do the same thing. That's what I really want my legacy to be..