 Story_ID: 665872 Speaker 1: Okay, let's start by slating. I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Today is November 11th--right--2016 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And I'm at--we are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] in--at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. I would like for you to please say and spell you're name; tell me your birthdate and what you do? Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Jill Nelson: J-I-L-L, N-E-L-S-O-N. I'm--was born on June 14th, 1952. I'm a writer of nonfiction, a journalist, a writer of fiction; and I've recently become a creator of collage. Speaker 1: Oh, nice. So, I--I want to start a little differently. You--you're wearing a sign that says, "I still can't breathe," and I would like for you to tell me about this sign? Speaker 2: Well I'm sixty-four [years old], I was politicized in my late teens, early twenties by murder of black children by the police, a little boy named Clifford Glover and another named Randolph Evans who were shot and killed by the police in--both [sic.] I think in Queens [New York] as I remember. And so the recent killings, more recent, they've always continued, but the uproar over the death of Eric Garner who was killed by an illegal police choke hold. His last words were, "I can't breathe, I can't breathe, I can't breathe," he said it eleven times. And I went to a bunch of demonstrations for months around the issue of police accountability and police violen- violence. And then it died out, it died down. Two police officers were killed and the mayor [Bill de Blasio] somehow managed to conflate that with the protests, and since then it's been rather quiet. So I just started wearing this sign as a way to remind myself, and to testify and maybe to reach out to other people and remind them and let them know I was in solidarity--to warn our children and grandchildren about what can happen. Speaker 1: How long have you been wearing it? Speaker 2: It's almost a year. Speaker 1: What kinds of reactions do you get? Speaker 2: Lots of heads up, especially from people of color. Surprising the people who are supportive sometimes, you know, there'll be a bunch of men--I live in Washington Heights [New York, New York], and there'll be a munch of--bunch of Dominican men playing dominos and I'll walk by on my way to the store and they'll be like, "Yeah mami," thumbs up. I also get a look, sometimes, from white people which I call the--I felt bad about that already look, you know, the kind of, get over it. I already was depressed about that, I went to a demo [demonstration]. In some ways those are the most satisfying responses because I'm--I wanna remind you, I wanna be in your face: it's not done 'cause you stomped around for a couple of hours last year. Story_ID: 665873 Speaker 1: In recent days and years, so many of these murders of young black men in particular by police and others have occurred and been documented thanks to camera phones. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you feel like there has been any progress? Speaker 2: In terms of raising consciousness of some Americans? Absolutely. In terms of any justice for those who have been murdered? No. I don't see it. The only person I can think of now who was convicted was the guy, I think in Oklahoma, who was an elderly guy [Robert Bates] who was kind of a wannabe cop follower. And was for some reason included in police activities and said he was reaching for his tager- taser, but in fact killed, I think the man was Eric Williams [sic.] with his gun. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was he William, or? Speaker 1: I don't remember the name but I know there was a young man (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eric Harris. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Eric Harris--right. Speaker 1: So the fact that we have technology to document these crimes, you know, we are in 2016, is--is it making a difference? Speaker 2: (Pause) I think white supremacy and white privilege and racism trumps all in this country. You know I--twenty or thirty years ago I used to think that it was South Africa, that that would be the country that would drive itself and its people, all of them, into the sea before they would begin--they would change, begin to deal with apartheid. It's us, and that's what I think thirty years later--that's what I know, it's us. We're the ones who can't--this country that can't let go. I don't think it matters. And we saw it with Rodney King where that was pro- -probably the first taped beating where the--the--during the trial they showed him rising and narrated it, see he's got this animal strength and he's like a gorilla and he's coming up and they had to beat him. And they showed it over and over and over until people were so desensitized if they--that there was no chance that those officers were gonna be convicted of anything. And I personally feel this way now with the murders. I don't watch them anymore, I watch them a couple of times to see what happened and then I let it go. Because these are real people being killed right in front of our eyes, and I think that if you--it's not a spectator sport. Speaker 1: And in a moment we're gonna go back to the beginning of your story, but let's stay here for just a minute. We- because as we're talking about police brutalization, murder of young African American men or Afri- whatever age they are, African American males with no repercussion. You know, Amadou Diallo was on Giuliani's watch. When Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] was mayor in New York City [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a lot of bad things happened to young black males. And there's talk of him being part of the cabinet of the next administration [of President Donald John Trump]. What do you as an activist and journalist and thinker and writer think? Speaker 2: He's a fascist, he's a rat. He has no respect for the rights of individual citizens and people of color. He's a racist, and I will do everything in my power to stop him from becoming a member of the cabinet; and I've heard that he--they're thinking about him for attorney general. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean this is a man who justified police murders year after year after year, month after month, who when two undercover cops killed Patrick Dorismond--they came at him on 42nd Street I believe and asked if he had drugs. Dorismond was just standing there and when he said no and was offended by being typed as a drug dealer, he was killed and Giuliani declared him not--no altar boy, illegally reduced his--I mean released his records, minor criminal record; and then it turned out that Patrick Dorismond in fact was an altar boy. He's bad, but this is where we are in this country, you know, it's the--I--I think we're in the new confederacy and this is really similar to what happened, the backlash to--in terms of Reconstruction. That's what I say, it's a last--but I do believe the good news is that I do believe that it is the last gasp of the dying white culture, globally, it's over. White supremacy is over. Now, living inside this death--this dying, rotten, corrupt body is awful, even for tho- and probably mo- most so for those of us who are progressive and who are not white supremacists. But this is I think what it takes, this true awfulness especially with the recent presidential election to create real change and break this all down. I hope so. Story_ID: 665874 Speaker 1: Now we're going to start the way we normally do-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which is with some very simple what we call People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: Season? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: Fish. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: I'm done. Story_ID: 665875 Speaker 1: So now we're gonna go to your family, and we like to start with your mother and go back as far as you know about her family, and then we'll do the same with your father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.]. So please tell me your mother's name and when and where she was born, and a bit about her? Speaker 2: Her name was A'Lelia Ransom, maiden name; her married name was Nelson [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson]. She was born in Indianapolis, Indiana. She was the only girl with five brothers. She was the fourth child. Her father's name was F.B. Ransom [Freeman B. Ransom]. He was from Jackson, Mississippi. Her mother's name was Nettie Cox, she was also from Jackson. They both came from large families. My grandfather was the general manager for the Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company [Indianapolis, Indiana] that manufactured hair products for black women. My grandmother was a homemaker and a community and civic activist. They were very involved in the black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] integrating the other YMCA in-- Speaker 1: In Jackson? Speaker 2: Yeah--no in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They got out of Jackson. My grandfather married--I'm sorry met Madam C.J. Walker when he was working on a train to work his way through school, and he met Madam C.J. Walker who was traveling with a, you know, bag full of her hair products and she would see him regularly. And the story is that she told him, you know, "When you get out of school, call me, you know, you're a smart young man." And so he did. And that's how he ended up in Indianapolis going there to work-- Speaker 1: Where was he going to school? Speaker 2: --for her. I don't remember [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: He was in college? Speaker 2: Yes, he was in college. Speaker 1: And around--when was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen twenties [1920s]--something like that. Speaker 1: Was he the first in his family to go to college, do you know? Speaker 2: I think he was, I think he was. Speaker 1: What was he-- Speaker 2: And I'm sorry, it had to be earlier than the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was about to say (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right, it was probably around the turn of the century-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --'cause Madam Walker died-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --pretty early, and. Speaker 1: So for it to be around the turn of the century, he was one of few blacks who attended college at that point, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And it seems that that's a value that's been in my family on my mother's side, and my father's side in different ways for a long time, you know, to become educated people. My grandmother, Nettie Cox Ransom, my mother's mother was also from Jackson, also from a big family; and her father was active in the community. His name was Diamond Cox. I love that name, they should've named me Diamond. He was active in the community as well, and helped to start an insurance company. He ran at one point, I just found this out, he ran at one point for postmaster of Jackson and--against a white guy and won. They--in his obituary they said that he had not left that--he had a beautiful enormous house with a big porch, I have a picture I brought of my grandparents' wedding at that house in Jackson. But they said--in his obit [obituary], they said he didn't leave that much materially, but he left so much spiritually and in terms of his influence on the community (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And postmaster was a big job. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Oh yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Especially then. Speaker 2: Yes, especially then. Story_ID: 665876 Speaker 1: My grandmother, Nettie Cox's [Nettie Cox Ransom] mother, Grandma Cox, who was I think about five feet tall, lived--my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] used to tell the story of her--she grew up with--she lived with her daughter and my grandfather [Freeman B. Ransom]. And she used to talk--she was a former slave. And my mother would say that they would always try to ask her about it and her thing was like, "I didn't--I don't know anything about that slavery, I was in the big house playing with little missy. That was my job." Tiny little five foot woman, clearly mixed race, straight hair, looked pretty white, so. Speaker 2: But she didn't talk about any of that? Speaker 1: No, she didn't, my mother said. And then she said they tried for years, all of them, to get her to talk about it. And she lived a long life, so, but she didn't wanna talk about that--slavery. Speaker 2: Or her--what the blood lines were? Speaker 1: Or what the blood lines were--no, no. But you know, it's so funny when people talk about mixed race people now, because if you look--identify themselves as mixed race. Because if you look at any Africana person--any African American on the street, anywhere, clearly we're all mixed race; or you know, the vast majority of us are. So, you know, this notion of kind of like my mixed race is better than yours because mine was voluntary and yours was rape is absurd. But I notice this kind of pushing of this racial ambiguity in the culture in terms of way people identify themselves, but also in terms of I'm sure you notice this, the visual of ads and commercials and what you s- is being pushed. It's p- you know, "Are they black, or?" what's going on. Speaker 2: Well and to the, to your point, it's not new? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Right, but you know I think that it used to be that the people were black. Like you knew Lena Horne was black. She might have looked kind of super light, but she was black. Now it--I mean it's people where I as a black person have to do a double take, you know, "Is that a black kid in that ad? You know, is that a black boy in that ad? Is that a sister?" I think, you know, black looking black people are becoming obsolete. Speaker 2: Or, in many ways. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 665877 Speaker 1: I wanna make sure which one you were saying, was it, was it your mother or your grandmother who was helping to integrate the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]? Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Nettie Cox Ransom]. Speaker 1: Your grandmother. Speaker 2: My grandmother (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was in--this would be in the early 1900s? Speaker 2: Yes, in Indianapolis, Indiana. Speaker 1: And so, this is--to try to integrate the YMCA at that time, again is something-- Speaker 2: Right. No, I'm sorry, at that time they just wanted--they were pushing for the creation of a black YMCA-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which they did. And then later-- Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: --in the early '40s [1940s] or late-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that early '40s [1940s] they started pushing to integrate because-- Speaker 1: So at first she was responsible-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for helping them to get a black one at all? Speaker 2: A black--yes. One at all. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And so this consciousness about having your own in the community is something that goes back in your family a long way. How--what--what's the conversation that you remember from your mother's family about race and identity or do y- did she talk about that? Speaker 2: My mother? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean it was that we were part of something larger than just ourselves; and that we had to deal with not only our identity and our aspirations as individuals, but as part of a race of people who we represented, who we had an obligation to help, who were magnificent and there but for the grace of God. And we--I did not come from a religious family, we never went to church in my family. But it was that sense of your lo- li- your obligation and your place in life is bigger than just what you're going to accomplish for yourself. And I think that our lives have reflect--the lives of--our lives have reflected it, you know. Speaker 1: And it--for her, did she talk about where that focus originated in her family? Speaker 2: I think from her father [Freeman B. Ransom], from her mother. From her father as a business person and pushing this black company and it was--she was the first self ma- American self made millionaire. She hired tons of black people, Madam Walker. She empowered women by letting them become Madam C.J. Walker agents and earning their own money. She created these proje- products. She built buildings. She built the Walker Theatre [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana], the Walker manufacturing--Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company and building in Indianapolis. So this sense that you have a community and that you can build in this community. I mean in the Madam Walker building in Indianapolis, she built a theater because theaters were segregated, and where black people were allowed to sit was the upper reaches in the dump part of the theater--the nosebleed seats. And so she built a theater that was magnificent. You know, and great beautiful soft seats, and, and beautiful paintings and murals on the walls, and plaster casts because she felt that we needed something gorgeous and something wonderful. So it was that sense of-- Speaker 1: And your father worked with her from as soon as he got--so you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandfather. Speaker 1: Excuse me-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --your grandfather from as soon as he finished school-- Speaker 2: As soon as he finished school and he--until she died; and then he worked for her daughter, A'Lelia Walker. And he died in, I think, 1940. He worked at the Walker company--was a general manager until he died in 1947. Speaker 1: And they named your mother after her, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, my mother's name was A'Lelia [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson], named after A'Lelia Walker who was Madam C.J. Walker's adopted daughter. Story_ID: 665878 Speaker 1: Given that your, your grandfather [Freeman B. Ransom] worked for Madam C.J. Walker, was, was he considered affluent, like based upon his job, was that--that was a good job in terms of his contemporaries, was--what was the family's economic status? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think well to do. They were considered well to do. They had a summer home in Fox Lake, Indiana [Angola, Indiana]. You know, now we--you know, it's a little cottage on a lake, but he, that--they had that for many, many, many years when my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] was growing up and we went there, you know, as kids. Although we grew up in New York [New York], we would go there some summers and spend time with family. So, affluent. Speaker 1: And did they live in an affluent black neighborhood, was there such a thing back then? Speaker 2: You know, they lived on California Street, it was a black neighborhood. I think it was relatively affluent. I think they were probably one--among the more affluent people who lived there. And actually they--the City of Indiana [sic. Indianapolis, Indiana] re- restored that neighborhood, it deteriorated and they just restored it long after my--my mother's family sold the house and named it Ransom Place [Indianapolis, Indiana]. They built a little community and sold the houses I think initially mostly to people of color, but I think gentrification has-- Speaker 1: Changed that. Speaker 2: --changed that. Story_ID: 665879 Speaker 1: Please tell me about your father and when and where he was born; and about him and his family? Speaker 2: My father was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Stanley Earl Nelson [Stanley Nelson, Sr.]. He was born in Washington, D.C. He--his people were from Charlottesville, Virginia area. My grandfather, Howard Nelson, was a twin. And his mother had been married once--her husband died, she married again and I believe she had fourteen children total. My grandmother's name was Florence Mills. She grew up in--outside Charlottesville as well in a community called--they both grew up in a community called Esmont, Virginia, which is right outside Charlottesville. And she had, I believe, eleven or twelve siblings, you know. They were--my father--my grandfather--they were horse people on, I believe, on my grandfather's side, Howard Nelson; and on my grandmother's side, I believe her father was a carpenter and her mother was a seamstress and a maid. So that's what was done. Speaker 1: And Charlottesville, what--what size town was that? Speaker 2: S- then? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: You know, medium, pretty prosperous. It was right near--it's where Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] was. And it's funny, my grandfather's last name is Nelson, and there's a Nelson County [Virginia] right next to--right near Charlottesville. So, I'm pretty sure that's where the name came from. Yeah, but they were rural people. They were not city folk (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And farm- farmers--were any of them farmers? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think they might have had kitchen gardens. I can remember my father and my uncle talking about that, but not full time farmers. Speaker 1: So these are very large families. What were their homes like, do you know? Speaker 2: You know, I--I don't know. I know a little bit about my grandmother, Florence Mills Nelson. Her family, her--her mother, Betsy Mills [ph.] bought--was a former slave and bought land outs- ten acres, outside Charlottesville in 1900, which we still have. It's just--there was a house there and my father and his brother can remember going down, there were two creeks on the land. They've told stories about going down there to visit. They would drive down there to get their Christmas tree and go out in the woods and cut the tree down and then put it in the back of a truck or however they got there and haul it back to D.C. where they lived. And recently I have--a realtor went on the land and--a surveyor and took pictures. So the--you can see the old--some of the old foundation. You can see some of the chimney. So it was kind of--they have wonderful stories and they talked about having an ice house that their grandfather built into a bank--a mud bank where they would cut ice from the river and then take it down--from the creek, and take it down and store it over the winter. And when they needed ice, they would go down there and get it. Speaker 1: Wow. And when did the family move further north, do you know? Speaker 2: My grandmother in 19--probably between 1910 and 1920, something like that. Speaker 1: And where did they go? Speaker 2: They went to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, so they moved from--? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: So that--that wasn't that far was it? How far was? Speaker 2: It wasn't that fa- well three hours maybe, not that far, but I think an ocean away in terms of possibilities. You know, they thought they could get better work, have a better life. I don't think, you know, they want- I don't think they wanted to be farmers or maids or. Speaker 1: And what did they do in D.C.? Speaker 2: My grandfather had a grocery store at one point, it failed. He worked on the trains. He worked as a laborer, I believe. I seem to re- recollect one time him hoping that he would get a job at the White House [Washington, D.C.], but he did not. My grandmother hustled: she sold girdles, she baked, she cooked; she did whatever she could do to-- Speaker 1: And she had a lot of children. Speaker 2: --to make a living. No, my grandmother actually had four, three boys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh her, okay, got it. Speaker 2: Yes, three boys and one girl. Story_ID: 665880 Speaker 1: How did your parents meet? Speaker 2: My mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] was a librarian. She went to Talladega College in Alabama [Talladega, Alabama], and then she went to Columbia University [New York, New York] to the lib- school of library science; and then she got a job in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] during the war [World War II, WWII]. And my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I--from what I gather kind of a player, but he--and they were poor. He went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], his whole family did. And he wanted to be like--he wanted to go--he wanted to be like the people in college, you know, he looked up to them and he wanted to be successful. And so he hung out a lot with college people. And then the war, when the war came he heard that if you were in medical school you wouldn't be drafted. You would--and so he went and applied to the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and--he went to apply to medical school and the applications were closed. So he went to the dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] and he became a dentist-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --because he didn't wanna go in the war. Story_ID: 665881 Speaker 1: Your father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] went to dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] to escape the war. Now this is interesting because you said his family was poor, your mother's [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] family was educated-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was his family educated? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So was he the first to go to, you know, to professional school like that--medical? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. He had an older brother, my uncle Ralph [Ralph Nelson]. He was an optometrist but did not go to, you know, medical school. He, I think, left college, left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] where my father went as well to make money to help the family out. You know, I think my grandparents [Florence Mills Nelson and Howard Nelson]--they were, I think they were always struggling to get up, you know, to move up into the middle cla- even the lower middle class. And I think it was not really possible for them. So my fa- and my younger--my father's younger brother, Howard Nelson, Jr. whose nickname we call him Babe [ph.], he also--he went into the [U.S.] Army, was in Italy during World War II [WWII] and didn't wanna come back, but came back and ended up going to dental school as well, and-- Speaker 1: And he didn't wanna come back why? Speaker 2: He said it was the first time he had ever been anywhere where racism wasn't so crippling. You know, and he was young and handsome and he said the women loved him. And the wine was good, and the scenery was gorgeous; and it was just a different life, you know. However, he had a family. His pare- his whole--his parents were alive, his whole family was here. Speaker 1: So that's why he came back? Speaker 2: Yeah, and he had married, he says now, a woman because he wanted--he was afraid about the war and wanted someone to write him letters and care about him. But that was sort of I think a business deal. And so when he got back that ended--not acrimoniously. And then he stayed here. Story_ID: 665882 Speaker 1: I wanna go to your parents, when did they get married, do you know? Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948]. Speaker 1: And then they lived in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: They lived in D.C. until my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] finished dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: And when did they move to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: It'd be '51 [1951], I think. Speaker 1: And so wh- do you know why New York? Speaker 2: My father had a residency at the Guggenheim clinic [Guggenheim Dental Clinic, New York, New York] he had applied for. And so they came to New York to do that and ended up staying. I think--my father talked very cruelly about growing up in D.C. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: You know, he said it was really racist. It was the South. It was segregated. I remember him saying, you know, you didn't go on to Connecticut Avenue unless you were there to work for someone or serve someone. You didn't go to Connecticut Avenue if you were black. He was poor, and the way he made money, he said he would stand on Georgia Avenue, him and other black kids, and hope that--try to flag down someone who--a white person who was on their way to play golf so they could caddy. You know, my father actually was--loved golf and was a great golfer for many years. But he just said it was just backbreaking. And I think seeing his parents [Florence Mills Nelson and Howard Nelson] struggle to succeed and not succeed--I mean at one point when they were young, they lost their apartment. They were--two of my uncles went one place, and my aunt and another brother went to live with another family member; it was very tough for them. And I think New York held out some real promise. Interestingly enough, my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] left Indianapolis [Indiana], she went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] when she was sixteen [years old], and she never went back. And she said she was never gonna go back, and she remembered when she was thirteen, maybe twelve, twelve or thirteen, her father [Freeman B. Nelson] took her on a trip, a business trip to New York, and she said--when he was working with the Madam Walker company [Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company, Indianapolis, Indiana]. And she said she realized I'm coming here, I'm leaving Indiana. And at one point, around the time that she left, the majority of people on the city council in Indianapolis [Indianapolis City Council; Indianapolis City-County Council] were members of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. And she just said I'm out of here. There's no--there's nothing for me here and I don't have to stay here. Speaker 1: And did she come on her own? Speaker 2: She came to work at--to go to school at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. She--Talladega, applied to Columbia, came here. She never--after she left home at sixteen, she never again lived in Indianapolis (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her family had means-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: --so they were able to afford for her to go to Columbia? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. She was the only black student. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: The only black student. Speaker 1: When did she go? Speaker 2: Forties [1940s], early '40s [1940s]. And she--my mother was 5'3" and one of these, you know, size sixes, 116 pounds for her whole life. And her mother [Nettie Cox Ransom] sewed and my mother always dressed. And she used to talk about at--when she was at Columbia how the white girls would be look- looking all askance and was kind of mad like (makes face) ever- when she'd walk in, 'cause she had her gloves and her suit, and her pumps and she had great legs, and she was a style maven. Story_ID: 665883 Speaker 1: She moved to New York [New York] to go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and stayed. And they met--your par- (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she [Nelson's mother, A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] moved to New York, went to Columbia, went back to work at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: --and met my dad [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] at a restaurant in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: In D.C., right, excuse me, right. That's right. And so, where did they live in New York? Speaker 2: They first live on--lived on St. Nicholas Place-- Speaker 1: In Harlem? Speaker 2: --in Harlem. Then my father opened a practice at 720 St. Nicholas Avenue, a little brownstone that's still there, right below 145th [Street]. Then we moved to 706 Riverside Drive, which is on 148th [Street] and Riverside. And then my--as my father became more successful he moved his practice to Central Park South, 30 Central Park South--the first black professional to have an office there. Speaker 1: And what's the cross street from that? Speaker 2: 59th [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay. So this in the part of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's right up--half a block from the Plaza [Plaza Hotel, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: That; and then we moved to eight- 81st [Street] and West End Avenue, and that was kind of the pinnacle of-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --success. Story_ID: 665884 Speaker 1: And your parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] have two children, correct, is it the two of you? Speaker 2: There are four. Speaker 1: Oh four, okay. Tell me--tell me your siblings in the order. Speaker 2: I have a sister Lynn, she's the oldest, Lynn Nelson [Lynn Nelson Smith]. She's married [to Gregory Smith], I have--no children. I have--my brother [HistoryMaker] Stanley Nelson is second. He's married to Marcia Smith and has three children: Olivia [sic.], Kai [Kai Nelson] and Nola [Nola Nelson]. Me, I'm married to Flores Forbes; and I have a daughter, Sunshine Muse. And then my younger brother Ralph [Ralph Nelson] lives in California in Berkeley and he has a son named Max [sic.]. He's married [to Susanna Witte]. My brother Ralph's an educator. He works in--in a--as a school administrator, educator. My brother Stanley is a documentary filmmaker. My sister Lynn is a committed religious person; and then there's me, the writer. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: And my brother Ralph is also a musician. He has a band, he plays music-- Speaker 1: What does he play? Speaker 2: --on the weekends. Guitar. Story_ID: 665885 Speaker 1: I want you to look back in your childhood, and what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: We--my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] had a penchant for going for drives on Sundays. So we would have a breakfast, big breakfast usually. My father--my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] used to make this stuff like kidney stew and biscuits, and eggs, and--me and my brother were talking about this recently. Those ham steaks that have a bone, a round bone. Did you have those too? Speaker 1: I remember those (laughter). Speaker 2: I mean they're gone, I don't know what happened to them, but anyway. We'd have these breakfasts, and then we would go for a ride. And my father was the first person--he usually had a car and then he b- first person in New York [New York] to buy a Citroen. And so he would say, "I'm gonna go get the car and I'll be downstair- you know, come down in fifteen minutes, I'll be out front in fifteen minutes." And we would get all--we'd rush and get dressed; and an early memory is we would stand and my mother would kneel down and (gesture) Vaseline and put it on our legs, and kind of go down the line of the four of us, making sure we weren't ashy. And that's a real--one of my earliest memories. Speaker 1: That's a good one. Speaker 2: Those Sunday rides. Let me say too that sometimes we were late and my father would leave. Speaker 1: You didn't get to go on the drive (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) You know, I didn't--I don't wanna paint just a rosy picture of--you'd like an honest picture or just a rosy one? Speaker 1: Honest, please. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Sometimes he would leave and we'd come--we'd be so disappointed. We'd go down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he would have to drive by himself. Speaker 2: Yeah, who knew where he went, you know. Who knew where he went. Story_ID: 665886 Speaker 1: When you think back on your early childhood, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember? Speaker 2: My mother cooking French toast. I remem- we used to have great breakfasts as kids before we went to school. We didn't have cold cereal. You know, we had pancakes or French toast or waffles or eggs, or--so that: breakfast. The river, because we lived on Riverside Drive and we--our apartment faced the Hudson [Hudson River] and my parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] had a bed--had a platform built for their bed so that they could lie in bed--a big king size bed, which then they were kind of unique having those giant sized beds, but they had a platform built about five feet high so they could lie in bed and look at the river. My mother loved--they loved the river and loved water. Interesting, 'cause she comes from a completely landlocked state [Indiana]. So that's a big memory. And then Riverside Drive, it was so--just the leaves and the trees and the way they--the oak trees meet and the arching; it was such a beautiful place to grow up. Story_ID: 665887 Speaker 1: Growing up on Riverside Drive in--this would be--your, the years of your living there were what? Speaker 2: Well '52 [1952] to '65 [1965] maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. How many black people were in your neighborhood? Was it--were? Speaker 2: Not that many. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not that many, I'm sorry and it was probably more like '63 [1963] when we left. Not that many, and the tale is the--Robert Weaver [Robert C. Weaver], who was secretary of labor [sic.] or something lived in our building. He was black. The story is that Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] owned the building and didn't want us--didn't want to rent the apartment to them because he didn't want any more blacks. You know, he felt that they--you know, but that my father--my parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] were very aggressive about their rights and you know, threatened suit then and threatened suit again when we moved to 451 West End Avenue. Speaker 1: What happened there? Speaker 2: You know, they didn't wanna give them the apartment. And I think they sent a tester, they did that, the Urban League [National Urban League] with the te- sent a tester and then they, you know, went to them and said, "We're gonna file suit, you know, this is illegal. You can't--." Speaker 1: And so this is--this is during a time, certainly in the South when there was a tremendous amount of civil unrest. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's happening in New York [New York]? You're describing these moments-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what--what's the temperature of the times in New York-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --as you're growing up? Speaker 2: --we went to private school. Speaker 1: Where did you go to school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to--we went to the New Lincoln School [New York, New York], the four of us. During that time, the people who were, the families, there were other black students, not that many, but the white families, or and the white families tended to be progressive. I mean seriously progressive, you know, and lots of kind of the vanishing breed now of old style truly liberal Jews in New York. Zero Mostel's kids went there and Joseph Heller's daughter [Erica Heller] went there, and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones'--one iteration of his daughters went there. Richie Adair [Richard Adair], Jeanne Adair, Thelma Adair [Thelma C. Davison Adair], the minister--they, they went there as well. So we grew up in a progressive climate in a progressive school in a fairly then progressive city. This was way before the hedge fund money. And now what I see in--New Lincoln no longer exists. New Lincoln was kind of probably the most progressive school. Walden [Walden School, New York, New York] no longer exists. And I think what you have now from observation and talking to friends in private schools is the kind of lefty liberal, truly progressive schools are gone by and large, and you have--and the schools that exist you have so much hedge fund money and the cra- often crappy politics that come with that. You know so it's very different I think. But that's how we grew up. We had--Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] came to our school to speak and we were always we--you know, the teachers, the students who were always reaching out. I mean, we were--we--the school took us down to help us if we wanted to volunteer to--at the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] campaign. It was al- it was a progressive school and there was activism going on. My parents--my father was involved in the medical committee for civil rights [Medical Committee for Human Rights], and he went south and did people's teeth. He did some work with the Fortune Society. They had fundraisers. You know, I can remember a fundraiser where King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to come but something happened, he was just busy, he didn't make it. I met James Baldwin at our house when I was probably fifteen [years old], something like that. So it was kind of an amazing--an amazing time. Story_ID: 665888 Speaker 1: And so you were certainly exposed to what was going on-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of civil rights. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to come to your school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York]. Did you feel a sense of empowerment around what was--what was happening? That you're--you were--you and/or your parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] were taking action to help make things better? Speaker 2: Yes. I felt--definitely I felt my parents were. You know, because of age, I think I was much more turned on by the Black Panther Party because, you know, I was a teenager and I was--I didn't wanna take any--turn any other cheek or that whole thing about being beat. I mean it was amazing to me that people could do that. You know, nonviolent--practice nonviolence, that seemed amazing. Now on the other hand, I can remember going to the offices in Harlem [New York, New York] of the Black Panther Party and--with my brother [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson] and a friend of ours who was Puerto Rican named Raphael Guzman [ph.], and just being like really kind of scared, you know. These pe- the guys--the men, they were so macho and you know, they seemed dangerous. You know, so that obviously wasn't my--I didn't join the BPP either. But I felt that the world was changing. We were really active in the antiwar movement. We went-- Speaker 1: Let's go back to the Panther party for a minute. Were there--in New York [New York] were there--when you went, did you see women in significant-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --pla- because you know in--in California there were? Speaker 2: Right. I didn't--I do not remember seeing women. And--but it could've been the moment we were at the office. And their thing was well if you wanna be a part of this you have to take these newspapers and sell them. And we were kind of like (makes face). Speaker 1: You don't want to do that. Speaker 2: Yeah. But it was that, the Nation of Islam was very present in h- in Harlem, and that was, I thought, so di- it was amazing, it was so different. I felt as a woman and a young--a teenager and coming into womanhood, I felt protected by them and respected. Speaker 1: Did you see Malcolm X? Speaker 2: No. I did not. Speaker 1: Well, you weren't growing up in Harlem at this point, you were in the Upper West Side [New York, New York], right? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: Which is not where he necessarily was, yeah. Speaker 2: No, no. But we used to go uptown. We saw the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] all the time after school. I mean the Apollo was then like a dollar or something--go see these great bands, groups, the groups. And you know, I can remember going to Sam--my parents were always big into jazz and music, you know, and go, I would go with my father to Sam Goody's [Sam Goody, New York, New York], the record store to buy records. And I remember meeting Ali [Muhammad Ali] with him walking down the street. We were walking down the street around Sam--on Broadway around Sam Goody's and--and we saw this swarm of people, you know, and then once we got closer we could hear them going, "Ali!" And there was Ali. So you know, it was just a vibrant time and a time when you felt like the change was everywhere. It was--and you felt the--the sense of possibility and there were so many options for who, what you could do. You know, you could join the BPP, you could join the antiwar movement, you could join the Civil Rights Movement, you could doing the feminist movement, you know. You could join the anti-police brutality--I mean, everybody was into change it seemed. Story_ID: 665889 Speaker 1: And you know, then Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] came. Let me say too about growing up in that time, is what I remember. I feel this way to this day that when--I can remember coming home in '63 [1963] in November, November 22nd and the TV being on. And we had been dismissed from school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York] because Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been shot. But the TV being--my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] never had the TV on during the day. She was always out or busy or doing something. She--we weren't T- you know, TV was kind of like not as ubiquitous or as acceptable as it is now to so many people. But I can remember the TV being on. It was the news reporting about Kennedy's assassination. And then I can remember that happening again in '65 [1965] with Malcolm X: the TV being on. And then I can remember it happening again with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. So in a way that's a soundtrack of (pause) part of my growing up and a sign that something's wrong, you know. And I think I have a really ambivalent relationship with television in general, and I think a lot of it is because of that. Because when the TV was on during the day, there was no good to come of it. And at--in those days, there were--you hardly saw--that when saw--you hardly saw any black people on TV; and when you did it was a family affair. You know, it was like, "Come on, come on, you know, So and So is on 'The Dinah Shore Show,' you know. "Nat King Cole is on 'Perry Como' ['The Perry Como Show']," you know, and who cared about, you know, you didn't matter if you knew, you were just so happy to see black people, you know, looking pretty and being the star of the show. And that was it, you know, we didn't watch T- it wasn't like now. TV was not ubiquitous. Speaker 2: And when the TV was on with each of these assassinations, were the kids brought to look or was it just on and--and? Speaker 1: Oh we were brought to look. I mean we went in and my mother sat there and talked to us about what happened, and then my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] came home from the office and he talked about what happened. Then we had dinner or they talked about it and we were always really--it wasn't hidden from us. But I--in retrospect, I mean I think they probably were challenged as we all are with how do we explain the world to our children and not break their spirits. And I think my parents being civically active was one way that they did that for us, you know. My mother raised funds, she was on the board of the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] (makes sounds). You know, she was always doing something besides taking care of yourself and your own, because your own is this larger group. And my guess would be that that's one of the things that brought them together, you know. Story_ID: 665890 Speaker 1: I'm curious about your father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] after going to dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], building a practice, successfully bringing a practice to Central Park West, right? Speaker 2: Central Park South. Speaker 1: Central Park South, excuse me--well, which is very important. Central Park South being the bottom of the park [Central Park, New York, New York], very elite street, and having grown up poor. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did he talk about this transition that he was able to create for his family and himself? Speaker 2: I mean he talked a lot about how hard it was. The kind of--he didn't talk so much about the psychic emotional wave, but we saw it. I mean my father was, could be absolutely present and then absolutely absent. You know, you never knew who was coming home at night from the office. And sometimes he didn't come home. You know, it was a big thing with--"Don't make Daddy mad," you know, "don't set Daddy off. He works so hard for us." You know, which as I've grown up or gotten older, I've realized--I've talked to other people and realized that was--it's not an uncommon family dynamic, especially in black families at that time. So it was a lot of weight I think, you know, a lot of weight. Speaker 1: Did he ultimately help to support his parents [Florence Mills Nelson and Howard Nelson] after he began to make more money? Speaker 2: I think some, but I think his younger brother [Howard Nelson, Jr.] and older brother [Ralph Nelson] were probably more supportive. Story_ID: 665891 Speaker 1: Now your parents didn't stay together? Speaker 2: No, they divorced. Speaker 1: And when--you know, often with divorce, it's, it's hard on the children but also your mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] wasn't working, was she? Speaker 2: No. And she went back to work. She went back to work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was it--so what--because that can often be a tremendous financial stress, as well as-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --emotional stress on the family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What happened with your family? Speaker 2: I mean it was real--it was a super emotional and financial stress, you know. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Fifteen. Speaker 1: So it's at a--also for you, this is your formative years? Speaker 2: Oh, really important age. Yeah, I was fifteen, my brother [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson] was sixteen. I had a brother [Ralph Nelson] twelve, and then my oldest sister [Lynn Nelson Smith] was nineteen. So you know, I--now when I look back I mean my poor mother, like left with you know, damn near four teenagers, you know, and a hostile husband, you know. (Pause) It was a very bad experience for my mother and for all of us. You know, we became poorer. You know, we eventually--my mother eventually moved to a nice place, but not as nice as 81st [Street] and West End [Avenue]. We had a house on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]. My--my mother had to fight my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] for it; and then eventually had to buy him out. You know, the judge was like, if you can't--if you can't settle this, you know, you get--here's three months to settle it, if not I'm gonna order it sold, you know. You know, my father lived to be a hundred and he died in September. And me and my brother were talking--right, you knew him--we're talking about him and you know, he--he was unique and el- and really a presence. You know, he lived a life that probably very few people of any race or gender--or gender have, have lived. But my father, what he left behind was us because he just--as he mo- he kind of lived these different lives and as he moved from one life to another, he just got rid of--you know he, when he got rid of everything in A life to go to B life. Got everything--rid of everything in B life to go to C life, you know. I mean, you know, he was driven and selfish and yet he was really unique and a presence, and I think we have all worked to find the good in that. And I think our mother pulled that off. I mean she--without her, you know, we probably would be not in good shape, or-- Story_ID: 665892 Speaker 1: What did your mother go to work to do? Speaker 2: She went to work at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] in the library. Speaker 1: So she went back to being a librarian (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, she went back to being a librarian. And you know again, like love the students. You know, encouraged outreach by the staff, you know, fought and got this--them to implement, everybody had to wear buttons saying, "Ask me," when they were on--when they were in the library so that the students would know that you were--the librarians were there to help them. My mother used to say that a lot of librarians didn't like people--they liked books and liked to read. And she was like, you have to deal with people. You know, this is our job. And you know, used to get these great letters and gifts from her students, from people she'd helped. She didn't teach, but I mean from, you know, people and they were like--I remember I met a friend when I went to City College. I went there; my sister [Lynn Nelson Smith] went there; my brother went there--my older brother [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson]. And I remember some--being in class and meeting a woman. She's like, "Oh ye-," I said, "I have to work on this paper." She became a good friend of mine. And she s- her name was Allison [ph.], and she said, "Oh yeah, there's this great woman in the library who can help you, you know, Mrs. Nelson [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson]." And I was like, "That's my mother." And she was like, "Mrs. Nelson is your mother? How great." So there was always that sense of--and my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.], even in his abandoning us, you know he went to India and lived on Bhagwan's [Rajneesh] ashram [Pune, India]. And I mean he did really interesting stuff and went and lived on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] year round and went to La Jolla, California [La Jolla, San Diego, California] and said he was Deepak and became a teacher of meditation when he was seventy-five [years old]; and yoga. I mean, it was strange, but (pause) formative. Story_ID: 665893 Speaker 1: You told me where you went to--you went to private school, where did you go to college? Speaker 2: I went--well let me f- I went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, please. Speaker 2: --prep school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Ah. Speaker 2: --when I was sixteen [years old]--tenth, eleventh, twelfth grade for three years in-- Speaker 1: Which, which school was that? Speaker 2: Solebury School in New Hope, Pennsylvania. I went there because of--I mean, I was acting out and things were going bad at home. My parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] were--had split up, blah, blah, blah. My father had a patient whose--whose--had been to the school and that's how we found out about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went there to New Hope, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And so you went away. Speaker 2: Yes, I went away. Speaker 1: So which--I mean, while many families do that, it--it--I'm assuming that it wasn't that common for a black family to send their child to prep school at that time? Speaker 2: Probably not, you know. Speaker 1: Were there any other black students there? Speaker 2: A few, but I think everybody was on like a part of A Better Chance, and--a program except for me. And--but you know, all of us in some other--most of us in some way were there to get away from something bad where we were. You know, whether it was your neighborhood 'cause you were from Trenton [New Jersey] and Trenton was awful and violent. There were kids from Trenton. Or whether it was your family situation. You know, with the kids who were paying full freight, it was usually the family situation, you know. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you said you were acting out, what were you doing? Speaker 2: You know, smoking reefer, drinking, I mean we used to--those are the days we could go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. We used to bop down to the Fillmore East [New York, New York], get on the subway and go down and see Hendrix [Jimi Hendrix] or Cream or you know, Earth, Wind and Fire--whoever. You know, it was fabulous. Janice Joplin. We were kind of--me and my brother [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson] and my sister [Lynn Nelson Smith], who was older, but me and my brother were really tight. We were kind of black hippies, you know. And you know, we were in the vanguard of Sly and the Family Stone lovers, you know. It was just very--I remember we went to the Cream's farewell concert and we had--at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] and we were with two friends. And we had taken mescaline. Billy--what's his name? The drummer. Buddy Miles--no, not Buddy Miles, was that his name, the drummer [Ginger Baker]? Speaker 1: I--I don't know. Speaker 2: Anyway, before Cream we had--we were like oh, this mescaline is no good, we got ripped off. And then Cream came and started playing the opening chords and we were just like--all of a sudden we looked at each other and we were tripping. So, you know, we were pretty out there. I mean with everything else politically that was going on then, it was also a time of sexual exploration, drug exploration; and I think, you know, putting me in a school in the woods of Pennsylvania kind of wasn't a bad idea. Story_ID: 665894 Speaker 1: And I think in many ways it was good for me, in other ways it wasn't, you know. I ended up having a liaison with a teacher who was married. He, I believe, when I look back on it now, used me as a way to kind of get out of his marriage. And you know, I think it was abusive to me, the school [Solebury School, New Hope, Pennsylvania] didn't--exploitative, the school did not take action or contact my parents in a way that they should've, you know. And this was going on with a lot of people at the school. But I think that was part of the '60s [1960s] as well. You know, I graduated from high school in 1970, then sort of everybody was freaking out, things were exploding and there was nobody in control; and someone needs to be in control, you know. It's funny 'cause I just got a, you know, whatever the little annual report or something from them, and I--every time I get their annual report I feel like I should write them a letter and say, look I feel like you exploited me. You didn't protect me, you know. My mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] used to say she should've sued them, you know. She should've gotten together with all the parents, had a class action suit, you know. So I think it changed my life in some good ways, but some bad ones. Speaker 2: But you also told your mother--you--you told her what happened at the time with the teacher? Speaker 1: Yeah, I moved to Vermont with him-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --after I graduated, oh yeah. My mother was like, mad as hell. I must say, my mother really--but even that, because of the times and because of my parents' marriage exploding--imploding, my mother was like you're like a slave master taking my daughter, you motherfucker. Speaker 2: And this was a white man? Speaker 1: Yeah. And my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] was kind of like, "I don't know what to say," you know. I always--you know, I--luckily my mother lived long enough and I got smart enough to thank her, you know, and say you know, I'm glad you fought for me, it made a difference. Now I--so that didn't last long. I graduated. We were together less than a year, maybe a year. Story_ID: 665895 Speaker 1: But then I had my daughter [Sunshine Muse] when I was twenty [years old]. I think because I just wanted to ground--not by him, by a nice African American. I think I wanted to ground myself. And I think I wanted to have a family that could replace the family that we had lost--the birth family. Speaker 2: But then to have a child--you were not married? Speaker 1: No. Yeah that was--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For your family that must've been really tough? Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] was--I remember she sat me down and she was like, "This is why you shouldn't do this," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. "I'm gonna say this once." And then she--after that she absolutely supported me, you know. Speaker 2: So meaning, she thought you should not have the child? Speaker 1: Right. But once I decided, I did--and she was very forceful. My mother didn't mince her words. But once I did, she was supportive. And in fact, I think my daughter, who is now forty-three, in some odd way helped to reconnect all of us because we all loved her, you know. I mean how can you not love a baby, you know? We just all loved her, you know. So it (gesture). Speaker 2: And so did you--what happened in terms of your education when you had your daughter? Speaker 1: Well I was in school when I was pregnant. Speaker 2: Where were you? Speaker 1: City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. I left for a year. I was living with her dad. And I decided I wanted to go back to school. He was very resistant to that. He thought I should think about like--I remember him saying him saying, "Maybe you--you know, you could start an incense business or making jewelry." And, I'm like, I'm not making fucking jewelry, have you lost your mind. Speaker 2: What did he do? Speaker 1: He sold stuff on the--at street fairs. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay fine, but you know, I'm not making any incense or any jewelry; I'm going to college. And so I stayed with him for another year I think; and my younger brother would come up and babysit for my daughter. I had to take swimming at nine or something, and I can remember my younger brother coming up, Ralph [Ralph Nelson], and you know the house would be--I'd get home from swimming at night in the winter, what a drag and--I love swimming, but. Speaker 2: Well why were you taking swimming at night then? Speaker 1: I had to take it to graduate. Speaker 2: It was part of your? Speaker 1: Yes, it was a requirement. Speaker 2: That's so interesting because you are a swimmer-- Speaker 1: Yes, I'm a swimmer, but-- Speaker 2: --for all these years, right? Speaker 1: Yeah and I was like, you know, can I just get a certificate? No. But I remember coming home and the house would be tore up, and--but my daughter and my brother would be so happy, they'd be laughing, and just having a great time, and--you know. But we broke up, me and her father pretty much because he didn't support my education and my ambition. And I was like, hey, I don't--there's no--I've never given you any indication I wanna be a home incense producer (laughter). That ain't gonna happen. So, you know. Speaker 2: And because you have a child with him, did you stay in--did you stay in touch even though you weren't together? Speaker 1: Pretty much, but he didn't step to the plate, you know. I think sometimes, in my observation--I don't know about women, I can't speak for women, but I feel that sometimes men want the woman but not the kids, you know, and I--or want the package. And I felt like he was someone who wanted the package. I remember once he told me, "Now we're like geese, they only mate once." And I'm like, (laughter) I'm not like a geese or goose; (laughter) I'm not only mating once, anyway. But you know, we shall see. Story_ID: 665896 Speaker 1: Did you go back to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. I went back there, finished. Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: English and black studies. There was no communications or journalism then. Speaker 1: What was your plan? Speaker 2: To be a writer. Speaker 1: So you knew that from--from what age? Speaker 2: Oh early. I can--I knew that from when we lived on 148th Street. I always liked writing. I always did well in writing; and I had a sister [Lynn Nelson Smith], who like my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] was 5'3" and fl- eternally size six and really fly. I started out writing stories, and--where she would be nicer to me. Something would happen, like she was kind of--you know how big sisters are, they can be dismissive. So I would write stories and poems and they al- were pretty much the same where my sister would not be nice to me and I'd be trying to--I would be nice to her. Then something would happen bad to her, then I would save her; and then she would--we'd bond. So I think, you know, writing was cathartic, it was therapeutic. I was rewarded for it, I was good at it. Plus I--my mother read all the time and read newspapers and she listened to the news and she watched the news on TV; and so I can remember distinctly her muttering about stories--that stuff wasn't true or this is a lie. And I remember watching TV especially and seeing stuff about--the news, seeing stuff about Harlem [New York, New York] that was nothing like the Harlem I knew. So I think early on I wanted to--I knew the power of the word, I knew the power of reading, and I knew--I wanted to change the narrative, you know. I mean I lived in a neighborhood where you knew everybody. You knew the guy in the corner candy store, Manny [ph.]. You knew Mr. Trowlek [ph.] the dry cleaner. You knew the people at the grocery store, Thrifty Market [ph.]. I can remember one time us dropping candy wrappers, the three of us coming home--four of us coming home from school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York], we used to take the bus together and--the public bus. And when we got home, you know, we stopped at Manny's and got candy and we didn't--I don't even think--we dropped the wrapper, I don't think we threw it down, I think we just dropped it. We got home, my mother was at the door because Trowlek, the dry cleaner, had called her to tell her that we had thrown trash on the street. And we had to go back out and walk up the hill and pick it up, you know. And I remember one--I think it was my brother, Stanley [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson] said you know, "How do we know which is ours?" And she's like, "Pick it all up." You know, that's how lived, but you never heard about that, it was always like psychos and drug addicts and violence, and pathology. And so I think I wanted to change the narrative. Story_ID: 665897 Speaker 1: And so, when you graduated from City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], what did you do next? Speaker 2: I started freelancing. I had occasional part time jobs. I worked on a--as an interviewer for a project that was trying to figure out--get statistics on sterilization abuse; you know, which was a kind of door to door job. I worked for the Black Theatre Alliance [Black Theatre Alliance of New York] for their newspaper for a while, you know, maybe a four month stint there. Picked up whatever I really could. Freelance, you know, someone would start a little magazine, I'd so something, made really no serious money. But I wrote--I had column and wrote for the newspaper when I was at City. So I had done that. And then I decided to go to the journalism school. Speaker 1: At Columbia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, you went there when, in '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 2: I graduated in '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Okay, it's a one year program. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so what did you--going to Columbia School of Journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], what did you hope that you were gonna get out of being in that program? Speaker 2: (Pause) You know, a leg up, some connections. It seemed like the thing was so closed, and someone had told me, I don't remember who it was, but they said you--it opens doors. Because when they have to interview people, they're gonna wanna interview people who went to the same school they did, these you know, people who are running things and hiring people. And if they have to interview black people or people of color, and women, it gives you--it puts you in the door. It might get you in the door, so that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it was that. And I would say I got that out of it. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, it--it's interesting when people have had a freelance career already going into that particular school too exactly what you described is--it's usually strategic? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was definitely strategic, it was definitely strategic. You know, I kind of--I knew what I wanted to do when I went there, I knew what I wanted to do my thesis on, you know. Speaker 1: Which was? Speaker 2: It was called 'The Dope Kids of 115th Street'; and it was about these kids on 115th Street between 7th [Avenue] and 8th [Avenue]--now Adam C.- Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and Frederick Douglass [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]--who sold like a million dollars' worth of heroin a week on--off this block, you know. Speaker 1: And they let you track them? Speaker 2: You know they did. They--the pe- I met a woman who lived in the building where they--where they hung out outside the building, and she was really nice to me. And I think after a while--I just would go every day, you know and at first like, "Oh you from Eyewitness News?" You know, "Yeah we're gonna be on TV." And then I think they--I just became like a bump on the log. You know, they sor- it didn't ma- you know, I--I became invisible or maybe I became visible in a different type of way. So I knew I wanted to do that. Again, to tell a story that I didn't feel was being told. You know, 'cause they were smart, I mean they were smart. They had a great business going and they had the lookouts, they had all these people organized by age to avoid the Rock- because of the Rockefeller Drug Laws. They were using people under eighteen [years old] to do certain types of work. I mean they were slick. They had lookouts, you know, you really--makes you, you know it's the old story that we know where it makes you think, gee what would these people be doing if they went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Did you get that published? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the Village Voice. And in terms of contacts, Wayne Barrett and Jack Newfield came to speak to my class. And afterward I went up to them and pushed my way through my other--through my classmates and said, you know, "I really wanna write for the Voice and I love both of your work," which was true, and they said. "What are you doing your thesis on," and I told them. They said, "Oh let us know when you're finished, we'd love to see it." So that really--boom; and I think I gra- I graduated in May and I think that was published in July on the cover. So that was a wonderful-- Speaker 1: Entree. Speaker 2: Yes, abso- absolutely. Story_ID: 665898 Speaker 1: You graduate [from Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and then what is the work that you do? Speaker 2: Freelanced, wrote a lot for the Voice [Village Voice], wrote a lot for Essence. Essence was really crucial to my surviving and getting out there and success, did that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so this is now in the '80s [1980s], which is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for Essence 'cause I was there at that time, shortly after you started writing for Essence--Essence was at its height. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: You know, it was very powerful-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] into the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I feel like I was there for the heyday. And there was so many wonderful people who were there at the same time, or came through during that period, you know, who were doing really good stuff now. Speaker 1: What types of things were you writing about? Speaker 2: You know I did a profile of Abbey Lincoln for Essence. I--wow that's a long time ago. I did some columns about women's rights type of stuff, black women and feminism. I did a piece on Winnie Mandela. I went to--you know, I--I thought--Essence was very--and I--mostly I did political stuff, you know. You know, I tended--there were some people who did more kind of celebrity profile stuff--that was not me. I did more political stuff. But you know and really enjoyed it. And then there was Essence, there was Emerge, you know, there were a lot of--there was Encore. I mean, there were kind of black publications and places to, you know, you held in your hand, you know. There was a real print, dynamic print media. Speaker 1: When do you think you found your voice? Speaker 2: You know I don't know if I have. You know, I feel like it's always changing. It's always changing, you know. You know, I went to work at The Washington Post in 1986. I was recruited by them. Speaker 1: Let's not go there yet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I want--let's stay at Essence for a little bit longer, because Washington Post is its own whole story. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about the editorial process at Essence, in terms of being a freelance writer submitting your ideas. You know, what is that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what was that process like for you? Speaker 2: You know, I had editors I worked with pretty regularly, so if I came up with an idea I could call them. Speaker 1: Who were your editors? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Audrey Edwards I worked with a lot; Cheryll Greene I worked with a lot. Val Wesley [HistoryMaker Valerie Wilson Wesley], I worked with her. So I could call them up and say, "How about I do a story on this. What do you think about doing a story on that?" Then there would be some back and forth between me and the editor. Then they would say pretty much, "I'll get back to you, let me pass it by the editorial board," or Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] or who--probably Susan was the editorial board. And then they would get back to me and--with maybe some tweaks, but usually pretty much the story I wanted to do anyway. And maybe their ideas had broadened it in ways that were helpful to me. You know, I can't ever remember a story being so changed that I was like, forget I don't wanna do it anymore. Speaker 1: Well and those particular editors, especially Audrey and Cheryll were politically minded? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. And that was my-- Speaker 1: I think as Val as very literary-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --more than-- Speaker 2: Than political at--when she was there. Yeah. Speaker 1: I think so? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my job I think there to be--I was one of the political writers and that's what I did, so it was perfect. And also to be able to write that--to write as a black woman for black women from a black woman's perspective and not have to pretend that that wasn't--not have to disappear myself. I mean that was the joy of, of working at Essence, you know, I thought. Story_ID: 665899 Speaker 1: Did you ever run into conflict about how progressive your voice was in terms of, you know the, on the advertising side sometimes-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --they come and say, "Ah could you tamp it down a bit?" You were not in the--you weren't on staff, so I just wonder-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --did you ever had--did that ever come back to you? Speaker 2: (Pause) Not that I recall. And also at that time, I think the very back page was opinion. I mean there were places in Essence where you could just be straight up opinion. So if something wasn't going to work, you know, front of the book editorial, it could work back of the book as an opinion piece; and that was often an option that I--that I was offered or that I came up with. So no, I felt actually pretty--it was fun working there, you know. Speaker 1: Well and, at that time, Essence was privately owned by black people. Speaker 2: Right and it was political, it was a political job. And it was privately owned by black people. It was read by tons and tons and tons of black people, especially black women; and they paid well, so I could make a living, you know, working for them and a few other people and put it all together, you know. And, and feel great about the work I was doing and know that when Essence came out, when I walked down the street for the next--'til the next issue I was always gonna see someone who's like, "I read your piece in Essence, when are you gonna do something for Essence; loved what you said about this." So you really felt--I felt part of a community and of an organ for black people and maybe in some ways in hindsight that was my way of organizing. You know, that was my civic thing, my civic duty, like I'm gonna put this stuff out and we're gonna talk about this as this community of black women. And also the challenge and the joy of--I think a lot of what I try to do in my work is read the zeitgeist and then write it, write about it. And so it was great to, to do that as a black woman and say you know, this whole thing about body image and size is really bothering me, you know. And I'm sick of dieting or, or whatever. I'm sick of my friends constantly talking about weight; and then to kind of pitch it to Essence and then do a story about black women and the tyranny of you know the skinny white girl. That was a ball. Speaker 1: Because there was a space for it? Speaker 2: There was a space for it. Speaker 1: That discussion? Speaker 2: Yes. There was a need for it; and it was a--a totally sub rosa discussion except for Essence by and large, you know. Because even Emerge and other magazines they were much more--Ebony, they were more mainstream and Emerge was much more overtly political and male, but Essence these were black women who I thought got it a lot of the time. Speaker 1: And did you ever work directly with [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor? Speaker 2: As an editor? Speaker 1: Or just, be- I mean, she was the face and leadership of the magazine, so, yeah did you ever-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --interact with her in--in working on the magazine? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know I would come in and see her and she was often--you know, when I come in and meet with an editor they'd--often I'd go in to see Susan and she'd be usually really supportive and, "Loved your last piece, we're so glad. You know, Jill [HistoryMaker Jill Nelson], so glad that you're going to be doing something for us." And you know, that was the drill, you know. As time went on I felt that there was kind of a good cop, bad cop thing at Essence; in that Susan was always the good cop and the--your editor or somebody else was always the bad cop (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hm. Story_ID: 665900 Speaker 1: So, in '86 [1986] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But let me, can I--let me just add this. Speaker 1: Please, please. Speaker 2: The great thing about life, my writing life has been that I have never had--I've never worked under someone so I can pretty much do what I want, you know. Like you don't want my story--you don't want my story, fine, you know. Like my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] used to always tease me, she'd say you know, "There hasn't been a job invented that you won't quit." And it's kind of true, you know, when I think, actually that comes in many ways from my parents and definitely from my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.], you know. And from my mother too, who you know, pretty much didn't work until she had to; and then when she had to, created something that she could respond to. Speaker 1: And so, as a freelance writer during this period of time, did you ever worry about making enough money, I mean you have a child [Sunshine Muse] you're taking care of? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: You're freelancing rather than having a consistent paycheck. Speaker 2: Yeah I did. I worried about not having enough money. I had great support from my family, not financial, but as much as--much more babysitting and you know, emotional support. Speaker 1: Which equals finance. Speaker 2: Yes and my mother, this was before the Internet, my mother used to be do--do my research. She was a librarian [at City College of New York, New York, New York] so I could call her, say, "Can you help with this that, that," and she would. She was great, because otherwise, you know, I can remember hauling to the library with my daughter when she was young and trying to keep her cool and entertained while I'm looking up stuff on the microfiche, you know. So my mo- they were very helpful in that way. But yeah I worried about money a lot. You know, it's funny because I--you know, but you--you defer your own gratification, you know, for your kid. I mean I can remember my daughter having--being young, like maybe six or seven [years old], and the big thing was Calvin Klein jeans and she had to have these green corduroy Calvin Klein jeans. And I can remember, you know, her skinny little self in the store turning around to look at her butt. (Makes face) Look how far we've come with that. But you know, realizing that you--I wasn't gonna get the shoes I wanted because she needed the jeans; or she needed the Adidas, or she needed the Reeboks. But I think that happens no matter how much money you have, you know. You--your kids come first. So maybe, you know, it's not going to Spain and sending your daughter to French camp or whatever it is, but you're gonna do it. Story_ID: 665901 Speaker 1: Before we leave Essence--you worked at Essence, Emerge, you said Encore, I didn't even know Encore, what was that? Speaker 2: Ida Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis]. Speaker 1: Oh okay, sure. Speaker 2: I think they still owe me money (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That is so likely. What--what--you--you had worked--you had written a lot for the Village Voice; then you start working with black media. What was your pers- what's your perspective on black media at that time? Speaker 2: Hugely important to its audience and the readership. Diff- I know most about Essence and it's difficult sometimes unfortunately to work for. I--I think sometimes there's too many cooks involved. There were too many cooks involved in stories. I would hammer something out with an editor and have a great relationship with them and be able to work it out and give and take. And then it would--I'd do the story we decided on and then my editor would come back, and it was as if my story had been gangbanged by all the editors there or whoever, and everybody was getting a piece of it. So the story that we had really worked hard to focus and define and feel comfortable with on both sides suddenly became something larger, and yet you could never really figure out why because your editor wasn't--they never said this stuff, but there was this impenetrable wall, I felt, between me as the writer and the whole editorial staff in terms of finding out why did this story change and--and if--are we--do we decide--does, do me and an editor work out a story idea or is it--should we be in a group with twenty other people? Speaker 1: Well and when you mentioned earlier thinking that maybe it was Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] who made the decisions 'cause, for a while when I was there, I was part of that senior editorial team. So there literally was a group of people like maybe ten or twelve people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who were all-- Speaker 2: All weighing in? Speaker 1: --weighing in to a certain point. Not editing every piece, but weighing in on, is this piece going to happen or-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or what various people's thoughts were. I mean and--and actually I think that's true at many publications. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I don't think it's unique to Essence. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I think the personal nature of writing for and about black women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black women. Speaker 1: --probably made it feel even more personal for everybody there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I think it's hard. I think it's hard. And also I think it also pushes your buttons or ones--my buttons as a black person about trust, respect, letting ourselves be free with each other. You know, if I'm a respected, trusted, skilled writer, you've got to give me my head; and I think that that's something that's hard to find often in black media, it's hard to find often in progressive or left media. I mean it seems to me, you know, the right wingers get to do whatever they want-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: --you know? Speaker 1: That's an interesting perspective because it--it's counterintuitive. Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely. Story_ID: 665902 Speaker 1: In 1986 you took a job-- Speaker 2: Yes, I went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at The Washington Post? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well it feeds into your last question, which is money. I mean they call me up and they offer me a job and they were gonna move me to--from New York [New York] to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]; and I had been recommended by my friend Robert Lipsyte who's a sports--wonderful writer and was a sports writer at The Times [The New York Times] for years and I met him because during--maybe between--between grad school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and college [City College of New York, New York, New York] I was an editor at a magazine called 7 Days, a leftist publication. And I somehow got to be the sports editor among other responsibilities and I knew Lipsyte's work and I called him up and said, "Would you be willing--interested in writing, you know, for us being a sports writer, a columnist," and he said, "No, but I will--I'd love to meet you and I'll teach you how to write about sports." And so that's--I did not in fact become a sports writer, but that's how we became friends. And so when this guy who was the editor of The Washington Post new Sunday magazine [The Washington Post Magazine] asked him about people--the best young journalists, he suggested me. I started to say people of color, but I remember Bob saying--Lipsyte, that it was not color, he just thought I was the best. So I was recruited, I went there. I rented this great house in upper Northwest [Washington, D.C.], my daughter [Sunshine Muse] got there and jumped out of the car. And it had this--the house had a winding path to it and three steps up and beautiful flowered bushes on either side; and my daughter jumped out of the car, she was thirteen [years old] and she says, "Look out, Cosbys!" This was before. Speaker 1: Way before. Speaker 2: Way before. Speaker 1: This--well, but you know, for perspective-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because let's stay at that time, 'The Cosby Show' was revolutionary for black people. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Because many people, including black people, didn't realize that there were professional blacks-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --that there were medical doctors who were black. Speaker 2: Right, right. Right. Speaker 1: I mean what your family was, people didn't think was true? Speaker 2: Right, right. And for me and my daughter, our little family, it was a real step up. I mean we're living in this great house and you know, we had a car and life was good, a new Volvo, you know, and things were rolling. Speaker 1: And, and having a job, was this the first full time job that you'd had? Speaker 2: I--no I'd had another job. At one point I worked for a woman name- named Marguerite King Barnett--Barnett King [sic. Marguerite Ross Barnett] who was a chance- vice chancellor at City University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a speech writer for her, I worked there for maybe a little under a year. Okay job; nice, really nice sister. She passed. Her daughter, Amy DuBois [Amy DuBois Barnett]? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: That's her daughter, was a little girl then. But I left there because I had an invitation to go to South Africa to work on a film as the interviewer, and I couldn't get the time off. So between, you know, (gesture) job security, South Africa under apartheid during the state of emergency, meet Winnie [Winnie Mandela]? (Gesture) Winnie. Story_ID: 665903 Speaker 1: And so this is many years later-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you are now living large with your house (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm living large, you know. I have my house and this new Sunday magazine [The Washington Post Magazine] and all this money and energy is going into it, and-- Speaker 1: And what's your role? Speaker 2: I'm a staff writer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the first issue comes out, and the cover story is called 'Murder, Drugs and the Rap Star' [John Ed Bradley]. And it has this sort of sepia, dark tone picture of some black guy on the cover, the rap star who no one had ever heard of. He wasn't really a rap star. And inside there is a photo of his woman like cutting his toenails or picking his toes or--and the, the black community in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], which has a very large, old, black middle class, the one my [paternal] grandparents [Florence Mills Nelson and Howard Nelson] were striving to get into, went ballistic. They're--led by [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes of TV One [Silver Spring, Maryland] and others, they were outside every Sunday throwing the Sunday magazine back on the steps of The Post [The Washington Post] chanting, "Take it back, take it back." It was the worst. People wouldn't be--let me interview them because I worked for The Post magazine. People would let me interview them but only on the condition that I wasn't gonna publish until the debacle with the magazine was somehow resolved. I mean it was really hell. It was a mess. And then of course when you're the only black writer on the s- oh I'm sorry, well [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams was there, but as I said, when you're the only black writer they wanna come--you know, after people fuck up, they wanna come to you and you can be like the Negro translator. You know, like Luther for, for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. But it's like, what do you think about this story, Jill [HistoryMaker Jill Nelson]; will the black community be okay? What do you think about this cover, Jill? And I'm like I don't know, you know, I don't like it or I do like it, but that has nothing to do with the (air quotes) black community. You know, this nonexistent monolith, you know, thinks (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well and then, and then you know, for those who don't know, what is--at that time what was Juan Williams' perspective, what was he--what was his stance as a writer then? Speaker 2: (Pause) I mean, I thought he was a right wing guy and he was Clarence Thomas' pal, and you know, it was ridiculous. And I mean what's he--what's he now, isn't he on FOX News? I mean come on now, you know. He was--he was trouble. And I felt-- Speaker 1: But so for them, they, I guess they thought they had left and right with the two of you? Speaker 2: I guess they did, but I wasn't going for it, because that's not my job. You're not paying me to do that, you know, and that's a bad--(pause) when--to, to participate in something like that belies the reason I became a journalist, which is to change the narrative and to tell the uniqueness of our so--our diverse, myriad stories. So I can't be your monolith, you know, and not for fifty thousand dollars which then was a lot of money. I was happy to be making fifty thousand dollars. Although I remember when I got my first check I went up to HR [human resources] and I was like, hey this must be a mistake. I mean, because I hadn't had a job-job before really. Speaker 1: So you'd never had all that money taken out? Speaker 2: Oh my god all that money taken out. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Whatever I did with I--I ended up paying at the back end so I could get the money in the front end. What a mess. So and that was really a bad beginning and it never righted itself. It never righted itself. Story_ID: 665904 Speaker 1: How long did you work there [The Washington Post Magazine]? Speaker 2: F- a little over four years. But I had gone there saying I wanted my daughter [Sunshine Muse]--to get my daughter out of high school, and I did. Speaker 1: And where did she go to high school? Speaker 2: She went to a place called The Field School [Washington, D.C.], which was a private kind of hippie school. She went there for two years and she--one day she said to me, "You know, Mom, is there something wrong with me?" And I go--I went, "No, why, would make you think--?" She says, "Yeah I go to this school with these kids who wear boxer shorts to school and have clo- have, you know, safety pins in their noses, you know and act crazy." And then she went to public school, to Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.]. I think I was thinking about New Lincoln [New Lincoln School, New York, New York] for me, that creativity and that freedom, and I think that that wasn't what she needed and that school wasn't, you know, it was--I don't know, thirty years later, things had changed. Speaker 1: It was kind of grunge? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was grunge and, and a lot of people who did have a lot of weird issues, you know. You know, and I--I think that the difference be- the (pause) the way that well to do or successful black people raise their children and their expectations are very different very often than what well to do or wealthy white people expect from their children, and what's acceptable behaviors. And I think she was right to move out of that. Speaker 1: And did she thrive in the public high school? Speaker 2: Yes, she did much better, she did much better and was happier, and--you know. Speaker 1: And so your agenda was to get her through high school so when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she's finished, your- it's time to go? Speaker 2: Well yeah at the very least. When I went there I thought I'd just be--she would get through high school and I'd be there, but then I was like (gesture) at--soon I figured it out after a year at the most, I'm out of here, I just have to get her through high school. So that's what I did. Story_ID: 665905 Speaker 1: So what--knowing a year in that it's really not working, and knowing you, being outspoken and vocal about your perspective and able to write about it freely prior to The Washington Post [The Washington Post Magazine], what--well you wrote a book about it (laughter)? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. I, you know and I--I--I found odd stories that I wanted to do and I just pushed and pushed, you know, and tried to get them through. And stuff that would take me out of the office (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what--what were some of the stories that were successful? Speaker 2: I did a profile of Alton Maddox [Alton H. Maddox, Jr.], the civil rights attorney here in New York [New York]. And I went to--I came here and interviewed him. I went to Newnan, Georgia where he grew up and hung out there, and met his friends and family there. Speaker 1: And why was he important at that moment? Speaker 2: He was important because Michael Griffith had just been chased by a white mob onto a highway and run over and killed when he had the nerve to go to a part of Brooklyn [New York] he wasn't welcome in. And Alton, who I knew from different cases here and writing about people here for the Voice [Village Voice], was an attorney on that case. And he said this wonderful thing. One way I got--convinced the editor to do the story was, you know, Alton said this great thing like that, a black man's life--a dog's life is worth more than a black man's life in America. You know, if someone had run over a dog--which I think is true still. So I did that, I loved working with him. I did a story about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that--we'll pause and come back for the next one. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: You can say, I was--I was asking, was he still living; you say yeah? Speaker 1: I was gonna say, Alton Maddox is such an amazing committed--and his wife, Leola [Leola Weaver Maddox], just these amazing committed people. I met him when I worked on a story called 'Did An-' for the Voice, called 'Did Anthony Davis Kill His Teacher: A Civics Lesson at Bushwood High' [ph.]. That was about--got onto that story 'cause I saw a little tiny piece in, I think the New York Post talking about how this kid had killed his teacher and the teacher weighed two hundred something pounds and the kid weighed 140 something. Just ca- and they mentioned Alton Maddox, it caught my--thought, this is odd. They had a fight and he killed him, but the weight difference--that's how I met Alton and started working with him, you know. So I think that--I'm sorry my mind's wandering (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, so you were telling me other articles that you got through at The Washington Post? Speaker 1: Ah, yeah, I worked on one called 'Her Life is Her Job' [Jill Nelson] about Michele Roberts [Michele A. Roberts] who's an attorney, was a public defender then, has been mega successful in private practice and now is the counsel for the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Sister who just was--her work was her job. I mean, she was just absolutely tenacious about defending her--the people who came to her, just wonderful. I did a story about a, a woman--a cotillion that was put on for girls from underprivileged backgrounds and I followed this young woman, Cynthia [ph.], for a couple months as she went through that whole process of, of language and curtsying and dancing and the dress, and the whole--and how much influence it had on her life. So I did some stuff I was happy with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 665906 Speaker 1: In doing those stories [for The Washington Post Magazine], because they're investigative stories, was it--I'm, I'm looking at the compare and contrast between Essence. There's more money for you to be able to spend time doing these things, is that--was that true? Speaker 2: Yes, there's more money. Speaker 1: You know, because doing investigative stories for-- Speaker 2: Yes. Right. Speaker 1: --publications that don't have deep pockets is o- is often a challenge? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I mean for every me who is out of the office working on some story for a month, there's five, ten, fifteen back then, reporters, on the same beat, you know, who can cover whatever the beat is, who are in the office, who aren't working on a long-term project. So that I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So just in terms of the construct of the-- Speaker 2: Yes, that was fun. Speaker 1: --business; and then you weren't in the office-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --so, did that make it easier for you? Speaker 2: Yes, and that was one reasons these story--I--we--I conceptualize these stories plus it's better for me to be out doing something unique. I did a piece on two transgender--and this was, I don't know, '88 [1988], '87 [1987]. Two transgender men transiting to women who--just I hung out with them and wrote about them and what their lives were like. You know, and that was stunning to me, I knew nothing about this you know. I wrote about a go-go group. Go-go is D.C.'s [Washington, D.C.] indigenous music. So I hung out with them and went to clubs, and you know, watched these kids doing this whole thing (gesture). It was a ball, you know. So that--I think I figured out I can do good work and not get into any conflict, because if--I'm thinking of good stories and I'm out of the office. I mean, I have a strong personality. I'm not at all trying to suggest that this is a one way street, you know. But I think that a lot of things in my life, most of them positive, from both sides--my parents, both sides of my parents, my mother [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson] and my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] encouraged me not to take shit, to be a race woman and not to work for someone else, you know. Story_ID: 665907 Speaker 1: And so you left, what--what year did you leave The Post [The Washington Post Magazine]? Speaker 2: Ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: And what did you do from there? Speaker 2: You know, I stayed in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for a minute, maybe a year. My daughter [Sunshine Muse] had started Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And I had kind of a breakdown of ex- exhaustion after I took her to college--that was tough. And I did--tried to do some freelancing. I went--I--Essence was great, I still did work for them. But D.C. is a city where--you know, New York [New York] is a city, although this may be changing, but it was then a city where if you told people you were freelancing they'd be like, "Wow, how interesting, what do you do?" D.C. was a place like, "Freelancing? Blah" (gesture). You know, you're out of my radar; you don't exist. You know, it's a company town in every way. And I would say 75 percent of the people who responded to me didn't respond to me after I quit my job. You just--are disappeared, you know. You know, they put out story--I quit my job. They put out stories that I had embezzled funds. And someone called me up from some newspaper and asked me--said they heard I'd embezzled--a source had told them I embezzled ten thousand dollars. And I was like, you know you'd be calling me at Lorton [Lorton Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia], that's a prison, if I'd embezzled ten thousand dollars. Speaker 1: So the people at The Post put out these statements? Or you don't know for sure (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I believe so. I believe so. And not, I mean I think, you know, creepy colleagues. Speaker 1: So what was your departure like; what, what was that conversation? Speaker 2: I went in to see Leonard Downie [Leonard Downie, Jr.] who was the managing editor and I told him that I was quitting, and I wasn't happy there, and that I--I write about this in the book I wrote about it, which is called 'Volunteer Slavery' ['Volunteer Slavery: My Authentic Negro Experience,' Jill Nelson]. I told him I don't think you can imagine someone like me, you know, and I got to go, I mean that's-- Speaker 1: Have you had been having these conversations at all with them over time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean I was constantly having these conversations with them. And--and you know, I mean--and they responded sometimes. You know, I remember when Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was coming there--coming--in '90 [1990], when Mandela came to the--the Mandela U.S. tour. They were gonna have a meeting with Mandela with just the muckety mucks. And you know, me and a couple other people went and said unh-uh. I had been in South Africa, I had met Winnie [Winnie Mandela] when Nelson was still in prison, working on this film that I quit my other job for, and I was like, you know, I have--we have to be there and I was there. And Winnie was there, her--her and Nelson were still together when they came, she was like, "Jill [HistoryMaker Jill Nelson]!" And you know, I had my Ndebele beads and my--I used to call it my Winnie wear. So yeah, it was a--I was--(pause) I think that we are--(pause) I don't wanna be in a box, put there by anyone. That's not what I'm on the planet for. And I think that it's--I think that there's a tendency to put us in a box, you know, that we're either sort of angry and scary or be, you know--or cheerful and grateful. And I'm neither or all of the above and much more, you know. And that's how I felt at The Post, I felt they couldn't really imagine me or a lot of the other black people--I mean I was there with [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, Michel McQueen [Michel McQueen Martin], [HistoryMaker] Michele Norris, Marcia Slacum Greene, Sandy Gregg [Sandra R. Gregg], Lynne Duke; I mean I was there with some dynamic smoking sisters, and I don't think any of them were understood. I really don't, or--or encouraged to perform at the top of their creativity and ability. Story_ID: 665908 Speaker 1: How many years later did you publish 'Volunteer Slavery' ['Volunteer Slavery: My Authentic Negro Experience,' Jill Nelson]? Speaker 2: Three. It was published in '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: And so, that's certainly--your--I mean, first of all: title, provocative title, the book is about your experience there. I think it sent shockwaves through the publishing world (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: H- what--how was it received, how--tell me what your experience was after having--it is now available for people to read, what happened to you? Speaker 2: Well, it was really hard to sell. My agent, Faith Childs [Faith Childs Literary Agency, New York, New York]--we were turned down by thirty-three publishers. And then went to the new small black press in Chicago [Illinois] called Nobel Press, they published it. People told me don't write- don't publish it, don't write it, it'll destroy your career, you know, you'll never eat lunch in this town again. By then I had moved from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and you know, it was really, I thought, really well received; it did great, you know. The thing about writing a book that is critical and names names, and is--my book was funny. That I realize that you--I want you to come on this journey with me about this job I had, but even using that as kind of a scaffolding to really--I think the book is really about my family, to talk about family. And I, and it's a tough journey, and so I used--I decided, I'm gonna use humor, that's what's gonna ma- I'm gonna seduce you with the humor to come along with me. And it worked, you know, I had people tell me, you know, "I've read your book in one sitting and I felt like I had a fifteen hour phone conversation with you, I feel like I really know you." So that was really affirmative. And also that I think it res- people--it resonated for people 'cause so many people are in corporate jobs where they just feel so alienated and so unimaginable to the people for whom they work. I think that spoke to a lot of people. And then everybody likes a freed slave narrative. The freed slaves, or the slaves, whichever way you look at yourself. All--everybody wants to hear about someone who let it go. And so it was well received (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it--and you sold a lot of copies, it became a bestseller. What--do, do you remember how many copies you sold? Speaker 2: No, maybe twenty something thousand--twenty-two thousand, something like that. Speaker 1: And how then--what happened to you work wise; did--did you get blackballed at all? How did The Washington Post respond? Speaker 2: No, no, they--they did not respond. They reviewed, I got a good review there. And you know people--no- the thing about--no one--people don't come up to you when they're mad at you about your book; they don't, you don't see them, you know. It's not like they're gonna come to your reading, and be like--[HistoryMaker] Juan Williams is not gonna be like, "You dissed me in your book," or whoever it is, DeWayne Wickham or whoever. So that doesn't happen. You know, so the response I felt was good and it opened doors, you know. And I--it--I mean Essence was a door that I just went back into. Essence was really supportive. I talked to Essence before I quit about, this is what I'm gonna do, you know, I'm gonna need work, you know, and I have much more time, blah, blah, blah. So I thought it worked out fine. And then ever since then I've been writing books, you know. And I had a column with--I wrote for USA Today once a month or twice a month, whatever, I don't remember and then I had a column on MSNBC. I wrote for Heart and Soul. I had a column on niaonline.com [NiaOnline]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that one. Speaker 2: Yes, so I feel like things have--and then I've been writing books. I feel like now I kind of am a book writer and every now and then I'll do an op-ed or you know, essay piece. But luckily have the privilege to pretty much be able to write about what I want. Story_ID: 665909 Speaker 1: You started teaching--you taught for a while at, at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], your alma mater, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were you teaching? Speaker 2: Journalism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Journalism to undergrads. There was--the graduate--CUNY graduate school [Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, New York] did not exist. Speaker 1: And is this being an adjunct professor or you were on staff like-- Speaker 2: I was on staff, tenure track, tenure track. And then I published (pause)-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you were there in '98 [1998] to 2003? Speaker 2: Was I there to 2003? Speaker 1: Well, that's what my notes say. Is that about right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, maybe something like that. Speaker 1: Why did you leave? Speaker 2: I couldn't negotiate with--my schedule with them. And I had just published my first novel, 'Sexual Healing' ['Sexual Healing: A Novel, Jill Nelson']. Had a contract for and was already working on a--my memoir--second memoir 'Finding Martha's Vineyard: African Americans at Home on an Island' [Jill Nelson]. And I--they wanted me to teach four; and then run the student newspaper, be the advisor for the student newspaper. And I went and I said, "Look, I can't do this," and I had this book and it's been well received, and blah, blah, blah. And they told me, "Even if you were Albert Einstein," the dean told me, "even--we--we don't negotiate at City College, even if you were Albert Einstein we won't nego- wouldn't negotiate." And I was like, that's why you don't have Albert Einstein here, you know, (laughter) I mean you have to negotiate if you wanna keep good people. So, I left (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you left. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 665910 Speaker 1: You mentioned that you've been pretty much writing books since then. So the publishing industry has changed dramatically over the years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, starting with there being very few places where you can even buy books and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the Internet. And so, how, as a writer now as an author, how are you--how are you negotiating your relationships with these publishers, making it work for you? 'Cause it's--it's a huge shift (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Oh yeah, it is a huge shift. Speaker 1: Is Faith [Faith Childs] still your agent? Speaker 2: No, and--but still a very, very, very close friend. We decided that as the industry changed, it seemed more important to be friends than to like fight it out with the industry, which I think is a really good decision. You know, I feel that the way books work is you (pause) try to sell your book for as much as you can. Figure out what lump--what you're gonna do with the lump of money you get; and then write the book and do it again and again and again and again, you know. So you know, we wanted to move and buy an apartment. So that became kind of the major lump of one book. And then keeping money so I can pay myself a good salary, or you know good enough salary to keep on going. And it's been really been that, you know. And I'm married, you know, and I have a husband [Flores Forbes] who has a great job and he's a writer--he is a urban planner, but he also writes, so he's really understanding about it, and. Speaker 1: And your writing, you're publishing books with what frequency? Speaker 2: Well the last one--I used to publish them every, like three years, two years. The last one was in 2009, so now I just finished a novel. I'm just starting to send it out, so that's been kind of a stretch. But a good one--not financially, but good in that I always was so--I've been hustling for so long, you know, since my daughter [Sunshine Muse], that it was nice to like not have my foot in the--in two worlds or in two books simultaneously. Although, you know, I'm ready to sell it and get my next lump and see what's coming next. Speaker 1: Well and--so in part if you were every three years and now it's been longer, the rhythm changes. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The industry has changed again dramatically-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --from '09 [2009] to '16 [2016]. Specifically, usually there's less money for that lump-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --just because--not because of you--but because of the industry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, because of--yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, in between what do you do? How do you--so between 2009 and 2016, you didn't write a book, what were you doing? Speaker 2: Right. Did some freelancing, actually worked for Nia [NiaOnline] for a while. They didn't--you know, they paid me, I thought, rather well. Speaker 1: Yeah they did. They were good. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did a decent job. Did some fr- a bunch of freelancing, you know, hustled where I could. You know, did some contribu- essays as a contributor to different anthologies; and I had an apartment, I sold it, you know, made money. Put lumps, some of it--some, you know, into the apar- the, another apartment and the rest to live off. So it's kind of like that. Story_ID: 665911 Speaker 1: Because for those people who do this (laughter), it's, it's interesting to see somebody else's journey, you know how do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. No, it's-- Speaker 1: --put all the pieces together? Speaker 2: --well you know, you know it's real- it's hard, it's hard. My advice would be: think it out before you do it. Understand that stuff waxes and wanes and it--you have to be able to go with that ebb and flow. Very good if you have a nice partner who has benefits, you know. I mean, I can remember when we went--before I was married I'd been with my partner [Flores Forbes] for ten years and we went to register as domestic partners so I could have--get his health insurance. That's--you know, you, that's important, you know, so you gotta figure out do you live in a state or a city where that's possible. How long does it take to click in? Then I think too part of it is, what I've realized too, is that part of the gap is that I'm older, you know, I'm not as driven, I'm not as fast. My priorities have changed. You know, I used to write so much--I mean I think most of my writing was--it was polemic in that I wanted to change the world. You know, wake up, wake up, you know. The last line of 'Straight, No Chaser,' which is called 'How I Be-'- subtitle 'How I Became A Grown-Up Black Woman' ['Straight, No Chaser: How I Became a Grown-Up Black Woman,' Jill Nelson] is sisters, "Come out, come out wherever you are!" You know, I want--do you know I was so much more adamant. And I think that's changed, you know, I don't think I'm--so I think--and also part of it is you wanna--as I've gotten older I've--you have a different sense of time. So I wanna push myself in different ways. So my new book, the novel I just finished which is called 'Settlers' [ph.] is--it's different, it's a stretch. I wanted to do something different (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's it about? Speaker 2: It's about a group of multiracial, a small group of six women who are in a book club and the- they read Ralph--when the book begins they're reading Ellison's [Ralph Ellison] 'Invisible Man' and then the protagonist, one of the club members, three, she has three major shocks to her system and they become avengers. They decide to become avengers. So it's about age, racism, sexism, technology, gentrification. Speaker 1: How many books have you published so far? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: So this will be seven? Speaker 2: This will be seven. Story_ID: 665912 Speaker 1: You spoke of your parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] teaching you to be a race woman. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this--what, what has popped into my head is sort of tangential, but I think of [HistoryMaker] Bethann Hardison who said that--she kind of came out of retirement to fight for the rights of black models when it started changing so dramatically, and there's so many fewer faces. And I wonder, you know, we're in 2016 and Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] just--it's hard to say, but he was elected-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or selected to be president. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: As a race woman, what do you feel you have to do as a writer? What, you know, what does [HistoryMaker] Jill Nelson think that she needs to do in light of this reality? Speaker 2: You know, stay focused on trying to tell diverse stories, to broaden the narrative, don't take any shit, wear my sign, keep fighting, you know. I mean, I'm--we--if we thought that the struggle was won or we were winning, we're not, clearly. And this is such a repudiation of black people, people of color, LGBTQI [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex] people, Muslims. I mean this is the return of the Confederacy, and we've got to fight. Because the--or else we're gonna have the new Jim Crow, and maybe even worse. Because I do believe that this is the dying white culture. But they're not going easily, you know, anywhere, globally. I mean look at Brexit. You know, this is our Brexit: Chump is our Brexit (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which by the way he said, he called it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he called himself our Brexit. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and you know, but we have to be prepared to fight, and I mean by any means necessary. My husband [Flores Forbes] was in the Black Panther Party in California for ten years, he--in Oakland. He was arrest- he was a fugitive, he was in a shootout, he was a fugitive for three years. Then he was, he turned himself in and was convicted of felony murder. Served five years and is now an assistant vice president--associate vice president at Columbia University [New York, New York] for--in community affairs. You know, you--we have to keep fighting, you know, we have to fi- keep fighting and teach others how to do that. You know our kids, you know, our nieces and our nephews, our grandchildren. This is unacceptable, you know. I mean I read this story the other day, yesterday online about the woman--some black woman at a gas station in Delaware who gets out to pump her gas and these four white guys drive up and start calling her nigger and, "Go back where you came from," and, "this is our country," and one of them shows her a gun. And she was just so terrified and reduced to tears, and we've gotta figure out a way for that woman to protect herself, for us to protect that woman, and it's not gonna be pretty. But we have to do it. I mean what's our--otherwise we're just taking up space. And I feel this way about black people at jobs who--or women at jobs or Jews or whoever, or Muslims at jobs who don't bring any other people on like them. I'm like, go--get out, you have that job to bring others in. If you're not gonna do your job, move over so someone can come in who can do it. Story_ID: 665913 Speaker 1: And that presumes that they have that level of awareness. I mean what your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right. Speaker 1: --your parents [A'Lelia Ransom Nelson and Stanley Nelson, Sr.] taught you is that it's not just you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you have to bring others along? Speaker 2: Right. And what I--I don't know--I see the people I know, my brother [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson] has teenagers and a few other people I know, and I know my--I have a teenage grandson, fourteen and an eight year old. I see this--your daughter [Carrie Emmanuelle Cole Chinsee]; I--I think parents are still teaching this. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And that's important, and those are people I'm interested in. Speaker 1: And at the same time, you know, another report was that in some high school yesterday that--or maybe even junior high school, what they call middle school now, that the kids were all dressed in Confederate flags. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There is two sides of this thing that are showing their face. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and I--I think, you know, I can dig it. I mean imagine if just by an accident of birth you were privileged and you were on top of other people, and you were--had been told for years you were supposed to get something, you know. And these people are mad and they feel robbed because those days are over for them, you know, it's not gonna happen. And they've been manipulated by a fascist and his minions, or he's their minion, to believe that he's gonna bring back the good ole days. But you know there--you don't bring anything back. You know, whenever I hear people talking about going back, I'm like back to when, what year, the '50s [1950s], you know. You know, the '20s [1920s] when women couldn't vote, when there was slavery, during Reconstruction, antebellum. I mean when are we talking about? Speaker 1: Well and also during all of those periods most white people were not rich. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They--the- an interesting part of what's happening, I think now, is that the majority of white Americans are becoming visible in the media, in television, in movies, poor white people didn't exist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So they were le- they were more invisible possibly than the invisible man in 'Invisible Man,' Ralph Ellison] because they didn't exist, it was beautiful, blonde, blue eyed, skinny white women and wealthy beautiful, slim, dark haired white men. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: And now these people, you know, the hillbilly elegy; the--that--that these people who Trump [President Donald John Trump] promised something to are people he doesn't see either. Speaker 2: Yeah, no. But the thing is that they see him and they think, you know, sloppy as the--their lives may be, they relate to him and Melania [Melania Trump] and Ivanka [Ivanka Trump], and Eddie Munster, you know. I mean, these people, it's really--it's heartbreaking, but it says--but you know, it's a wake up. Any of us who were asleep, wake up, you know. And it'll be interesting to see what people do. Story_ID: 665914 Speaker 1: I mean I have--I--there is much good to be said about Black Lives Matter, but on the other hand, what are you doing, where are you? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What are you doing? And I'll tell you something, I'd be damned if I'm gonna walk around the street saying, "Hands up don't shoot," to a bunch of cops who shoot. I mean, you know, we have to step it up. You know, marching to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] ain't gonna get it. I mean we need some new strategies and some new techniques, you know, and we need frankly people who are willing to risk a lot more. You know, it's not enough to go march around one day and go home; and then look at me with that I feel bad about that already face. These are really dire straits, you know. And I frankly--I mean you hear about all the gun sales, well who's buying all these guns. I mean who needs to protect themselves. Are the people who need to protect themselves getting the guns, you know, do you have--I don't have any mace, you know, or tear gas, but I'm gonna get some and something else too I hope. I mean this is no joke. And we're just--I mean the thing about black people is like, just like the Obamas, we're talking about earlier, they're so--we're so nice. You know, we really believe in people's goodness in some fundamental way. And, and I think we're wrong, you know. And let me just say this--can I say something else. Speaker 2: Please. Speaker 1: I, you know, I was saying--I think often about young people and you know, the way they always wanna act like--when Black Lives Matter when there's a demo [demonstration], the critics wanna go, "Oh what about the black people killing other black people." You know, and it's conflating two things that can't be conflated. But I feel this way: if you are black and male and young and living in Chicago [Illinois] or New York [New York] or D.C. or any of these other cities really, and you grow up in a situation where the police, those who are armed to serve and protect have no respect for you or your momma or your sister or anybody else who shoot people you know to death, why would that make you think your life is valuable or that the lives of people like you are of value. And the difference is, you know, forty years ago my husband [Flores Forbes] saw two of his--three of his friends shot and killed when they tried to rob a convenience store when they were teenagers in San Diego [California] where he grew up. And this, in addition to having been assaulted more than once and then kidnapped essentially by the police, made him join the Black Panther Party. Now we have a situation where we're just shooting one another. There's got to be some--another step, there have to be other steps that we can take. But that's my thing. It's like don't act- tell me these kids are animals when you treat them like they don't exist, less than an animal as Alton Maddox [Alton H. Maddox, Jr.] said, worse than a dog and then you expect them to what--value their--feel valuable. Feel that other black teenage kids are valuable. I mean we're in a bad situation. Story_ID: 665915 Speaker 1: So what advice do you have for young people who might wanna follow in your footsteps; you know, to--to bring to light what's going on in our culture through, through the field of journalism? Speaker 2: If you can afford to go to school, go to school and get educated. Study everything realistically, understand the Internet, radio, visual, this is--I mean I think print is waning, I don't think that's the way to go. Realize that what you wanna do is really hard, that news is not the 'Kardashians' ['Keeping Up with the Kardashians'] or 'Access Hollywood' ['Access'] or E! or TMZ--that's not important, you know. And that you have to--to do good work. You have to work hard, be smart and sacrifice. Because if you're an intelligent person you can make a lot more money on Wall Street [New York, New York] than you can going to work at--even at The New York Times at the top of the heap. You just, you know, so you have to be really committed and have a long view, have a vision--this is why I'm doing this. This is why this sustains me. This is why the sacrifices are okay. I mean, you know, 'Voluntary Slavery' ['Voluntary Slavery: My Authentic Negro Experience,' Jill Nelson] came out in '93 [1993]. You know, that's t- twenty something years ago. I--everyday someone on the street stops me and says, "Are you [HistoryMaker] Jill Nelson?" I like it, they say are you (air quotes) the Jill Nelson, you know, and sometimes I say, "No, I'm just Jill Nelson." Then they start to move away, then I go, "Wait, wait." But they say, "I read your book, it really meant a lot to me, you know, wow, you know, I just reread it. I still have it. My mom just gave it to me last month. It was really great." You know so you realize that the work that you do can have impact. You know, in some of the stories that I have done for Essence, The Washington Post, the Voice [Village Voice]--everywhere I've written, I do feel like I've touched and changed some lives--lives, maybe one, maybe two, but and that's what, that's the payoff, you know. I mean King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said this great thing about if I can leave one committed life behind then I know my living wouldn't have been in vain, I'm paraphrasing I think. And it's true. And if you can leave it even more, even better. You know, I brought this quote from Baldwin, can I read it? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a quote from James Baldwin from a collection, 'The Cross of Redemption: Uncollected Writings' [James Baldwin]. And he's talking about being an artist. And he says: "The writer trapped among a speechless people is in danger of becoming speechless himself. For then he has no mirror, no corroborations of his essential reality; and this means that he has no grasp of the reality of the people around him. What the times demand in an unprecedented fashion is that one be not seem outrageous, independent, anarchical. That one be thoroughly disciplined as a means of being spontaneous, that one resist at whatever cost the fearful pressures placed on one to lie about one's own experience for in the same way that the writer scarcely ever had more uneasy time, he has never been needed more." And that's from 1959. Speaker 2: And here we are. Speaker 1: Yep, here we are. Story_ID: 665916 Speaker 1: Jill [HistoryMaker Jill Nelson], when you think back on your career, which is certainly not over, but you've had many years of being actively a journalist and writer, what do you consider your legacy to be? Speaker 2: (Pause) I think I have succeeded in giving voice to stories that were untold, of changing the narrative both in terms of journalism, in terms of fiction, in terms of memoir. You know it's a great question because even here Harriette [HistoryMaker Harriette Cole], I--you--I have talked about things here that I've never talked about in these hours together publicly. But you know like, Langston Hughes said, "Your life ain't no crystal stair." And the sugar coating means nothing, it's useless, it cracks right off and falls on the ground and gets trampled. But being honest about our differences, our mistakes, our successes, our eclecticism, you know, what it felt like to be tripping at a Cream concert, you know. What it was like to be a Jimi Hendrix fan and see him live. I met Bob Marley. I mean, you know, it has been--I think for us as black people too and as women, so often and as Americans I guess, we feel this need to idealize ourselves--that to be a loving race woman we have to be perfect. It's not true. And also I guess I want part of my legacy to be that you can be creative. You know, you can take the risk and be creative and survive and make it and succeed and be fulfilled. You know, I remember reading years ago, my father [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] was a great Duke Ellington fan, and reading years ago that Duke Ellington's father [James Edward Ellington] wanted him to be a musician. We need to encourage our kids to be artists and musicians and dancers and writers, not just (gesture) get a job and be safe. Story_ID: 665917 Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) Not really. I'm a fan of 'No Regrets'--that song: "No regrets, though our lovely love affair has gone astray." You know I--it's--I think I don't have regrets because, you know, I've done it my way and I'll be back in one form or another. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked? Speaker 2: (Pause) No, I've tried to be honest. You've asked great questions. You know, I ask for the viewer's open mind and loving understanding. I'm trying to give it back. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Great questions. Story_ID: 665918 Speaker 1: That's j- fi- 1954, I'm on--that's me, [HistoryMaker] Jill Nelson on the left, I'm two [years old]. That's my sister Lynn Nelson [Lynn Nelson Smith], she's six; and that's my brother [HistoryMaker] Stanley Nelson, he's three. Speaker 2: And where are you? Speaker 1: We're at my maternal grandmother, Florence Mills Nelson's house in Washington, D.C. (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Hold on, please. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's summer of 19--I'm sorry of 1973. That's my daughter, Sunshine Muse, sitting on my lap. That's me, we're on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in our house sitting in the bedroom. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my father, Dr. Stanley Nelson [Stanley Nelson, Sr.] on the left with my mother, A'Lelia Ransom Nelson; and they're in Quogue on Long Island [New York] where we went for a few summers when I was very small before we became Martha's Vineyardites. And the other picture is my brother Stanley, my sister Lynn and myself. I think we had a turtle or a fish in there, at--in the yard at the house we rented at--in Quogue; and in the background is my dad and I think my uncle Ralph [Ralph Nelson]--that's my father's oldest brother. Speaker 1: This is the wedding of F.B. Ransom [Freeman B. Ransom] and Nettie Cox [Nettie Cox Ransom]--my maternal grandfather and grandmother. Nettie is the woman in the back with the big hat on, to her left is F.B. Ransom (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here? Speaker 1: Yes. And in front of her is Diamond Cox, in front of Nettie. Speaker 2: Right here? Speaker 1: Yes, that's Diamond. And I read in his obit [obituary] that he was often known as Decox [ph.] which is gonna be my name when I become a rapper. Speaker 2: There you go. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's--on the far left that's [HistoryMaker] A'Lelia Bundles who is the granddaughter of A'Lelia Walker, Madam Walker's [Madam C.J. Walker] daughter. Next to her with the tiara is Dinah Washington, this wonderful singer. Next to her is my uncle Willard Ransom, his--also known as Mike Ransom; and next to him is my mother, A'Lelia Ransom Nelson. They are in a nightclub in Indianapolis [Indiana] and they are all looking to the right because my uncle Mike, who's a lawyer, has seen the process--process server enter the bar who is looking for Dinah who had apparently absconded before fulfilling a contractual obligation the year before. She escaped. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: This is my sister Lynn Nelson and--my oldest sister, the oldest of us, the four of us; and my brother Stanley Nelson at s- visiting Santa. I think that was in Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York]. Minutes later my brother ran away screaming because he found Santa a scary figure. And many, many years later, my father came home one night angry muttering about Santa Claus was a white man, and threw the Christmas tree out the window. Speaker 1: This is me on the left, Jill Nelson, and my good friend Sherrod Van Dyke [ph.] who is a painter originally from Harlem [New York, New York]. She left the United States sixty years ago, first for Spain and now she lives in--she's lived all over Europe, she now lives in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and we--myself and my husband [Flores Forbes] go and visit her once a year. Speaker 2: (Laughter) What a crazy face. That's me in June on--that was my, on my fifty-fifth birthday. I treated myself to a week in sailing camp for women and was--got my first level certification as a sailor. Story_ID: 665919 Speaker 1: This the Democratic Convention in 1984 [1984 Democratic National Convention, San Francisco, California] when Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was running. The tall man next to me on the left is Jitu Weusi, an activist from Brooklyn [New York] who is sadly no longer with us; and next to him is me with a weird hairstyle. I was there covering, I think for the Village Voice, the convention. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Ah. This is me in an ad for Pepsi-Cola [Pepsi-Cola Company; Pepsi-Co]. I was eleven or twelve [years old]--probably eleven, maybe ten. This is the woman, Gail [Gail Fisher] I forget her last name who was in the series 'Mannix.' She played his secretary [Peggy Fair]. This was--I--Harvey Russell [Harvey C. Russell, Jr.] was a friend of my parents, and he was the first V- black VP [vice president] at Pepsi and arranged that. I was paid a hundred dollars-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right. Speaker 1: --and it was on billboards. Speaker 2: Ah, this is my first trip to Africa in 1981. And that's in Zimbabwe, the countryside of Zimbabwe. Speaker 1: That's a party at the home of Earl Caldwell, it was a goodbye party for me right before I went to work at The Washington Post. And the man on the--young man on the left is Anthony Davis [ph.] who I wrote a story for the Village Voice about, called 'Did Anthony Davis Kill His Teacher' [ph.] and that's how I met Alton Maddox [Alton H. Maddox, Jr.] and still a good friend, Anthony. Speaker 2: This is a book signing in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. On the left is D.C. [Washington, D.C.] mayor Sharon Pratt Dixon [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt], next to her is my daughter, Sunshine Muse, and there's me writing a dedication. Speaker 1: Did you get that, Scott [Scott Stearns]? Speaker 2: This is a rare picture of us with our father. That's me on the left, that's my father, Dr. Stanley Nelson [Stanley Nelson, Sr.], my little brother, Ralph Nelson--Ralph Lewis Nelson and my big brother Stanley Earl Nelson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Stanley Nelson]. Speaker 1: This is a play at the New Lincoln School [New York, New York]. Third from the right top is my brother Stanley, we were doing a play about the Pawnee Indians [Native American] who we studied, as I remember, for half the year--we studied different aspects of Americana for a half a year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is--that's me on the left and my mother, A'Lelia Ransom Nelson. It's 1981, it's the morning of the day I went to Africa to Zimbabwe for the first time. We're at Wilson's Restaurant [Wilson's Bakery and Restaurant, New York, New York] on 158th [Street] and Amsterdam [Avenue] having breakfast. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is Washington, D.C. in the summer or early spring of 1980. I'm--I was working for The Washington Post then. And the woman standing is a photographer and I'm squatting. We are across the street from The Madison hotel [The Madison Washington, D.C.] waiting for Nelson Mandela who was--had recently been released. He was doing a U.S. tour and he came out to run many mornings, so we were sent to wait until he came out and run along with him. Speaker 2: Do I need to say anything? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: This is my first book, 'Volunteer Slavery: My Authentic Negro Experience' [Jill Nelson]. Speaker 1: My second book, 'Straight, No Chaser: How I Became a Grown-Up Black Woman' [Jill Nelson]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is an anthology I edited: 'Police Brutality' ['Police Brutality: An Anthology'], came out right af- aft- not long after the killing of Amadou Diallo. Speaker 2: My first novel, 'Sexual Healing' ['Sexual Healing: A Novel,' Jill Nelson] came out in 2003 about two black women, best friends who start a brothel for women where the sex workers are men. Speaker 1: A labor of love, 'Finding Martha's Vineyard: African Americans at Home on an Island' [Jill Nelson]. The house on the corner left is our family home. Still there. Speaker 2: Are you on Ocean Avenue? Is that what it is (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On Ocean Park [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Ocean Park, I didn't realize that. Speaker 1: A sequel to 'Sexual Healing'--'Let's Get It On' ['Let's Get It On: A Novel,' Jill Nelson] in which the brothel owners franchise to a yacht off Martha's Vineyard. And no this place doesn't exist yet. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: This was fun..