 Story_ID: 42239 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you spell your first name and--. Can you give us your first name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Pamela, P-A-M-E-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay. I really want your full name, I guess. Speaker 2: Therese-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: T-H-E-R-E-S-E, Newkirk, N-E-W-K-I-R-K. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 13, 1957, New York City. Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Professor of Journalism and Journalist, Author. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August 3rd, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In the Arthur Carter Journalism Institute at New York University. Story_ID: 42240 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warmup questions we are compelled to ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Lobster. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have many. I'll pick Costa Rica. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 42241 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's [Gloria Newkirk] side of the family and your father's [Louis Newkirk] side, but separately, so we can keep them straight, and then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, and her maiden name was Spencer, S-P-E-N-C-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 12-31-1935, I believe. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: In Manhattan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Harlem. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history? Are there any stories? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's mother, Dorothy, was born in Newport News, Virginia; and her mother--you know, I don't know much about that side of the family. And it's odd because I knew my great-grandmother until I was about twenty five or thirty when she died. So, she lived in New York the whole time I knew her. But she raised my grandmother in Newport News, Virginia; and my grandmother came to New York as a young woman. I don't know how old she was, but she had to have been very young because she had my mother when she was twenty; and so, that was already in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, all right. Well, so there are no stories about Newport News? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. And it's a place I've been wanting to go just to see what I can find about her history. But I know her father left when she was a little girl, and I know he was from Barbados and moved to England, and her mother was a housekeeper, as was my grandmother. She was--when I was a little girl, she was still a housekeeper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a very glamorous housekeeper. You would never know she was a housekeeper (laughs). She was a really fashionable woman of Harlem, but that was her occupation. Speaker 1: Did she have a position with somebody that really had, you know, some money or sort of a (simultaneously)--. Speaker 2: She worked for someone, yeah, on Park Avenue. I never knew who it was. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about the people she worked for? Speaker 2: I didn't know of them, no. She kept that really separate. Like, every once in a while I'd hear about a gift she was given. She kept a really nice house, and she had a prize collection of perfume, many of which she had gotten from--as gifts from whoever the woman was she worked for. Speaker 1: Okay. So she moved to New York when she was still young? Speaker 2: She was a teenager. Speaker 1: Teenager, okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: She was born in 1915, I think. Speaker 2: Oh, God. Speaker 1: Yeah, it'll be 1915. She had your mother when she was twenty. Speaker 2: About that, yeah. Story_ID: 42242 Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be it. So. Now, what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather, wow. His name was Samuel Spencer, and his family is from Ohio. And I know there's a Spencer Department Store, and I--oh, God. What part of Ohio is that? It's not Cleveland [Ohio], it's not Dayton [Ohio]. What's another (simultaneously)-- Speaker 1: Akron [Ohio]? Youngstown [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Columbus? Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Columbus? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was his family. They were all--many of his siblings were educators; teachers, principals. And for some reason my grandfather was not (laughs). My grandfather worked as a porter for--at Grand Central Station. He was a redcap, a very proud redcap (laughs). Speaker 1: Yeah, now those jobs were considered good jobs. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: No, he was-- Speaker 1: --because of the tips and other things that you could get. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He was a very, very proud man, and he raised his three children very well in Harlem. Speaker 1: So that also meant he probably got a union wage. Speaker 2: I would think. Speaker 1: And Pullman porters, I think they incorporated the redcaps in with them. And being a redcap, you could stay in town, you didn't have to travel. Speaker 2: Right. He didn't travel. Yep. Speaker 1: Then you might, I don't know if he did, but sometimes they, you know, railroad employees get privileges, travel privileges, on the railroad. The porters did. Speaker 2: If he did--I know he, when we were little, he used to take us to Philadelphia a lot, because his close--one of his closest brothers was in Philadelphia, and we would take Amtrak or he would drive. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know the porters could have almost free--either free rides or almost free rides. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: See, I didn't know. Speaker 1: So, okay. Did he have any stories about being a redcap that he shared? Any famous people or--? Speaker 2: No. But I just know he was really proud of it. He was really proud of being able to take care of his family, and he, you know, just a simple, simple man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A man of very few words (laughs). Story_ID: 42243 Speaker 1: Let's see. Your mother [Gloria Newkirk] was born in 1935. Did she grow up in Harlem? Speaker 2: 1935 or '34 [1934], yeah. She was born in Harlem. She was born in the apartment in Harlem and grew up there, 127th Street, and they lived there until she got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Has she had any stories about growing up, about what Harlem was like when she was--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. She always talked about what Harlem was like when she was a kid, and how she'd see Langston Hughes walking down the street, and how on Sundays everyone wore, you know, the finest clothes. And she talked about the parades, and it just sounded like a place I couldn't even imagine, because when I was a kid, you know, going to Harlem, it was pretty rough during the heroin epidemic and, you know, blighted blocks and--. But she talked about this, you know, the legendary Harlem that you read about, you know, when you read about the Harlem Renaissance. That's the Harlem she knew growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. They say Lenox Avenue was like the shop [ze la zai?](ph. splg.) somebody said this week, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Exactly. I mean she was so proud of, you know, what Harlem was anyway, and always saddened by what it had become. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she have a chance to finish school or--. Speaker 2: My mother graduated from high school, from Washington Irving [Washington Irving High School], which is right Downtown Manhattan on Irving Place, around 18th Street, and she--that was as far as she went until as an adult, she went back and got her associate's degree. Speaker 1: Now, was Washington Irving a special high school? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think it was just a regular public school. But it was--back then it was considered a good--really good public school. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered why, because it's not in Harlem, right? So-- Speaker 2: No. It's on Irving Place, yeah. Downtown. It's not far from here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I--you know, New York City, that's the way schools are. Like, for high school, you do travel, like, I don't think Harlem even has high schools. If it does, it maybe has one. So everyone in Harlem wouldn't be able to go to a school in Harlem anyway. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: That's not unusual. Speaker 1: A neighborhood school kind of concept will not be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, not for high school. Yeah, you went to a lower school in your neighborhood, but usually for high school most people traveled. Story_ID: 42244 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, did your mother share an aspiration that she had as she was-- Speaker 2: She always regretted that her father didn't send her to college. She wanted to go to college, and she was not given that opportunity. And then she married really young. I think she was married by the time she was 18 or 19, and she had my sister when she was 20, and then she had me when she was 22. And she worked first as a telephone operator, and then she went to training for IBM keypunching, and she did that for many years. So she was like in the vanguard of the whole computer revolution. She worked at this company on Wall Street [New York, New York] for many years and really liked her work. Speaker 1: Okay. You don't remember the name of the company? Speaker 2: Commercial--oh, no. I should know the name of the company. It was at 40 Wall Street. It--maybe it'll come back to me. But, yeah, she worked there for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then after that job, which she had for, I don't know, maybe twenty years, she worked for the U.S. Postal Service as a secretary. And she worked there until she got sick, and around, I guess, the early '90's [1990s], 1990's, and--or maybe even 2000. But she worked there until she couldn't work anymore. Story_ID: 42245 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Louis, L-O-U-I-S, and his middle name Harding, H-A-R-D-I-N-G, and Newkirk, N-E-W-K-I-R-K. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth--God, I should have brought birth certificates for this (laughs). June 18th, 19--oh, God. If I'm wrong, I can correct this, right? 1931, I believe. Let's see. He is--he's 81. So what year would that be? Is that right, that he would be born in '31 [1931]? Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was born in New York City, as well. He was born in the Bronx, and he was one of fourteen children. Speaker 1: Wow. Now, does he have roots in the South at all? Does his family have any roots there? Speaker 2: No. Well, his father--his father was from, I believe, South Carolina, but his mother was from Upstate New York, and she--I mean, she was just so proper and spoke like she was British. And all of her children did as well. Most of them were not formally educated beyond high school, and many of them weren't--my father, I think, got out of seventh grade or eighth grade, but very well spoken, self-educated, and very successful. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Self-made in every way. Story_ID: 42246 Speaker 1: So are there any stories about--I mean, how far back can you--. Speaker 2: Yes (laughs). Speaker 1: --Well, first of all, how far back can you trace this side of the family? How far back do they go? Speaker 2: Well, I have papers that go back to Mingo--Mingo the slave. I have papers that go back to the seventeen hundreds, but I could not give you those--I mean, I could share those papers with you. I don't have the stories going back that far, but--so, Mingo would have been his great-grandfather, and he was a slave. Speaker 1: In South Carolina, I guess? Speaker 2: I believe he was in South Carolina. But I can verify that for you. Speaker 1: Right. They would have to be South Carolina, yeah, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --slavery had been abolished in New York in the 1930's. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It definitely wasn't in New York, because my grandfather was definitely not from New York. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, somewhere between 1830 and 1840 it was abolished. Speaker 2: Well, slave--it was New York, 1827, I believe. Yeah. Speaker 1: Then they gave you ten more years to-- Speaker 2: Right (laughs). Speaker 1: --to get out of--I mean, to get used to being free or something like that. Speaker 2: Right. Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Some kind of crazy--. Speaker 2: But it was 1827, yes. So he was--but my grandfather was definitely born in the South. I'm not sure of the year. My grandmother was born in 1900, Upstate New York. I don't know what year he would--I know he was older, so he was born in the 1890's. But he (simultaneously)--. Speaker 1: So Mingo would have been (simultaneously)--. Speaker 2: --died when I was really young. So I never really got to know him. Speaker 1: This is your-- Speaker 2: My grandfather on my-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my paternal grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, this--Mingo was born prior to the Emancipation, at least, we know that. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Because he was a slave in South Carolina. Speaker 2: And then he had children who were also slaves, so-- Speaker 1: Oh, so, he goes back (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. He would have been my-- Speaker 1: He was an adult when slaves were freed. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there were two generations of slaves that we traced. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then to my grandfather, and then, of course, his children. Speaker 1: And now, are there any stories passed down about Mingo and any of his descendants? Speaker 2: No, because, like I said, I never really got to know my grandfather, his--I might have been like five when he died. And, he was not a very nice man. So, I don't--I don't--I don't--I've never heard any stories about, like, his childhood or the circumstances of his coming to New York. I don't know. Maybe my father knows them, but he never shared them. But he was not a nice man. He was like really abusive to his kids. And, like, those are the stories I heard, about how he used to whip them, like, those--like, I never had a nice story about him. So, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you were going to tell me some stories, I guess, about your grandfather and your father before I made you go back to Mingo, so. Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, like I said, I didn't know much about him. I know he worked in a shoe store somewhere in Manhattan, he sold shoes. And he was a really strict disciplinarian, and that's about all I know about him. I remember him. I remember seeing him, and he had an uncle who looked just like him, and I used to confuse them. Uncle Lee, Lee Newkirk. But that is pretty much all I can tell you about him. Story_ID: 42247 Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: My grandmother I can tell you more about-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but not much about her upbringing. But she was a minister, and she had a church, Temple of Faith and Hope. And all of her children had a choir, "The Newkirk Singers," and they did one recording. And out of the fourteen--this is a very interesting family. My father [Louis Newkirk] was an antique dealer, my--I have an Uncle Galen (ph. splg.) Newkirk who was an opera singer, Peter, Peter Galen. I have another aunt, Lenora Newkirk, but her stage name was Lee Kirk. She did a lot of Broadway, and she was, I think, the first African-American to star in television commercials, and that would have been in the '60s [1960s] I believe. She did Kool-Aid commercials with Bugs Bunny, and she did a number of Broadway plays. I don't remember the names of them. Speaker 1: So Lee Kirk, huh? Speaker 2: Lee Kirk. Yep. And she still, I mean, you could still--she still does television commercials, and sings, and does plays. And she--well, she wouldn't like me to tell you her age, but it can't be too far from my dad's (laughs). Speaker 1: Yes, so she's pushing 80 then. Yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't say it (laughs). Speaker 1: Yes. All right (laughs). Speaker 2: You're not getting me on camera saying that (laughs). Speaker 1: So she's still working and everything, okay. Speaker 2: I have pictures of her. She did my last book. She did a reading for me with--in fact, she's done several readings for me with Ruby Dee. She did one with me--for me with Ossie Davis. She's fabulous. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Does she do musical theatre as well as-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. She sings, yeah. Really talented. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she a part of any of the theatre group like the New Lafayette Theatre or the-- Speaker 2: I don't--I don't know. Speaker 1: Negro Ensemble Company? Speaker 2: I'm sure it's on her resume, but I don't--I think I would know if it was Negro Ensemble Company. No. I just know she did a lot of plays and--not a lot of plays. But she did a few major plays, and she did a lot of television--like high-profile television commercials, billboards; like, she was--she was pretty successful. Speaker 1: Because I know how small the world is, she probably knew that same--that whole generation of actors and stuff or a lot of them that came along when Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Probably. Speaker 1: And all them. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know when she gave a reading with--for me, Felicia Rashad, Ossie Davis; I know she and Felicia Rashad had known each other from something else, yeah. Story_ID: 42248 Speaker 1: Okay. That's something. So your father [Louis Newkirk], what stories did he tell you about growing up in--now, he-- Speaker 2: I mean, he basic--he had a lot of stories because, you know, fourteen kids living in an apartment in the Bronx (laughs). Like he would talk about, like, I mean, it sounds like they were sometimes hungry because he told us this story that once he ran in the kitchen to steal a biscuit, and he heard one of his parents coming and he ran onto the fire escape and he fell and broke his leg (laughs). (Unclear) for a biscuit? And when he was little, I don't know how young, but I know he had--he was very entrepreneurial, all of his brothers were. He had a shoeshine stand, he had--they--. His older brother, Clarence, I think he was the eldest, he had a fruit stand, and they had a fruit truck, and they would, you know, he would say they would go to the streets saying [singing], like, he said they were saying "rotten tomatoes," but it sounded like they were saying something else. And, yeah, he just had a lot of stories about, you know, growing up, making it work. You know, they weren't educated, but they--his family, you know, given what they came from, were really successful, you know. Like I said, one was an opera singer, one--and he performed at Carnegie Hall and traveled throughout Europe. Speaker 1: Well, what's his name? Speaker 2: That was--his given name was Galen (ph. splg.) Newkirk, but his stage name was Peter Peter Galen. And-- Speaker 1: Peter? Speaker 2: Peter Peter. Speaker 1: Peter Peter? Speaker 2: Peter, Peter Galen. And I don't think he was like a major success, but he lived extreme, and he--I mean, that's what he did. He was a--he had owned a record store at one point. He owned a gift shop and record store; Lenox Gifts in Harlem on Lenox Avenue. And I think before that he had had another shop, but once he stopped doing that, he'd sang fulltime. I mean, he traveled. And I finally got to see him at Carnegie Hall, which was pretty exciting. And he died a couple of years ago. And then my uncle Clarence, the eldest, he went from having his, you know, from doing the truck with the fruit, and then he had a--he had one of those trucks that, you know, flips down and he sold, like, hot dogs and hamburgers and whatever. He would go to the basketball games. There was a big game up in Harlem--I forgot what's it's called. The Rucker's Games? Speaker 1: Oh, the Rucker League, yeah. Speaker 2: Rucker League. Speaker 1: That's where the playground legends would play. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So he would do that, and he was the guy who, like, you know, had that set up. And then from there he opened a grocery store on--in Harlem, I believe Lenox Avenue at 135th, and from there--so, from a grocery--he had a supermarket, he had a barber shop, he had a funeral parlor, he had--I mean, he was very successful. Story_ID: 42249 Speaker 1: Barber shop, a funeral parlor? Speaker 2: He had like just about--he had a whole block of businesses on Lenox Avenue, and--that his children still operate, at least the funeral parlor, Newkirk Funeral Home--. My cousin Cheryl or Sheila, one of them, operates that. But, while he was alive, he lived really well. He had a boat, he had, you know, nice cars, he--he was very successful, you know, given what he came from anyway. He wasn't rich, but he was--he was--he was definitely successful, and very helpful to his family. And so, that was another one. And then--who else? My uncle Thomas as an administrator in a--he taught at Cortland College. So he's the only one of the 14 that I know--no. He--no, maybe others had gotten a college degree. I don't even know where he went to college or when he did that, but, he did work at Cortland College up until like the eighties. But he was considered like the educated one in the family. The rest of them were more like self-made in, either entertainment or, you know, businesses. My father owned an antique shop. First there was one, and then he bought all the buildings on this one street, a devastated area in the Bronx along Bruckner Boulevard. And he developed an antique center, and he would rent out the storefronts to all the antique dealers, and it became a major antique center on Bruckner Boulevard. He got--he was recognized for it. He was in, you know, their articles; I think the Times [New York Times] did an article on him. He was like considered the mayor of that area. Speaker 1: Now, this is Brooklyn Boulevard in-- Speaker 2: Bruckner Boulevard in the Bronx-- Speaker 1: In the Bronx, okay. (unclear). Speaker 2: --the South Bronx that they now call Sobro, as an indication of how (laughs), when they start calling it Sobro, instead of the South Bronx, you know that it's-- Speaker 1: Now, it's arrived. Speaker 2: --a different kind of area (laughs). Story_ID: 42250 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now how did he get involved in an antique business? Speaker 2: My father is a Renaissance Man. My father is, like I said, I don't think he got--I know he didn't get further than the eighth grade. I don't he ever made it to high school; I'm almost certain he never made it to high school; but very well-read, very well-spoken. He--I mean, when I was a kid, we lived in the projects, the New York City Housing Project. But I never thought we were anything but middle class. And then when I was--by the time I was around eight, my parents divorced and he bought a house in Englewood, New Jersey, that is a (sic) eighteen-room Victorian. I mean, we call it a mansion, this huge house (laughs). And he always liked old things. He always collected old things, and he read a lot about antiques, and so, he opened his first antique shop in Englewood, New Jersey. And it was called "Gemini Moods" (ph. splg.). It was just like a little antique shop when I was a little kid. And-- Speaker 1: Now, this is in Englewood, New Jersey? Speaker 2: Englewood, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you all live there? Speaker 2: I did--I mean, they divorced--don't ask me what year. I know I was little. And I would go back and forth. So for a few years, I would live there, and then I would be back in New York, and then I'd be back in Englewood. So don't ask me which year I lived where. But I do know I went to middle school in Englewood, and I graduated high school in Englewood. And I went to elementary school in Englewood, but not all the way through. So I was back and forth. Story_ID: 42251 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met that's told? Speaker 2: I think they met--I mean, they--I don't know. They were divorced when I was so young and it was not--my mother was not a very happy woman about that. I think they met in church. And because I know he went to her church, and I think he only went to the church for her (laughs). So I don't know where the first meeting was, but they were young. And I know once I asked him why my mother, and he gave a not a very satisfactory answer. He said something like, she was the prettiest woman he ever saw, or something like that. But they were both--they were kids when they got married. Speaker 1: So you said they were 18? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, my mother was--couldn't have been older than 19. Story_ID: 42252 Speaker 1: All right. So your parents [Louis and Gloria Newkirk] met and they got married when they were--when your mother was 18? Speaker 2: Eighteen or nineteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't verify--I mean, I have all the papers, so I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, this is-- Speaker 2: But they had--she had my sister by the time she was 20, so let's say she got married at 19, because she had my sister, like, nine months to the day after she got married (laughs). So, my sister was born in 1955, November 12th, 1955. Go back nine months (laughs), that's when they got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is starting out--today, we're in 2012 and you're saying they got married young. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And in those days that wasn't so young. Speaker 2: No. That's what people did. Speaker 1: That's about average. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep. Speaker 1: You get out of high school, get married. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's what my grandmother did, and that's what my--and my great-grandmother, I don't even know if she was married when she had my grandmother, but she was like 16 or 17. And then my grandmother was like 18 or 19 when she had my mother. So I had young parents, young grandparents, and a young great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Young in those days would be 14 or 15. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Which is what they were doing in the South. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Back in those days people were getting married at that age. So. Okay. So, your parents got married, but they split up when you were still--. Speaker 2: I was young. I may have been-- Speaker 1: Maybe two years old? Speaker 2: --like, first grade, second grade. Speaker 1: Oh, well, you were at least six. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You were five or six years old. Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember when they broke up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 42253 Speaker 1: All right. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah. Like I said, we lived in the Astoria Projects. I don't know if that's the formal name, but that's what we called them when we were kids, the projects (laughs). And it--it was an integrated housing projects in Queens [New York City, New York], in Long Island City, and it was a very close-knit community. I mean, no one locked their doors. We would walk into each other's homes. I had, like, really pleasant memories of growing up there, and I still know a lot of--a lot of my friends from that time. And, I mean, it was pretty--like I didn't know we lived in the projects. I didn't know, like, projects as in poor, because, I mean, I thought we, you know, were pretty well-off (laughs). Speaker 1: Well, you know, the projects had taken on a stigma. Speaker 2: A different kind connotation. Speaker 1: Yeah--. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --of late that's, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, for good reason because of--yeah, all of the pathology that we see now. But when I was a kid, I mean, you know, people had even if they were poor, which my mother tells me we were, but I always thought that was funny. I remember my sister and I would--we would get this little box from school for UNICEF [The United Nations Children's Fund] that you go and you knock on doors to collect money from UNICEF, and my mother would say, "Why are you collecting money for the poor? You're poor. You need to collect money for yourself." And we would think that was the funniest thing. It's like, are you kid--like, that was a joke to us. We never saw ourselves as poor. And, what else do I remember from that time? I mean, I remember my kindergarten teacher, and I--I mean, we had fun. Speaker 1: I just want for the earliest memory. You know, the first thing you might have remembered growing. Speaker 2: The very first thing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: I just remember, like, that neighborhood. And I remember the flagpole. There was a flagpole outside of--in, like, that was a congregation right near the playground, and I remember just like playing on the monkey bars, like, just playing outside until my mother called me out of the window to come home; playing in the sandbox, playing, you know. It's just kids would just--there was no supervision. We would just be outside all day. Story_ID: 42254 Speaker 1: Was this a high-rise project [Astoria Projects, Queens, New York] or--? Speaker 2: Six stories. Speaker 1: Six stories. Speaker 2: And we lived on the sixth floor. Speaker 1: Now, when you grew up, was it just--was it you and your sister [Dorothy Moran] and your mother [Gloria Spencer Newkirk] and father [Louis Newkirk]? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Until they divorced. And then, my father first moved to Corona Queens, which is where the World's Fair was. Well, he lived right, like, near the line of Flushing. I think--well. Don't quote me. I think it was Flushing where the World's Fair [1964 New York World's Fair] was. And that's an early memory too, going to the World's Fair. So what year is that, 1964? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So. I guess I was, you know, six or seven. Speaker 1: Famous New York World's Fair. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was, like, amazing. I just remembered just--and we would go there all the time because he lived right near it, and we would just walk to the World's Fair. And what else? I mean, even--my parents divorced when I was really young and no one, I mean no one that I knew had divorced parents. So that was, like, a shocking thing. But for some reason, I didn't have a hard time with it. My sister did. Like, for me it was like--I guess I was so young that I was able to normalize it. But I kind of liked, like, going to his house and then going to her house (laughs). I thought it was kind of normal. Speaker 1: Yeah. So I guess she remembers just having the two of them probably. Speaker 2: She was traumatized by it. Yeah, she was, like, really traumatized. And I never really was traumatized by it. I always saw the advantages of it. So--and from my father, I think I gravitated more to my father because intellectually, I think we were more compatible, and he was just so supportive of, like, anything I would say. If I was interested in NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], by the next week he would have gotten something from NASA; like I'd get a big envelope, you know, about space or if I said I wanted to write, he'd buy me writing books or like no matter what, he was just very supportive. Story_ID: 42255 Speaker 1: Yeah. I guess you're answering one of the questions we have, and I always the people when they consider their parents' personalities and their dispositions, and their hobbies, their talents, the way they look, the way they walk, who do they think they take after the most. Speaker 2: Oh, my father [Louis Newkirk]--definitely, yeah. Just because he thought it was all possible, and that's how his whole family was. Like, they were just so positive, and I think that is why they overcame so much. You know, fourteen kids growing up in the Bronx [New York City, New York] (laughs). But they were so--like, if you're around them, they were always laughing, there were all these jokes, they were so close, and so amazingly optimistic. And I think it explained why so many of them went so far with so little. Speaker 1: Now, does this have anything to do with the philosophy behind your [paternal] grandmother's ministry? Speaker 2: I think so. My grandmother was just this really--first of all, she was this big, powerful woman, matriarch; so strong, so solid, and so positive, like I can never--she never gossiped. She always was, like, encouraging, and she would look at you and say, "You're going to be somebody," like, "I see it," like, you know. And you believed it because she said it. So my mother [Gloria Spencer Newkirk] was not like that. She was more pessimistic, kind of-- Speaker 1: Precautious sort of? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't think she--I--you know, I think it does come from your parents, that you believe you can do anything, and I don't think she got that from her parents. But I was lucky that I got it from my dad, that, like, I never thought, like, if I wanted to be president, I wouldn't have thought that was ludicrous to go for it. I just didn't want to be president (laughs). Like, I never thought there was a limitation based on my gender or my race. I never--I never considered that. And I always thought it was weird when people did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I still, like, now, at least I can intellectualize why people do, because if you didn't get that gift from a parent who believes in the possible, then you don't know you can do it. But the way I grew up, I never even fathomed that there would be something I wanted to do that I couldn't do because of whatever. Like, I just never--now, what I didn't know is how to do it, like, that is what took me a longer time, figuring out how to navigate to get to what I wanted to do. But I always thought there was a way to do whatever it was I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 42256 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, and you were starting to get into it on some level before I interrupted you; but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: When you say growing up, like, how far back? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Because I have so many--like, I think my childhood through my adolescence is so chopped up that it's so disjointed. It depends on where I was, like, in--so, there was the Astoria [Astoria Projects, Queens, New York] days, and that's when I was really young. And, I mean, we had a singing group, and we performed at the Apollo, we were called the Baby Dolls. And- Story_ID: 42257 Speaker 1: It [singing group, the Baby Dolls] consisted of you and who else? Speaker 2: It was my sister [Dorothy Moran], who was like the lead singer; she was like the Diana Ross (laughs); and our best friends, the Cogers, who also lived in our building, 2 dash 04 Astoria Boulevard [Queens, New York]. So it was Cindy and Jeannie Coger, C-O-G-E-R, and we were best friends for as long as we can remember. Like I don't remember--I can't remember a time I didn't know them. So yeah. So we had a singing group the whole time I lived in Astoria [Projects]. They moved out first and that's what broke up the group, when they moved (laughs), and then we moved shortly after. But-- Speaker 1: So the Baby Dolls. How old were you? Speaker 2: The Baby--you know something? It's so funny. I have no idea. I must have been seven, eight, nine. Maybe up to ten. We had it for--we did it for a long time, and we were very serious. We sang all the time, and there was someone writing music for us. We had a costume designer. When we appeared at the Apollo, we had someone who designed (laughs). Speaker 1: Was this--what adult was pushing this? Was there any-- Speaker 2: Well, my father [Louis Newkirk] for a time, well, my aunt Lee Kirk; he used to book all of her shows and he was involved in a record company. And you know something? I don't even know why or how, but he did that for a while. Like I said, he was very entrepreneurial. And I know he was involved, like, with the Newkirk Singers, and he helped them get their recording. But so--but the Baby Dolls, he knew the people in the music industry who took an interest in us. And, like I said, there was someone who was, like, you know, writing songs for us and we were in the studio, and, like I said, all it took was one of the Coger's moving, and that was the end of our group (laughs). And until that point-- Speaker 1: So what kind of material did you do? Speaker 2: And we won. We won Amateur Hour. Like-- Speaker 1: You all won the Amateur Hour at the Apollo? Speaker 2: We won. At the Apollo Theatre, we won. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was a--we were tied with this group from Brooklyn for like a couple of weeks. It was so funny. We would have runoffs, and I think we won because all of the Newkirks were there. Like I said, my father is one of fourteen kids (laughs). So, it was like the whole Newkirk family was-- Speaker 1: All the cousins and-- Speaker 2: Oh, God. I mean to--you know. New York is home. I mean, in Manhattan, most of them lived in Manhattan. So, but yeah, we did that, and that was an early memory. Story_ID: 42258 Speaker 1: And then even after that, we used to go to the Apollo [Theatre] all the time. Like, my sister and I, we saw everyone at the Apollo. Honi Coles. I don't know if you know his name? Speaker 2: If he's a tap dancer. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was a famous tap dancer. I didn't know. He was our babysitter, because my father would drop us off at the Apollo, like, for the first show, whatever time the first show was, like twelve. And we would sit there. And in those days, they would let you, if you wanted to sit through all three shows; you could just stay in the Apollo until nighttime (laughs). So my father would come back, and, you know, we go out to lunch or, you know, we'd--and sometimes we'd just sit there all day. And we would see James Brown, Stevie Wonder. I remember the Five Stair Steps. We became kind of close to them because, I mean, we were like groupies. We were there all the time. And I remember when the Jackson Five first came, and I didn't like them because they were taking all the attention from the Five Stair Steps. But, I mean, New York was just--it was just so great growing up then, because we were surrounded by music, you know, either we were singing or the Newkirk Singers were singing or, you know, we were just--and then my mother, her siblings, she had a brother and a sister, and anytime you went to their house, everyone played the piano. My mother was a really accomplished pianist. But she would only play for her family. And we--like, if you'd go to their home, like, there was harmony and singing always. So that was always a pleasant memory, just family gatherings and a lot of singing, a lot of harmony, yeah. Speaker 2: So that's a lot--you know. So you had pretty rich experiences growing up, I guess. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. But I took it for granted. I mean, it was just normal to me to just like sit in the Apollo all day and see all of these, like, world class musicians and--I mean, I saw-- the only group, major group, that I did not see at the Apollo were the Supremes, and that was, like, our favorite group. And we saw them at the Copacabana. Speaker 2: Oh, so, you saw (unclear) (simultaneously)? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. If there was a major group, we saw it. My father [Louis Newkirk] was very into music exposing us to music and--yeah, we saw--I mean, I can't think of a major group we didn't see. Speaker 2: So you said the Five Stair Steps were your-- Speaker 1: And usually we saw them many times, right (laughs). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sometimes three times in a day (laughs). Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this is, let's see, you were-- Speaker 1: The Five Stair Steps, we used to teach them choreography, because we knew all the latest dances, and they were kind of a sheltered family, and when they would come to New York [City, New York], we would teach them, you know, the latest dances. But we would go see them all the time, either at the Apollo or wherever, wherever they were playing in New York. And, I mean, just everyone. It was just so great. Speaker 2: So you were ten when the group broke up, you think? Speaker 1: About that. Speaker 2: That's 1967? Speaker 1: If even that. I know I was young. I was really young as a Baby Doll. I was the youngest Baby Doll. Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, did you get involved with any of the movies that were produced in New York back in the--because the black film industry thing started taking off in the-- Speaker 1: No, never. No. Speaker 2: --early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. We were just like kind of music-- Story_ID: 42259 Speaker 1: So when your friends moved it was all over. You didn't-- Speaker 2: Pretty--the Baby Dolls ended, and the--Jeanie, Cindy and their older sister Tina, they performed a few more times at the Apollo, because I think after--after you win, you get to perform in the real show. And for some reason, we, my sister and I, did not do it, but they did. Speaker 1: Were you all the same age? Speaker 2: They were older. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were--well Cindy was about my age. She was about a year older, but Tina was much older, and Jeanie was significantly older. It may have been a school thing, I don't remember. But, like, I was that young. So I don't--but I know it was so thrilling because, you know, now, the Apollo, you know, you see how legendary it is. But back then, I just remember, like, going on stage and just feeling so good about it, and you'd have to, like, rub that little-- Speaker 1: The stump. Speaker 2: The little stump. And I remember the first time we performed, right before we were going out, the man who had just gone out before us, he was booed off, and he ran back stage; he was, like, crying, and I was, like, "Oh, no." (laughs) "Oh, no. Is that going to happen to us?" And--but that was the last time I ever felt that stage fright as, you know, as a kid, because I loved it. It was so much fun. I mean, I'm glad I didn't pursue that, but it was fun as a kid. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a--the "Sandman" I guess was there-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He was there. Speaker 1: --that would hook you. Speaker 2: Hook you, take you right off. Speaker 1: Take you right off. Speaker 2: Dance you off (laughs). Yep. Speaker 1: Now, these are the days before Apollo was on television (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. This is long before that. Speaker 1: I know I first saw the movie-- Speaker 2: This is the--this is the '60s [1960s]. This is the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because I was in elementary school, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, you were the youngest too, because I'm calculating here in my head. Speaker 2: I was the youngest. Speaker 1: You were the youngest one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep. Yep. And it was probably like sixty--if I had to guess I would say, like, '65 [1965], '66 [1966]; around that time. Speaker 1: When you all stopped? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. That was like near the end of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or the end of it. Story_ID: 42260 Speaker 1: I remember when Martin Luther King was assassinated. That was what? Like '68 [1968]? And we, I think--our career had ended (laughs). Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, do you remember where you were when he was assassinated? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at home. I mean, I don't know when he was assassinated where I was, but I remember when I found out, I didn't know who he was. And my father [Louis Newkirk] sat us down and told us who he was, and he told us about the March on Washington, which my father had gone to. And, in fact, my father--there's a photograph of him at the March on Washington that was in Ebony Magazine. I keep meaning to get a picture of it. Get a copy of it. But he--there was a picture of him, Harry Belafonte, and whoever else, but, yeah. He was--so, I found out who Martin Luther King was after his assassination. I was what, like 11 years old or ten. Maybe I hadn't turned 11 yet. But, yeah. I remember him telling us about that. And I remember too when JFK [President John F. Kennedy] was assassinated. I was in kindergarten, and they had us go home early, because I think it was only half day anyway. And I remember the teacher was crying, and every--all the adults were crying. This is 1963, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Right. Speaker 1: So I was like six, depending on what time--what month it was-- Speaker 2: November. Speaker 1: --I was either-- Speaker 2: November 22nd. Speaker 1: So I had just turned six, because my birthday is November 13th. And I remember vividly, like, everyone just crying, and then I got home and then my mother was crying. And it's like I didn't understand why everyone was so sad. And then, I mean, I remember watching--watching it on television. I was just captivated by it. But I was kind of--I felt left out because I couldn't cry, but I wanted to cry because everybody else (laughs)--I just remember that. Story_ID: 42261 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you, when you were growing up, did you--were you influenced by the news at all? I mean, did you pay attention to it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Because my mother [Gloria Spencer Newkirk] was, like, really attentive to politics. Like she was, like, I know she loved Mayor [John] Lindsay. I know--I know she and my grandfather [Samuel Spencer] in particular thought Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was the best president ever. Like he used to always talk about Johnson and how Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] gets so much credit, but "it's Johnson who passed all the major Civil Rights legislation." He just thought the world of President Johnson. And, you know, like I said, my father [Louis Newkirk] went to the March on Washington, and he--I--he supported the Black Panthers. Like he would give, you know, he would give money to the Black Panthers, and he would talk to us about that. He would take us to--there was a bookstore in Harlem called "The Tree of Life," and it was like the only major African-American bookstore. And from the time I can remember, we would go there and he would--you asked me about news. This has nothing--I'm thinking more of like my consciousness. Like, I would read about Phyllis Wheatley, and I think that's--that's what put the idea of writing into my head. Like, "Wow, she was a poet. Wow. This was the 1700s and this black woman was publishing books." Like that left an indelible impression. And so, I always was aware of that. And then, I think that my earliest memory of the news and the impact of the news, besides the Civil Rights Movement, and like, just, you know, when Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, there was a reporter in New York named Melba Tolliver, and she had an Afro. And I remember there was this big protest. She was suspended for going on air with an Afro. And I thought that was the coolest thing, because I had an Afro (laughs). I was a kid, but I had an Afro, so I really related to this woman who took a stand like that. And so, of course, when I did my first book, I got to meet her. I interviewed her. I'd met her before that, but she was someone who I always admired, and I think she played a real role in my interest in journalism because I saw how you could make a difference in, like, you know, influence how people thought. And then, I think I--I don't know if it was because of Phyllis Wheatley, but I, you know, as a kid I always wrote poetry, and I was influenced by The Last Poets, Gil Scott-Heron, Nikki Giovanni. Like these were my kind of heroes, "sheroes" growing up. And then Melba Tolliver and Gil Noble. And so, there were--and so, I think by the time I was in junior high school, I was thinking journalism. And I was writing for like community papers. Story_ID: 42262 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever go to the big--what was the name of the big bookstore at 125th and Lenox [New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: That must have been "Tree of Life." Speaker 1: The one with the pictures of the presidents of Africa out front and stuff, Louis Misho (ph. splg.) or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, I didn't know that was the name of it. Speaker 2: I think that--yeah, because it was big-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --and it was, yeah. And we used to go there all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like, I was always shocked by my friends who didn't know who--like, "You don't know who Benjamin Banneker is? You don't know who Paul Laurence Dunbar--?" Like, it always shocked me that people, and not just my friends, but like, my teachers, my--. Like I was always surprised by the things people didn't know, because I didn't realize that my father kind of steeped us in it when we were so young. We knew about these peoples (sic) for so long, that I just assumed everyone did. Like I just couldn't imagine not knowing who Phyllis Wheatley or Paul Laurence Dunbar, you know. Like, how could you not know these people when they're so huge (laughs)? Story_ID: 42263 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Louis Newkirk] deal with books too as an antiquarian? Speaker 2: Well, yes. As his business developed, he--and, you know something? Even before it was a business, he always collected black memorabilia. We always had, and people always thought it was strange, that you'd go into our house and there was a picture, you know, some daguerreotype of some black family, and people always assumed it was our family, and we didn't know who the people were. But he just liked the pictures (laughs). And so, we all--he always had a lot of rare books and rare posters and buttons. I mean, his house was like a museum. And a lot of the things that--even when I was doing research for my "Letters" book [Letters from Black America, 2009], he--he, and I would tell him about some great collection I'd found at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture], he'd say, "Oh, yeah. They got that from me." (laughs). Because he would just buy out, you know, estates of, you know, people who would--and people were discarding things like pictures, and books, and letters, and, I mean, they would wind up in our house first. Speaker 1: Now, did you meet back in those days, Dorothy Hudson, who was the director of Schomburg or--? Speaker 2: I didn't know any of those people, but-- Speaker 1: --Curtis Kaiser or any of the people--? Speaker 2: --Hm-mm. I didn't know them personally, like, not until I started doing research like that. I mean, when I was a kid, it was our home that was a library. I mean (laughs), I felt our home was every bit as rich as the Schomburg. We had so--I mean, Marcus Garvey; his speeches, his programs, his posters of Father Divine. I learned so much about people, like through, you know, primary documents in my home. I never had to go to Schomburg. It was just I was surrounded by that all my whole life that I just kind of normalized it. It's now that I realize like, "Wow." (laughs). "So, do you still have," you know. I remember we had a whole trunk of Louis Armstrong letters, all of his fan letters, because my father, one of his friends, girlfriends, was Louis Armstrong's niece. His only, only niece. And she was his wife's niece. And she traveled all over the world with him as a kid. And so, I mean, I grew up going to his home. I knew his dog Trumpet. Speaker 1: His dog's name was Trumpet? Speaker 2: Yeah. So Lucille, I mean, we would go to their home a lot as kids. And, I never met him though. I never met Satchmo. He was always on the road. But we used to read his fan mail, like, just for kicks. We used to sit there--it was like a huge trunk just filled to the brim with fan mail. And, we just-- Speaker 1: Now, back-- Speaker 2: There was just always just stuff like that in our house. Speaker 1: And that's near Queens [New York City, New York], right? His--Louis Armstrong's house? Speaker 2: Corona. Not far from where my dad's house was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he said that Louis Armstrong wanted him to work for him, like to--as a manager or something. But he never did it. Story_ID: 42264 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school now. What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Oh, God. I think, and I'm not sure, it was in Astoria [New York, New York]. I think it's P.S. 117, but I could be so wrong. Speaker 1: In Astoria. That's, A-S-T-O-R-I-A? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, well, I take it you liked school. You seem like a person that would like school. Speaker 2: I was always the teacher's pet. I loved school. From my first teacher, Ms. Duben (ph. splg.), in kindergarten; my first-grade teacher, Ms. Feliz (ph. splg.). Yeah, I always liked school. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And history. Speaker 1: Now, did you get (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: But I would say English because I don't think I really liked history until--until around junior high school. I had an African-American history teacher who started teaching us things that I had never heard before about slavery, and Emancipation Proclamation, and she kind of contextualized Lincoln, and he wasn't as, you know, he wasn't as heroic with black people as we had grown up believing. And so, that's when it became intriguing, that history was so multilayered. But until that time, definitely English because I liked to write, I loved poetry. From the time I was little, I wanted to be a writer, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were at P.S.--you said you were back and forth a lot, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I know--so I went to this--whatever the public school was in Astoria, I went there, and then I went to the elementary school in Englewood [New Jersery], which was--there's just one (laughs). Speaker 1: What was it called? Speaker 2: I think it's Englewood Elementary School. Speaker 1: Englewood, okay. Speaker 2: Liberty. It's called Liberty. L-I-B-E-R-T-Y, on Liberty Road, which is now the Board of Ed. in Englewood, but then it was Liberty. And then, I went to the middle school in Englewood, and again, it's only one. And it was--I think it was just Englewood Middle School. And then I graduated from Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood, but I spent three years at Sheepshead Bay High School in Brooklyn [New York], because my mother, by then, lived in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: So--wait a minute now. Now, you graduated from-- Speaker 2: Dwight Morrow High School. Speaker 1: Dwight Morrow, but you spent-- Speaker 2: Three years at Sheepshead Bay High School. Speaker 1: Three years? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. I was there a freshman, sophomore, junior year. And I wrote for the school paper, and I was a student representative at anything that they needed a representative for. I did the close-up program, which was a program that, like, sent you to Washington to observe--observe Congress and-- Speaker 1: It's called the what now? Speaker 2: Close-up. Speaker 1: Close-up program, okay. Story_ID: 42265 Speaker 1: I wonder if that still exists. And I represented our school at like poetry readings. I did like readings at the Brooklyn Museum [New York City, New York], I did radio shows; I was really involved. I loved, loved school. And my school was so far from my neighborhood, we were bused. That was the '70s [1970s] when busing was really controversial in New York. Speaker 2: Now this is Sheepshead Bay [High School, Brooklyn New York], right? Speaker 1: Sheepshead Bay was like an all-white neighborhood, and it--the school--my sister's [Dorothy Moran] year, I think they were the first ones to integrate Sheepshead Bay. So, she's two years before me. Speaker 2: Now, this interesting because you know who went to a school there? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Lou Gossett. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. He said his family was about the only family there. Speaker 1: It had to be true. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Because I didn't know anyone who lived there, any black people who actually lived in Sheepshead Bay. Speaker 2: Yeah. He got his first role because he was the only kid--he was the president of his class in the seventh grade or something. Speaker 1: Oh, my God. And he's older than we are, so. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Much older. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, but my--my sister was in that first group that went out there. So he may have been an only, because even when my sister went that first year it was two percent black. Before that, it was just--there was just no percentage (laughs). Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the only one. Speaker 1: He must have been. Speaker 2: He said that it's a Jewish neighborhood. Speaker 1: Oh, totally. Speaker 2: That--. Speaker 1: Totally. There were a lot of Bar Mitzvahs. Speaker 2: Yeah, the famous Jewish playwright writes--all his plays are based in that area of the--what's his name? The--well, anyway, we'll move on. Speaker 1: Trying to think who. Speaker 2: But I just--but, yeah. It's a--yeah. Lot of Jewish theatrical people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Very, very--oh, highly Jewish. Speaker 2: Leo Simon. Neal Simon. Speaker 1: Oh, is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 42266 Speaker 1: But, it was such a good school in terms of academics intellectually, but if you were black going to Sheepshead Bay [High School], you'd better be out of that neighborhood by nightfall, because they had this gang called the Garrison Beach Boys, and they would--they were like the greeting committee. And we were terrorized. We would be chased to the bus stop. They were like the Ku Klux Klan. They were so vicious, they had razors and knives, and there was one kid who was actually strung to a tree. And it was so-- Speaker 2: So they actually lynched a kid? Speaker 1: Yeah. He didn't--he wasn't killed, but they had him up on a--in a tree, and he had stitches across his head. He got hit--they--'cause they have bats and knives and razor blades. So why would I like school, I don't know. And I'll tell you this too. It was so strange that we normalized this, because we would tell the school. I remember running past the police. They would laugh at us. We were being brutalized out there. And it was so frightening, but nothing--like, the school never did anything. And I cannot think for the life of me why--I don't know if we told our parents or they didn't get how crazy it was, but we just went to school, and that was just part of, like, going to school there. And I remember I was really afraid because most kids would just leave in a pack. But because I was involved in the school newspaper, I did like shows, I would do these dance routines; I don't even remember what kind of shows I did. And I wrote for the yearbook, and so, I would be there after a lot of kids left, and then I would be afraid to leave the school. And, yeah, it was--it was frightening. But I cannot tell you why our parents never did anything about it. Why--or maybe they tried and there was nothing that could be done. But I know the police officers laughed at us. I would run past the police. And that was growing up in the 1970s in New York City. Story_ID: 42267 Speaker 1: So you came out, what, in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: '75 [1975]. Out of high school [Dwight Morrow High School, Englewood, New Jersey] in '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And a lot of the kids in my year, a lot of the black kids dropped out. Speaker 2: So the-- Speaker 1: I wonder why (laughs). Speaker 2: So the reason why you left Sheepshead Bay was to-- Speaker 1: It was just that it was time to go move back with my dad [Louis Newkirk]. I went back and forth. I was just, you know, I was just one of these kids. And I really did like living with my father. Speaker 2: Okay. So that--he was living in the Bronx [New York City, New York] then? Speaker 1: Englewood [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Englewood. Okay. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Englewood is near New Jersey. Speaker 1: So I did my last year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And I had a great last year in Englewood. I wrote for the school paper there. I got my first car when I was seventeen. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 42268 Speaker 1: I loved school, but I hated--I hated where my mother [Gloria Spencer Newkirk] lived in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]. I--it was--it was like this middle-class oasis in the middle of a really bad ghetto. So, it was this new housing complex called the Atlantic Towers, and, you know, people were postal workers, teachers, you know, the black middle-class (laughs). Different standard. And, you know, but middle-class aspirations, and, you know, beautiful new 24-story high-rise, pool, barbeque pits, basketball courts; lovely. But, all around it was Ocean Hill-Brownsville, and then down the--down the hill was Brownsville, which, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] was this burned-out, blighted, horrible, scary, scary neighborhood. And, like I said, that was during the heroin epidemic. So I went from Queens, which was like so lame and so, like, you know, friendly, everyone's nice and--to Jersey [New Jersey], and then living in Brooklyn was like traumatic. So I--so between my neighborhood, like it was nice in that complex, but you walk out the complex and you were in the mean streets of, you know, Ocean Hill-Brownsville. It was like, whoa, it was rough. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So. So I think that might have had something to do with why--why I moved to Englewood [New Jersey]. Story_ID: 42269 Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers or mentors during your school days that you remember that were really-- Speaker 2: Always. I mean, I always had--it was always someone who took an interest in me. I don't know, I think it's 'cause I always sat in front in the classroom, and I, you know, never caused any problems. Always raised my hand, always was interested. So, kids like that teachers like. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I always--I had a history teacher, Howard--oh, God. I forgot his name. But he was a mentor, and he got me--he's the one who recommended me for that close-up program that sent me to Washington [Washington, D.C.]. And radio, I mean, I--I don't know why I was always being interviewed by radio programs. And then I had an English teacher who took an interest in me because of my poetry, and he entered me into this poetry series, and I was doing readings at the Brooklyn Museum when I was really young. And I always had mentors, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, then at Englewood [Middle School, Englewood, New Jersey] I had Kathy Achave (ph.). She was the--she was the advisor for the newspaper, and she was a mentor. Yeah. Story_ID: 42270 Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you get good counseling about college? Speaker 2: No. Not really. I don't know. I think back then a lot of kids got counseling from their parents. I don't remember having like a college counselor. And if they had one, I certainly didn't know about it. So, I sort of, like, I knew I wanted to go someplace like Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], but for some reason I didn't quite know how to--how to like do it. Like, I didn't know what the procedure was. Now, I see why I was so confused. I had no guidance (laughs). I didn't have that kind of guidance. And I think my mother [Gloria Spencer Newkirk] would have been happy if I had gone to, like, IBM keypunch school. Like that was her idea of, like, making it (sniffling). And my sister [Dorothy Moran] didn't go to college. She got married when she was like eighteen. And so, I didn't really have that kind of mentoring. Like I had, like, when I was in school, I always got positive feedback, but when it came to college, I cannot recall ever someone talking to me, you know, speaking to me about, this is how you do it, this is what you should do. So I ended up going to a community college, and it was in community college that one of my teachers said--'cause I was on the Dean's list, like, the first semester. And by the second semester, he--and I don't even remember his name. It's so sad, 'cause he kind of changed my life. He said, "I want someone to meet you. I think you could get a scholarship to go to Polytechnic Institute [Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, New York]." And so, some professor from Polytech sat in on one of my classes, and after, you know, he talked to me, he said, "Would you be interested in--." I didn't know what Polytech was, but they had a journalism program. They had a program in journalism and scientific technical writing. So I said, "Sure. You pay for me to go, I'll go to Polytech." Speaker 1: Is this in New Jersey or New York? Speaker 2: This is in Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 1: In Brooklyn? Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. And so, I went, I hated Polytech because everything was science. That is one subject (laughs) that I never really took to. Everything was scientific and technical, but I did love this, like, rich intellectual environment. And then a friend, an ex-boyfriend who had gone to NYU [New York University], said, "You should go to NYU. I think that's where you would really fit in." And so I came to NYU and got in. And--but I was working two jobs. I worked--I had a waitressing job, and I had a hostessing job. So at one I was--it's this restaurant called Fiorello's. I was the one who greeted you and got you your table. And then after that, I'd go upstairs to this--it was a private club and restaurant called "Club 30." It was a--it was a--for people who lived in the building. It was a gym, restaurant, penthouse (laughs), really nice; must be nice. And I was a waitress there, a really bad waitress, but they liked me. And that's how I put myself through NYU. I worked those two jobs. And so, when I got out of NYU--. Speaker 1: Wait a minute. I don't want to get you out yet. Speaker 2: Okay (sniffling). Story_ID: 42271 Speaker 1: Now, that's--now, you were there from 19-what, '77 [1977] or something? Speaker 2: Oh, my God, no. I was not a traditional student. So I did some knocking around. Right out of--you really want the whole story, huh? So, when I graduated from high school, which was in 1975, I went to California for a year. And I went to a community college in California, but I think I only went for, like, a semester. I even through a semester. Speaker 1: Where was (unclear) (simultaneous) at? Speaker 2: Los Angeles Community College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't even think they had--I know I registered, but I don't think I ever finished there. And I kind of had fun for a year; going on Soul Train (laughs). Speaker 1: Did you? You went on? Speaker 2: All of my friends--I made friends with the Soul Train dancers (laughs), and I remember having a lot of fun that year, but I don't think I did much schooling. And so, when I came back to New York--so, this is '76 [1976] 'cause I was there for a year, almost a year, and-- Speaker 1: Now--now, who did--I mean, what gave you the idea to go out to California? Speaker 2: Because my stepmother was a flight attendant, and (sniffling) for--throughout high school, I would travel a lot. And one of the places I went with her was California--to Los Angeles, and I liked it (laughs). And, I don't know why they let me go to L.A., because there wasn't much of a plan. Like I got into the community college, they set me up in an apartment, I met--I had a friend, in fact, they were the Stair Steps. I knew their--he was their--their valet, Tyrone McNeil (ph.). He had a twin brother. It was Tyrone and Jerome. And he--by then, he was in California working for Marvin Gaye, and through him I met these friends, who--they became friends, and this is before I moved out there, and they were Soul Train dancers. So that's all I had. That's all I knew. Boom. I was in L.A. for a year. And--but while there, I went to--I still knew I wanted to do journalism, 'cause by then I had written a lot for the Amsterdam News all through college, I wrote for the Amsterdam News here in New York. Story_ID: 42272 Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide you wanted to be a journalist? Now, I'm thinking did I miss that now along the way here? Speaker 2: Probably around middle school. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: I was writing for my community papers, and then through high school I worked for my high school paper at Sheepshead Bay [High School, Brooklyn, New York] and at Dwight Morrow [High School, Englewood, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Now, what community papers did you write for--in middle school? Speaker 2: Oh, God. I don't even remember what they were. I know--oh, okay. Well, I wrote for the Amsterdam News, I wrote for--there was a paper called "Big Red," (laughs). There was a paper--oh, in the Atlantic Towers they had like a--like a newsletter, and I wrote for that. And that was like middle school. And, like my poetry was always published wherever. I would publish in my school paper. I'd publish--I have poetry published in the Sheepshead Bay yearbook even before--'cause I didn't graduate from Sheepshead Bay, so it must have been the year before I graduated. And then--so I've--I've fancied myself as a writer as long as I can remember. I always wrote. I always kept journals. I always wrote what my mother would call "depressing poems." (laughs). Said, "Why you always writing these depressing poems?" I didn't think they were depressing. I would write about race, I'd write about--I don't know, whatever. But--and I--so, this goes way back (sniffling), maybe even before middle school I was writing a lot. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right. Now this--somehow we missed that part-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (unclear) make sure I went back and got it. But so, okay, so-- Speaker 2: And like I said, I was influenced by Phyllis Wheatley, and Melba Tolliver, and The Last Poets-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Gil Scott-Heron. So, those were my formative years, and I was writing a lot, like, throughout the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], I always wrote a lot. Story_ID: 42273 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite poet? Speaker 2: Poet? Speaker 1: Yeah. Was it-- Speaker 2: Nikki Giovanni. Speaker 1: --was it--. Huh? Speaker 2: Nikki Giovanni. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Nikki Giovanni and The Last Poets. They were like neck and neck. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is highly political stuff for the most part. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was political. I had an Afro (laughs). I was--yeah. I was--I think because, again, my father [Louis Newkirk] was, like, real--like, he always talked to us about, you know, the Black Panthers. Like, he would tell us the other side 'cause you'd hear about these bad people, but in my home, they were good people. They were, like, saving Harlem and, you know. Oh, and also, when I was a little kid I would go to hear Farrakhan speak at the Temple Number 7 in Harlem in 116th Street. He spoke there every--I don't remember if it was Saturday or Sunday--but I would go there. Speaker 1: Would your father take you? Speaker 2: Sometimes or I'd go by myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what I liked about it is, you had to wear a long skirt. And I knew when you dress like that, nobody bothered you on the street. And that was a rough neighborhood, going through 116th Street. But, I felt like that was like bulletproof. Like, when you wore that garb, everybody's like, "Good morning, sister." "Good morning." (laughs) So I liked that 'cause I always hated--the one thing I always hated about living in urban communities is how you were treated as a female. You know, all the cat calls, and all the unwelcome attention. I always just hated that. So, I think that I gravitated to the political always. Yeah. Story_ID: 42274 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in--okay, in--when you left California, you came back to the East Coast-- Speaker 2: I came back to New York [New York City, New York], and I was--so that was '76 [1976], and I think by then, 'cause I was 17 when I graduated from high school, so I registered to vote for the first time when I got back. And then, that following year, Percy Sutton, 1977, was running for Mayor of New York. So it was '76 [1976], was when I joined his campaign. But my first campaign (laughs) was in '68 [1968], I think. Whatever year Bobby Kennedy was running, that was the first time I went into a campaign office and I would give out bumper stickers and was running for Bobby Kennedy. But, '77 [1977], so I was 18, 19, I worked for the Percy Sutton campaign as a volunteer. And that was an amazing experience. I would go out registering people to vote, and go in, you know, rough neighborhoods, like in Bed-Stuy, and it was just so eye-opening, because, you know, I would meet, you know, elderly people who couldn't read. Like I, I just didn't know about people like that. And so, yeah, that was a great experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Percy Sutton didn't win, of course, in '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: He didn't. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so-- Speaker 2: He did not. Speaker 1: Yeah. Who--was that (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: He--but he was the--he was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --when [Ed] Koch was the mayor? Speaker 2: --he was the Manhattan Borough president and, you know he was Malcolm X's lawyer. I didn't know that at the time (sniffling). I don't think he featured that in his campaign (laughs). Percy Sutton was like this amazing figure, but the campaign kind of watered down, how--how, radical really he would appear on paper if they knew, like, all the things he had done. He was a real trailblazer. I don't think I really learned about, like, just how amazing he was until I went to his funeral. And it was like, "Oh, my God." (sniffling). I think his parents were slaves. Like he was, like, he came out of--you talk about making it against the odds, and here he was, this lawyer, you know, first this, first that, you know; assemblyman, Borough president, ran for mayor, owned a (sniffling), you know, major radio station, and then owned stations throughout the coun... I mean. He was amazing. Saved the Apollo, you know, brought the Apollo back. Yeah, but anyway. I digress. Yes, so that was '77 [1977] I worked for his campaign and went to--and was at--it was called, oh, God--Brooklyn Tech I think was the name of it, but it was a community college in Brooklyn. And then from there I went to Polytech [Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, New York], and then from Polytech I went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and NYU is where I graduated from (sniffling). Story_ID: 42275 Speaker 1: And so, when did you come out? Speaker 2: I graduated [from New York University] '82 [1982] or '83 [1983], one of those years, 'cause some years I was going part-time, 'cause I told you I was working more than full time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was working two jobs, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But you know (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and I was writing for newspapers, and so, by the time I got out of college, I had had so many bylines; really considered myself a working journalist by then. Speaker 1: Who was your advisor here or did you have one? Speaker 2: At NYU [New York University]? Speaker 1: Yeah, at NYU. Speaker 2: NYU, it's kind of funny that I teach here now, because there were very few African-American students. I think there was one other that I knew (laughs). And maybe there were a few others, but I don't remember any others. I remember one other. And it was not very warm and fuzzy for us, and I never really felt embraced by anyone particularly. And also, you know, I was working full time, so it's not like I stuck around. Like I went to my classes and then I went to work. Speaker 1: Now was Spike Lee around when you were in here? Speaker 2: Yep. But he was in the grad school, I think. Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Because I was hearing about this phenom, Spike Lee. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I knew people who knew him then. It's funny, his kid goes to the same school my children go to. Just--my daughter just graduated, but his daughter and my daughter were friends. But, yeah. It was not, you know--like for me, I felt I was already a journalist so this was just to get the credential. I didn't really take school that seriously then. I had one--I had one professor who I remain close to. He was a historian, Graham Hodges, who's a pretty amazing historian. He's done a lot of books on blacks in New York, and I loved his classes, and stayed in touch with him. In fact, he's had me up to Colgate to give talks. He says I'm his most successful student. But (sniffling)--no. but other than him, I can't think of anyone who I really, you know, was close to. Speaker 1: Is Rosa Guy, was she here? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Rosa Guy? Speaker 2: Never heard of her. Speaker 1: I think. Oh, she's--. Speaker 2: There are people who are still on the faculty who were here then. I remember them, (whispering) they don't remember me (laughs). It's like, "How don't you remember me? You didn't have many people like me here." (laughs) Story_ID: 42276 Speaker 1: Okay. So, anybody else at NYU [New York University] that we may have missed that, you know, really was a--? Speaker 2: Played a role in my development? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: I wish I could say there was someone. Speaker 1: Well, who in the community of the writers that these--or editors at these papers then? Speaker 2: Oh, now there I could tell you, quite a few. There was a gentleman, Tom Johnson, who was a New York Times reporter, and I met him--I did this program, oh, God. While I was in college, I did a program through, it was a news service called "Trans-Urban News Service," and it was run by Andy Cooper, Andrew W. Cooper, downtown Brooklyn. And what they would do is, they would have reporters cover stories and then they would--it was like a news--it was a news service. They would sell those stories to black newspapers, and that's how I--. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous) Thurmond, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So that's how I got my first byline in the Amsterdam News. It was a front-page story, it was 1977. And I was so excited that I didn't realize until weeks later they had misspelled my byline (laughs). It was by "Pamela Quekirk" (ph. splg.). Front page. I brought up like a stack of them. And--but it was through Trans-Urban News Service that I wrote that story. And I did--even before that, I wrote, I wish I could remember the name of the community paper in Brooklyn I wrote for, because I don't think it was Trans-Urban. I covered Farrakhan; he came to Brooklyn to speak, and I got an interview with him. Oh, that--that was on the cover the Amsterdam News, too, actually. And I covered Sharpton [Reverend Al Sharpton]. Sharpton and I came up together, because Sharpton was, Brooklyn activist, and I was the young reporter, and I think he's just a few years older than I am. And so, I've known Sharpton since the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Did you know, are you familiar with Black News, published by the East in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I never wrote for them, but yep, I know them because I got involved in, like I said, the Percy Sutton campaign, I met Jitu Weusi, who was at the East. I met, you know, Al Vann, who was a Brooklyn Assemblyman. I met my husband (laughs); the man who would become my husband through that whole association with the Percy Sutton campaign, because the Brooklyn office was in Bedford-Stuyvesant, where the East, Alvin, like all of the, you know, activists, black politicians, activists; they were all, like, in that area. And so, from the campaign I kind of got involved and, you know, I would do voter registration for Al Vann. In fact, when I finally graduated from NYU, my first job was for the New York State Assembly in Albany. At one point I did work--I think I was--oh. I was an intern for Al Vann while I was in college. My first job out of college was for the New York State Assembly. I worked officially for the library, the Assembly library, but I worked indirectly for Assemblyman Roger Green. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who became the best man at my wedding. And then I left him to get my first daily newspaper job, which was the Albany Knickerbocker News. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is one of two newspapers in Albany, right, that were run by Hearst? Speaker 2: Yep. And they were owned by the same--Hearst (laughs). There was the morning paper and the afternoon paper. So I--my first job was with the afternoon paper. Story_ID: 42277 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about how you met your husband [Michael Nairne]. I don't want to skip over that real fast. Speaker 2: Okay. I was covering the Black and Puerto-Rican Caucus Annual Convention for either Trans-Urban News Service or the Amsterdam News. And I met him--oh, no. That's not true. I met him before that. I met him through the Percy Sutton campaign. Yeah, I think I met--and he worked for Al Vann. He was, like, one of his policy guys. He worked for Al Vann, Roger Green, who later became an Assemblyman; worked for Al Vann. So I met them through the Percy Sutton campaign. And then I really got to know him--and you know something? I maybe conflating two things that was around the same time. The Black and Puerto-Rican Legislative Caucus Weekend, I went to cover for the Amsterdam News, and I remember that's when we really talked. So that could have been '76 [1976]. That might have been a little before. So it was around there. It was in politics that I met him, though. It was either Black and Puerto-Rican Weekend is when we really started talking, but I think I had met him before that through the Sutton campaign, because he was involved too. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. So you get married in, that's '84 [1984], I guess? Speaker 2: '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: '83 [1983]. Okay. All right. You started working for the Knickerbocker News in '84 [1984], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. That sounds right. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Story_ID: 42278 Speaker 1: So did you have to move to Albany? Speaker 2: Yep. Had to move to Albany [New York] for my man (laughs). Speaker 1: Now, what is Albany like? Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a very upper middle-class suburb. I lived right down the block from Capital Newspapers, which published the Knickerbocker News and the Times Union. So, I didn't live in the city. He [Michael Nairne, husband] had, before we were married, he lived in the city; I never did. It was kind of nice. We--I mean, at first we had an apartment, but then when we got married, we had a house built, and, you know, we both had new cars. We lived really well because money went pretty far up there. And by then he worked for the Speaker of the Assembly. He was special assistant to the Speaker. And then shortly after we got married--when we got married, I was working for the Assembly. He was working for the Speaker of the Assembly, and then a short time later, I got a job as a reporter, and he got a job working for Governor Cuomo [Governor Mario Cuomo]. He was deputy secretary to Governor Cuomo. So, living in Albany was very nice, because it was like being a big fish in a small pond. You know, we both had, like, pretty nice careers and, you know, it was--it was nice. I loved my job. I loved being a reporter. I still think of all of the jobs I've had in journalism, that was my favorite. Story_ID: 42279 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of stories did you report on (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I was--I was, finally I was assigned to the state legislature. So, I covered, you know, my office was in the state capitol, and so, that was my--I love politics, and so I covered it. It was sometimes stressful because I would, sometimes, do like highly sensitive stories, and I knew my husband [Michael Nairne] would have a hard day at work (laughs), and I would say, "You're going to have a rough day today. I don't think your boss is going to like this story." But I broke a lot of--I broke a lot of stories, and I got a lot of attention, and it was fun. It was a lot of fun being a reporter there. And it was a great community of journalists. They had a--it's called the "Legislative Correspondents Association," and I was in the show, and, you know, it was like the gridiron in Washington [D.C.] where you do the spoofs and, you know, the Governor comes and, I mean, my husband was deputy secretary to Cuomo [Governor Mario Cuomo], so we would go to barbeques and, you know, the Governor's Mansion, and, it was nice. It was a nice way to be a young--a young reporter. Story_ID: 42280 Speaker 1: Now, you covered the Democratic National Convention in Atlanta in '88 [1988], is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah. By then I had moved to--I was hired by Gannett News Service in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's after the Knickerbocker News. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So from--I was in Albany [New York], I think, for like four years at the Knickerbocker News. And, like I-- Speaker 1: Is that up until '88 [1988]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Until, I think '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Oh, '87 [1987]. Okay. Right. Speaker 2: '87 [1987], and then I went to Washington. Now, I was only in Washington a year, but what an eventful year. So that year it was the Tawana Brawley story. So, I think I was in Washington for a month or two before I was sent to live in Poughkeepsie for, like, two months covering the Tawana Brawley saga. I was living in a hotel in Poughkeepsie. And then I covered the Democratic National Convention. I covered--I mean, just--I mean, I interviewed Colin Powell. It was just great. It was a nice job, but it was not as impactful as being in Albany, like, when anything I wrote in Albany, like, the impact was huge, because then state reporting was major, and so, it would be picked up by the New York Times by everyone. So, when you broke a story there, like, the impact was immediate. But in Washington, it's just so big, so many reporters, and, you know. Story_ID: 42281 Speaker 1: Did you kind of sense Mario Cuomo was liked in the black community and (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: And I--do you have a sense of why he never ran for president? Speaker 2: Well, there were always rumors about, you know, family--his family background, and I think it was more his wife. There were always these rumors of her father and mob ties, and--I mean, there were--I'm not just saying this. I mean, it was reported widely. Speaker 1: True. Speaker 2: And I think he was very thin-skinned. Like, if you wrote anything he didn't like, you were going to hear about it. First thing that morning, he calls screaming at you. He was like a real bully. Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: Oh, my God. He was--he never treated me that way, because I think it was so sensitive, because my husband worked for him and I think the whole racial dynamic probably scared him. I never thought he was so progressive. Like, I didn't--in fact, the biggest--one of the big stories I broke was, he had a commissioner, the labor commissioner, Lillian Roberts. I think she was the first African-American labor commissioner for the state. And she abruptly resigned, right? And no one could get to the bottom of why, like, all of a sudden she was out. But there had been these leaks of, like, negative leaks about her coming from his administration for weeks earlier. And she--but she would never refute, you know, confirm any of the things that they were saying about her. And finally I--you know, I called her every day, and finally she said, "Okay, I'll talk to you." So we had this sit-down interview, and she told me that, you know, the three or four years as commissioner she never had a meeting with the governor, he never talked to her; that he sent a third-line aide to ask for her resignation. Like--so she just like spilled the beans to me, right? (laughs) So, this was, like, major story because of the racial dynamics; she was the labor commissioner, she was high-profile. Anyway, so that was one of the stories that I'm certain didn't win my husband [Michael Nairne] any friends in that administration. And, of course, he never gave me anything 'cause he didn't know this stuff either. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then another story--wait, anyway. You asked me why he never ran. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I did. (unclear) Speaker 2: But I think it was this speculation and the fact that he was very thin-skinned, that I don't think he could have dealt with it. Speaker 1: So maybe it's something in his background-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or something in his family that would not-- Speaker 2: Or her family. Speaker 1: --pass the national scrutiny-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --test or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And he was so incredibly thin-skinned, I don't think he could deal with that kind of scrutiny anyway. The man was brilliant. I mean, even when I would know things about him that made him distasteful to me personally, like, he was a bully. Like, there was a reporter who stammered, and he was like, "Spit it out, Jonathan." It was like, he would just say things and do things and do things that I just--I would just like, "awk, cringe." But when I heard him give a speech, I would forget. Soaring. I mean, his mastery of language. He was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, [he was a smoothie like that?] Speaker 2: --beautiful. Ah, beautiful speaker. Speaker 1: Perry Como with speakers or something like that. Speaker 2: Oh, my God. No. He was masterful. In fact, people compared Jesse Jackson to him. I don't--I think Jesse was good, but I think--I mean, I think Mario Cuomo was the best speaker I had ever heard. Like, I would cover the State of the Union. I'd be like, "Oh, my God." (laughs). Like, you know, for a minute you just believed everything he said. It was, like, just so beautiful. Yeah. So, I respected him a lot as a politician, as a speaker. But as someone I covered, he was just such a bully. Mean (laughs). Story_ID: 42282 Speaker 1: Okay. So, U.S.A. Today, so you went to Gannett [Gannett News Service, Washington, D.C.] in '88 [1988], I guess? Speaker 2: I think I went, like, the winter of '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think November or something like that. I--'cause something--I think I moved there in '87 [1987], but--but '88 [1988]. But that whole year that I was there and I covered the Democratic National Convention, Tawana Brawley-- Speaker 1: What is the deal? Now, Michael Dukakis was chosen for the--in the Democratic National Convention of '88 [1988]. This was the last time that Jesse Jackson ran. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm sure the reason why I got to cover it was because of Jesse Jackson. And I am so happy for that, because I was the only out--there were, God, dozens of correspondents in their Washington bureau, because they have like 89 newspapers, and they had, you know--so I covered their New York--I covered the New York delegation, basically, for all their New York papers. But still, out of all of these reporters, I was the only African-American reporter in Washington from Gannett, right? They had a black editor or two. They--I think they had two black editors. They had Lee Ivory, and I forgot the other woman's name. And they had, you know, they were lower level editors, and they had one black columnist, DeWayne Wickham, who became a really good friend of mine. And I was the only reporter so, of course, I got to go to--go to Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause Jesse [Jackson] was running. But I didn't get to go to the Republican Convention. I was one of the few correspondents that didn't get assigned to the Republican Convention. I was really upset about that. It's like why? I can't cover white people? (laughs). But, anyway, it was still great. But for that year that I was there, I had to commute a marriage, so it was just as well that I moved back to New York. Story_ID: 42283 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So. Now, Tawana Brawley case, now this is some--now you know Al Sharpton. Speaker 2: I--by then I knew Sharpton [Reverend Al Sharpton] well, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. And so, what did you make of that? I mean, it's--people look back at this as a stain on the record of Al Sharpton, but because Tawana Brawley never--her case was rejected by the court. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But do you think the case had merit in reference to that (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, back then we did. We didn't know what, you know--we were following every lead and--but, I mean, in retrospect, I kind of believe the Grand Jury report for the most part. I believe she fabricated it. I don't think Sharpton had any reason to believe it was fabricated at the time that he, you know stepped in. Speaker 1: It just seem--I think it's--and correct me if I'm wrong here, but I think the crux of the story that--I mean the part of the story that most black people believed it because of the circumstances in which--they found her in a garbage can (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, with the fiches--feces smeared on her. Speaker 1: --with human feces on her (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: Like, who would do that? Speaker 1: So who would do that to themselves? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: But as--but the more you hear about her and the stepfather, who had been a convicted murderer. And if she's afraid of this guy, and she had, like, run away, and then she was afraid to go home, and so, who--will we ever know? I don't know. But-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There were problems with the family story, and it did start to fall apart. Speaker 1: Okay. And just for those watching this and don't know who she was, she accused some local white men--this is in Upstate New York, I guess and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --she accused some local white-- Speaker 2: In Wappingers Falls-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --people, and some who were connected to the government, local authorities with raping her and then smearing feces on her, and the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] symbol. I mean, it was a pretty-- Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty-- Speaker 2: --brutal kind of attack. And I was sent there to try to get an interview with her, and ended up being there for a long time covering the spectacle. It was such a spectacle, you know. It didn't hurt my career. I got a lot of good bylines out of it (laughs), but I don't know if any of it is good for anything. Speaker 1: It just seems strange that in a state where, you know, you have, like, so many instances of police brutality-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and [certain things?]. Speaker 2: Right. Right. I mean-- Speaker 1: They were never convicted. Speaker 2: --there was no reason--right. There was no reason going into it not believe that it did happen. It's just that the family started sounding a little, you know. It started sounding a little flaky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 42284 Speaker 1: Okay. So--now, in '89 [1989] you took a job with the New York Post, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Is that '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]? Yep, but whenever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I left Gannett [Gannett News Service, Washington, D.C.] because the New York Post had a new owner, and this woman, Jane Amsterdam, who had been a Washington Post editor, and she was like this hot magazine editor, New York, and she recruited a bunch of us--says she's going to change the Post, and this is after [Rupert] Murdoch, and they're going to clean it up, and I took the bait, 'cause I wanted to go to New York. And I called one of my mentors, Wayne Barrett (ph. splg.), who was a Village Voice reporter, and it's like, "What shall I do? Should I do this?" 'Cause I hated the Post because, you know, the Post then, you know, with Murdoch had it, was notorious. Speaker 1: This Rupert Murdoch? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Conservative-- Speaker 2: Like, [win-go?] and (laughs) conservative, and just not a place you want your good name associated with. But, you know, I called a number of people and they all said, "Hey, you know, Jane Amsterdam is so credible and looks like she's assembling a good staff," so, anyway, so I went. Oh, my God, what a--that was an experience. So, once again, only black reporter in the newsroom. My first week there, my welcome was that they would leave our paychecks in a box at the front desk in a sealed envelope. So they told me, you know, "Your check is in the box." I'd go to get my check, somebody had opened it. And so, I was like, "Wow," you know. I felt so violated. Like, it was ripped open, right? So, somebody confided that it was passed around the newsroom. People were furious because I--this black woman, who no one spoke to--they didn't speak to me--was making more money than most people because I came in under a new system, and I was recruited. I mean, I wasn't going to take a pay cut to go there. So, I mean, I didn't know (laughs). I didn't know I had a higher salary than anyone. I just knew I was making, you know, a little more than I had made in Washington. And so, that was my welcome to the New York Post. And so, over time, I, you know, it was okay. But, man, those first few months were very hairy. Like, people just didn't speak to me. And--and, you know, and it was hard too because the New York Post had such a bad reputation, and so, trying to, like, come into this place and overcome this stain and dealing with this internal stuff. And you had the new Post and the old Post, so you had the new people who had come from, like, legitimate papers who were very, you know, upstanding and like normal reporters (laughs), and then you had people who were known to make up stories. And it was like, there we were (laughs) (unclear). Story_ID: 42285 Speaker 1: Yeah, the Post [New York Post], I guess (where the people watch it become a tab--)? I mean a--well--. Speaker 2: It's a very famous or infamous New York City [New York] tabloid. And during the [Rupert] Murdoch years, it had become--and I think Murdoch then owned it again, but during this period that I worked there, it had been taken over by a business man and he tried to clean it up. And he brought in Jane Amsterdam, who recruited this staff. And so, you know, he had people coming from, you know, all of the respectable newspapers around the country, and they started a Sunday paper, which they didn't have, and a magazine section. And, like, so there was this huge effort to upgrade the Post. So I came in under that, and I have to say, it was great because even though I went through craziness at the start, Jerry Nachman--Jane Amsterdam left, who I liked and who had recruited me. But she was kind of afraid of the "old boys" network there, and she would just like let them have their way, and they were out of control. But when Jerry Nachman came, he was like this larger than life character who had worked in television, and I don't know what other newspapers he had worked for, but he kind of whipped the Post into shape, and he respected news and, you know, hard news. And I remember one day I had gone to Washington to interview [Reverend] Jesse Jackson, and now I don't even remember what I was interviewing him about, but in the course of the interview, he told me he had just gotten his visa to go to South Africa. He had tried for years to get a visa and they would never give him a visa. So he had finally gotten his visa and, you know, he told me he's taking, you know, there's a delegation of reporters going; Sylvester Monroe of Time Magazine. You know, he named these reporters; John White of the Chicago [Illinois]--Chicago television station. Anyway, so I get back to New York and I say, "Jerry, you know, Jesse Jackson's going to South Africa to see [Nelson] Mandela, and they may let Mandela out." And he said, "Well, I'd love to send you, but, you know, we have ask Deborah Orin because that would be her story." She was the Washington bureau chief. And so, he called Deborah and Deborah said, "Let the kid go." And it was like a matter of weeks. I had to get my visa, my shots, my everything. And they came to me with a bag money, as only the New York Post can do (laughs). Speaker 1: A bag? Speaker 2: Brown paper bag filled with hundred dollar bills (laughs). "Go." (laughs). And off I went. And we went to--we went to London first, and we met--I met Margaret Thatcher. And then we went to--where did we go in Southern Africa. I'll remember in a minute. Speaker 1: Not Zimbabwe is it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: Kenneth Kaunda was the president. Speaker 1: Oh, Zambia. Speaker 2: Zambia. Went Zambia, met Kaunda, you know. That first day had dinner at the palace, and then we went to South Africa. And, of course, I met Mandela that day that he came out. That was definitely the high point of my daily journalism career. I could have just stopped right then (laughs). Had a few more years after that, but I should have stopped right then. Story_ID: 42286 Speaker 1: Now you, as a child, stood in front of the "Tree of Life" bookstore when it had all the black presidents and all the first Heads of State, and Nelson Mandela's, as a child. So you knew who he was. Speaker 2: Right. Oh, my God, did I know who he was. Yeah. I mean, he was larger than life. I could not--it was--I've had so many, like, thrilling experiences as a reporter, but nothing, nothing, nothing ever could come close to that. It was like an out-of-body experience. It was like, "That's him." He's like walking through the door. It's like--it was like the waters parted, it was like Jesse Jackson and all these other major figures who were in Cape Town Hall; Winnie Mandela, Bishop Tutu, Walter Sisulu. Like all these major figures, right, were in this room. There may be fifty people in this room, and I was one of them. But they all faded into the paint when this man walked in. He--it was like he was in Technicolor and everything else was black and white. Unbelievable. It was just not to be believed, because right before he walked into this room, he gave the speech. And he was giving the speech on the balcony, and I'm leaning out the window--he's like there giving the speech. So, I'm like looking at this man give this speech, right? Meanwhile, I'm looking out the window and the police are firing into the crowd (making machinegun sound), and people are dropping, ambulances are pulling up, they're taking people; and there's Nelson Mandela. It was like, the whole thing was so surreal that I still don't quite believe it happened, and I was there. And even before that, we were going into--because when the news--we got the news that they were going to indeed release him, that day--we had been in South African five days, and there was speculation they're not going to release him while Jackson's there 'cause they don't want Jesse to get the credit, you know, for Nelson Mandela's release (sniffling). And so, you know, back and forth they went for, you know, five days. And then, finally, we got this news. You know I got a call, "We're heading to the Cape Town Hall," you know. "Meet us downstairs." Jesse Jackson gets up really early, so you're accustomed to very early phone calls to, like, "We got to go." (sniffling). So, you know, got my bag with my computer--I think it was--yeah, I had a computer, tape recorder, like all my stuff. And so, as we're driving, it's a sea of people as far as the eyes can see. It's just people. Like tens of thousands of people are waiting for Mandela. And we're driving through this road, and as we get close to town hall, people say, "That's him." They thought our motorcade had Mandela. People started climbing on top of our vans and on top of the limo, the first car that Mr. and Mrs. Jackson were in, and their roofs start--so they had to flee the car into the crowd, into the sea of people. I see Mrs. Jackson being hoisted up to the window (laughs). Oh, it was just bizarre. I'm almost asphyxiated because, like, we're trying to go through this crowd, and people are grabbing us. I don't even know what they were doing. And, anyway, it was, like, almost trauma, because it was scary. Our roof was caving in on our car, in this crowd. We don't know if we'll ever make it to this building. I still don't know how I made it to the building. We finally got in. And then, so from that insanity, I'm up watching this crowd and the police (making sounds mocking shooting), you know, was firing, Story_ID: 42287 Speaker 1: Were they shooting live--I mean-- Speaker 2: I think they were rubber bullets. Speaker 1: Rubber bullets, okay. Speaker 2: But people were, like, dropping (laughs)--, Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --being taken into an ambulance. [And so, God?]. And so, and then, there's [Nelson] Mandela. It's like it was almost too much to process. And then he walks into the room, and it's like, well, you know, it's a receiving line and then, you know, I'm there, and it's--. This is not to be believed. This is him, and he looked--he looked like he had been in a country club. He, you know, straight back; this regal (sniffling), magnificent person; serene, majestic. Unbelievable. And I remember, one of the reporters, John White, so he just starts crying. He's like bawling (laughs). It was like we all so, just so overcome by the experience. I mean, I didn't get him to myself, and I remember asking him a few, like, stupid questions, you know. What do you ask a man who had been in jail 30 years? Like, "How does it feel it like?" Whatever I asked. But I filed stories every day for the Post for, like, the ten days that we were away through London, through Zambia, through South Africa. Like I said, it was a once-in-a-lifetime experience, because there were very few reporters in the room, you know, seeing this unfold, you know, with that kind of company, you know. Speaker 1: I think that the National Association of Black Journalists gave you the citation for your coverage. Speaker 2: (sniffling). Oh, yeah, they did. They did. I think it was just the New York Association of Black Journalists. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, for international reporting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't even know if they ever submitted it for the National Association. But, yeah, that was nice, because that was such validation for me, because working for the New York Post was like, (noise) it was so tricky. And, when I was in South Africa, I had no idea what those stories meant to people. But when I got back, one of the people who met us at the airport was Percy Sutton. And he came up to me and he said, "Young lady, thank you." I was like, "Oh." Like that was amazing. Story_ID: 42288 Speaker 1: All right. All right. So, Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was released in 1990, February the 11th. Okay. Now, are there any other observations from that point? I mean, did you meet any of the activists and (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Like I said, Walter Sisulu-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --was one of our hosts. So many of the men who had been in the prison almost as long as Mandela, I met during that trip. I mean, we went through all of the townships. We had seen police brutality while we were there too. We had gone into one township, and as we were--I mean, and it was such a--everywhere we went, like the outpouring. People knew who Jesse Jackson was. You know, you go into these townships and it was just so heartbreaking, you know, the people lived. But they had such spirit. Like, these are the days right before Mandela's release. It was so electric. Like, people just knew that this apartheid thing was over. And anywhere we went, it just like this outpouring of love, and everywhere we went, they were singing in harmony, like a whole village. They were singing "O' Africa." It's like, how do they all sing in harmony, everywhere you go. Speaker 1: That's the one thing that-- Speaker 2: Culture, right? Speaker 1: It's important because, I think it's one thing I've always wondered. How do any group of people just automatically sing in (simultaneous)--?. Speaker 2: Oh, my God. It was just-- Speaker 1: It makes you think that everybody there can sing. And, it can't be true, but it seems like. Speaker 2: --everyone. It's kind of true, though (laughs). It was just so beautiful. And so, you know, going in and out of these townships and seeing, like, just the poverty, the level of poverty. And going, you know, to orphanages. And that's when the AIDS [Autoimmune Deficiency Syndrome] epidemic had hit South Africa really hard. In fact, in Zambia, I think at that time, like, two-thirds of the police force was infected. It was just, like, devastating. So that's when the orphanages, which is overfilled with, you know--you know, AIDS orphans. And so, it was very emotional. And, but one village, as we were leaving Gugulethu, I believe. As we were leaving, they starting firing on the crowd, the police, you know. It's like, 'cause people weren't allowed to assemble. And so, as soon as we left, you heard (making machinegun sounds). I mean, you just hear it, and then as we're driving back--so one of the cameramen said, "Let's go back," and it's like, "Yeah, let's go back," 'cause in the heat of the moment, you're not thinking. So, we start going back and we see this man laying in the street, shot in the stomach; put him in the--we put him in the van and we--now we have to take him to the hosp.... It was, the whole thing was not--it was just--. Speaker 1: Now, were they shooting live ammunition at this point? Speaker 2: That was he was shot with a bullet, yeah. So- Story_ID: 42289 Speaker 1: So this is the dying gasp of the regime?--. Speaker 2: Yeah. This was. Speaker 1: The South African regime. Speaker 2: This was the last gasp. This was the last gasp. And, I mean, from the moment we arrived, like, just coming to the airport, you had those, like, military-looking guys with the dogs and the mean faces, and it's, like, they're protecting us? (laughs) I was, like, "Oh, no." It was very tense. It was really, really tense. Like, it was--it was scary. It was scary. And then it was also--it was so destabilizing. It's like, we would go to--like, we went to Rev. Boesak's [Allan Boesak] church. Now, we heard of him in this country. It's a famous black, you know, South African. Speaker 1: Yeah. Allan Boesak. Speaker 2: Yeah. Like famous, right? But in the South African context, he wasn't black. He was colored. Right? So we go to his church, and it's a colored church, and it's like, just--it's hard to wrap your mind around--. Like, I had read about it. I had taken a South African history class, in fact, here at NYU. But seeing it lived out, and just how real it is, like how rigid those lines are, what it meant to be colored, what it meant to be black, what it meant to be Indian, what it meant to be white; it's like, wow. They meant business. So that was--I had to see that to--I don't think anything else could have shown me the extent of that kind of system, and just how it had been internalized by color. So when they would talk to me, they would say disparaging things about black people. And they would be surprised I was offended (laughs) (sniffling), so 'cause I related to the black people. I didn't relate to colored people. I was horrified. So that was--you know, it was just a very, very, rich experience that textbooks can't quite prepare you for. And I try to convey that in the stories I filed. I don't know if I succeeded. I have never read those stories again. But I tried to, like, show that kind of complexity and surprise, 'cause I was surprised every day. It was not one day that I was not shocked by something. Like even talking to--we stayed in a hotel in Cape Town, and, you know, black people didn't work in Cape Town. So all of the jobs as hotel clerks and that sort of thing were colored people, if not white. And any of the stores we went into, like, as soon as they heard our American accents, they were, like, all over us. Like the white people, they didn't discriminate against us. They wanted our money. And I saw the impact that our policies were having. Like, they were being starved. They--and here, you know, everyone--well, "Does it matter?" Like, "Is it making a difference?" There were all these debates whether it made a difference, you know, the withdrawal of U.S. dollars; made a huge difference. Story_ID: 42290 Speaker 1: Now, did you meet the--any of the union activists, like William Lucy and-- Speaker 2: Yep. We met all of those people. I mean, Jesse Jackson had meetings across the board with, you know, political figures, labor leaders; you know, just--I mean, amazing. Speaker 1: I know it's a different role that labor played in it that, I think, most people are not aware of in terms of-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. But no. But that was the huge thing, you know, those labor shutdowns. They shut down the whole country. You know they needed black labor, they needed U.S. dollars, you know, dollars from Great Britain; and they were absolutely reeling without those dollars. Like, stores were closing down. And it was--it was, like you said, it was apartheid's last gasp. But they had to change, because, you know the international community outrage was having a tremendous impact, thanks to Randall Robinson, and all the people who kept the pressure on. It really, really--and, you know, for all of the debates I had read about, It's like, these debates are affront. That's a lie. There's nothing to debate. Of course, it's having an impact. So I tried to write about things like that. But, you know, by the end, of course, he was released and that all came to an end. But I knew that even when Mandela came out and apartheid fell, it would take at least a generation before the masses saw a real change, because they weren't educated. You know, the masses were, like, (makes sound). They lived like, I guess, black people here lived in the deep, deep South, you know. They had none of the basics, you know; running water, you know, sanitation; decent, you know nutrition. You know, kids were dying, you know, of like, just measles. You know, just--it was just crazy. And then, you know, you travel a half an hour or two to Johannesburg and it was, like, being in Atlanta. You know, First World, Third World, like that close. Just a horror. Speaker 1: [The second world to go in the middle?] (laughs). Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. It was just--just one of those things you have to see for yourself, because you think you know, and then you see it, and it's like, wow. Speaker 1: Now, in 1990--is there anything else about the Post days--days with the New York Post? Speaker 2: It was so short. It was so short and sweet. So that was the highlight, obviously. Yeah. I had a--I had good experiences there too. I mean, they pretty much let me do whatever I wanted to do. I got to cover, you know, a lot of stories. Story_ID: 42291 Speaker 1: Now, you moved on in '91 [1991] to New York Newsday, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And how did that take place? Speaker 2: They recruited me. In fact, after my first job, I never applied for another job (laughs). So I applied for God knows how many newspapers to get the job at the Knickerbocker News. But then from the Knickerbocker News, Gannett recruited me to their Washington bureau; from the Washington, the Post [New York Post] recruited me to the New York office, and I pretty much covered everything I wanted to cover. Probably other than South Africa, the biggest story I covered was the election of Mayor Dinkins [Mayor David Dinkins], this city's [New York City] first African-American mayor. And that was great. And, I mean, I pretty much could do what I wanted to do there. For as crazy as that place was, they in the end were pretty good to me. And then I was offered a job at--oh, so I took the buyout from the Post, because they were offering buyouts. The Post was going through horrible economic times, I think has continued too. And I was offered a buyout--I mean we were offered a buyout. And I was pregnant, so I took it. I got pregnant right after I came back from South Africa. And so, I took the buyout, and, like, a few months into my buyout I was offered a job at New York Newsday. And I held office as long as I could, and then finally when they said they wouldn't hold the job any longer, I took it. Yeah. Story_ID: 42292 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So what was that--now, one of the big stories there--I don't want to leave--I mean, you had a couple of big stories while you were there. The Crown Heights riots. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And the subway crash. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, which one came first? I don't know which. Speaker 2: Well, the first--well, the subway crash was one of my last, because after we won the Pulitzer, I was out of there. I came here (laughs). So the--yeah, the Crown Heights riots. I was caught right in the middle of that. There were--well, the two--was it two years I was at New York Newsday, the whole time the city--it was just a really racially, tumultuous time in New York City [New York, New York]. You know, in part due to Mayor Dinkins and the backlash against Dinkins. Speaker 1: Dinkins was elected in '90 [1990]? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was while I was at the Post, 'cause I covered--. One of the stories that I really enjoyed doing was going to his hometown in Trenton, and it was so funny 'cause everyone but him were still there; like, his best friend, his father, his sister, his schools, and the people who went to school with him. It's like, "God, this is so nice." So I did a profile on him. But anyway, yes. So he was elected and I covered that. And then I went to Newsday, and he was just a really, really--and I think people were angry because it was still such a racially, tumultuous time, and people thought, well, what good is Dinkins if we still have Sharpton, like having these days of outrage (laughs), you know. Sharpton was still shaking up the city, and-- Speaker 1: What was the relationship between Dinkins and Sharpton? Speaker 2: At the time? I don't know. But I think anyone in public life had to be a little afraid of him, because--. Speaker 1: Of Sharpton? Speaker 2: Yeah. Because he had a lot of support from the black masses in New York City, because he was always there. Like, if anything happened, you didn't know if you could depend on anyone but Sharpton to show up. And, you know, and press your case. So he really posed a threat to elected officials who ignored him. He was not going to be ignored. So, it was kind of good for me because I knew him, and I was able to have access. So, anyway, the Crown Heights riots, the Crown Heights, the whole--that's the Yusef Hawkins episode. I covered the whole thing, and- Story_ID: 42293 Speaker 1: Now, what happened for those who are watching that don't--. The Crown Heights is a-- Speaker 2: You know something? I covered so many of these racial-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --racial tragedies, but Yusef Hawkins was a kid who was killed by a--oh, God. Now, see, I'm confusing--no. Crown Heights is different. Yusef Hawkins was killed in the Bensonhurst. Speaker 1: Yeah. Bensonhurst with baseball bats, [I think, or something like that?] Speaker 2: Yeah. I covered that too. I covered so many of these, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the--. Speaker 2: Yeah. So the Crown Heights riots--now I remember. Speaker 1: There was a parade or something, right? And some cars (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. There was a little boy who was killed. He was hit by a car, by one of the cars in the motorcade of the Grand Rebbe of the Lubavitchers, who are a sect of Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, who--. There had always been or long had been tension between the Hasidic Jews and the long-time black residents, who had charged that they had received a disproportionate share of city resources, you know, whether it was, you know, the Grand Rebbe's around-the-clock police protection, all kind of, you know, services 'cause they were a very segregated community. So the area was overwhelmingly black, but the Hasidim had gotten a lot of the resources that came into that community or that was the charge anyway. So there has long been tension, it's a lot of friction, and the Hasidim were a very insular group anyway, so, that, you know for many reasons there were tensions. Speaker 1: So--. Speaker 2: So when the kid--Gavin Cato, that's his name--was fatally struck by a car, a rumor spread that the, you know, the police didn't, you know, the ambulance didn't arrive in a timely fashion. Once again, there was the charge of preferential treatment; you know, that the guy was protected, that there wasn't an investigation that, you know, protocol was followed, whatever. So the tensions that had been building for years exploded after that. And so, for like four days, there were riots, and there I was, in the middle of riots again (laughs). It was pretty bad. I mean, bricks flying. I saw so many reporters get injured. I saw a cameraman get hit by a brick. A lot of my friends were beaten up. It was a bad time. Bad time in New York. And I think it's what cost Dinkins the election. Speaker 1: Did black reporters get a pass during the riot in terms of--? Speaker 2: Black reporters did not get a pass. And this was the irony: my paper, New York Newsday, had written a story about white reporters who had been attacked during the Crown Heights riots. Meanwhile, black reporters were being beaten by the police, you know badgered by the police, and we did not get a pass from black residents either. They didn't like us either because we worked for the "white press." (laughs). So we were getting it both ways. But when New York Newsday did this story--first of all, they did this--the first story that they did, did not address the historical issues and tensions in that community. So it kind of came off, like, these--"There they go again. It's crazy black people." You know. And, you know, I went to the city editor, the city hall editor and said, "Wait a minute. You know, there's more to this story." And I said, "You know, you reported--first of all, you reported on all the white reporters who were hurt, but you didn't report on the black reporters who were hurt. You reported the Hasidic side of this story and how, you know, black people were cursing and taunting, but you didn't report on the Hasidim who were throwing bricks at the black people." (laughs) It's like--. So, those of us who were there, eyewitnesses, African-American eyewitnesses, were able to broaden the scope on that story. And, you know, finally New York Newsday did a comprehensive story that looked at--looked at it in a more comprehensive fashion than they initially. But that's why we're there. Story_ID: 42294 Speaker 1: Now, this is--is this the same branch of Hasidim that Mira Kahana was part of when he was in the states? Speaker 2: I don't remember 'cause New York has a couple of different sects. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think it is. I think he was (unclear) (simultaneous) around Crown Heights. Speaker 1: (simultaneous) The very militant sect of Hasidim. Speaker 2: They are militant--yeah. Oh, yeah. They have their own patrols, they have--I mean, they beat you up, then they call the cops (laughs). You know. Yeah. They're tough. But, you know, they have a right to protect themselves, but there were issues always. So, yeah. That was--. And then there was another major--and I don't remember what stoked this one, but there I got caught in a riot on the Brooklyn Bridge. I don't remember what that one was about. But that was just a time of riots and protests. And it was a really crazy time in New York City. Really, really crazy. Like, we went from one racial thing to the next. Speaker 1: Yeah. I remember there's a story about the cops--a group of cops, not all of them, walking to city hall and peeing on city hall when Dinkins was mayor. Speaker 2: Yes. Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, it was awful. Awful time. Speaker 1: Okay. What--was there an upshot to this? I mean, was anything learned, you think or did (unclear)--? Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting you asked that, because at the time I thought something would be learned. But--was it Clark Steele or Shelby Steele? Shelby Steele had done a documentary for Frontline on the Crown Heights episode. And he had taken this really cynical--he had this really cynical take on it that, "here we go again," like it's just a endless cycle and then short-term memory. Like, it goes away and then there's something else and nothing is learned. At the time, I didn't believe that was true. I thought there was a real movement, you know. But I was in it because, [seems like?], you know, I covered the family every day, went to the funeral and, like, saw this movement. I thought it was a movement that was building around this. There were--he was right (laughs). It was just on to the next thing. You know, it was like these people are, you know, short-term fixations, you know; the media, great stories then nothing, really. Speaker 1: So that (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: (unclear) (simultaneous) Like where are those people now? Like, I don't know what happened to his family and what kind of--. You know, like, the media moves on. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And there's that next story, and I don't think anything is really learned. Speaker 1: Well, these police brutality cases do seem to-- Speaker 2: They go on and on. Speaker 1: --be deeply felt but not organized around. Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly. And I--you know, from my earliest days of--as a reporter in the '70s [1970s], when I was a teenager, you know, we were looking at stories; like this businessman in Bedford-Stuyvesant or maybe it was Crown Heights, Arthur Miller, who had been killed by police. And there were--there was another elderly woman who had been killed by police, and there had been--. Like, there had been so many of these stories and the police always walked. They always did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Ahmadu Dialo. Speaker 2: Ahmadu Dialo. But I think they did get convicted. I think they did. Speaker 1: It's hard. Speaker 2: I would certainly like to think they did, 'cause that was really a gruesome attack. But yeah, so, you know, it's--and I mean, you know, Rodney King, like (laughs)--we just saw, you know, you see it over and over and over again. Speaker 1: Yeah. This was the time of Rodney King as well. It's just after Rodney King that the--I guess, this takes place. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Rodney King was, like, '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: I don't know. It all seems to--. Speaker 1: The L.A. riots, you know-- Speaker 2: It all seems to, like, yeah. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: It's like, just a really, I guess nationally it was just a really tense time. Story_ID: 42295 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the subway crash now. Now, this is 1992, and this was a story that your team-- Speaker 2: Won a Pulitzer. Speaker 1: --yeah. Won a Pulitzer Prize for. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was one of those stories that, quite honestly, I hated having to cover this story, because it was one--New York Newsday was kind of known for team reporting. And so, anything that was big, you can rest assured twenty of us, fifteen of us, like, would fan out, and we'd cover every aspect of the story. But, you know, we were all like, kind of cordoned off to whatever we were covering. And my very unpleasant task was like covering the victims and like going to these funerals (laughs). Like, I would sit there and I'm crying, you know, at these funerals of people I didn't know. And, you know, it wasn't--I didn't--like of all of the stories that I had done for New York Newsday, if you had told me that's the one that would have gotten the Pulitzer (laughs), it's like, you just don't know. So random. But I guess, you know, the editor, Debbie Henley, was right. Like, if you cover something comprehensibly like that, that--that one surprise, and that's--that's how it happened. I mean, we did have the most complete, extensive coverage of that disaster. But I--I wouldn't never tell you that that's a story that I as particularly--those stories I was particularly proud of, but in the end I was happy my stories were included in the package, because there were people whose stories weren't included in the package. Speaker 1: Just to summarize it, there's a story of gross negligence-- Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: --on the part of a operator of a train. Speaker 2: Right. Right. And I think that one of the big stories that came out of it is that Mitch Galeman, one of the reporters, found some toxicology report that he had been drinking too. So, I mean, it was--I mean, it was already a major story, you know, because there, like, there's no fatal subway crash in New York. Like, no one thinks of the subway as a place where you could die. Speaker 1: Or risk your life. Speaker 2: So it was already such a major story, and I think that that story was. Speaker 1: This fellow drank a 20--20 ounces of whiskey or something before--. Speaker 2: Okay, so you remember the details. Speaker 1: Well, it's written here (laughs). Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: [I mean?], I'm reading this outline. Speaker 2: That wasn't-- Speaker 1: But when I first saw it, I just couldn't believe it. This is a bottle of Mountain Dew's worth of whiskey at a--. Speaker 2: Isn't that something? Speaker 1: You know, the kind you get a convenience store. That size. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it's full of whiskey. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he had that much in his system. Speaker 2: Crazy. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But the thing that's so funny is, what, you know, growing up, you know, in the kind of neighborhoods I lived in, I knew people's parents who did that; you know, father's who--they all seemed to drink (laughs). So, it was no surprise to me he was drinking, because the few people I knew who did that for a living happen to be alcoholics. Isn't that weird (laughs), when you put it together. But I think anything that is--becomes so rote, that boring, you know, would probably have a higher incidence of, you know, something like that; drinking or drugs. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think nowadays, I thought about, when I heard this story, I thought about a story on, I think, NBC Nightly News about operators being--using, you know, playing games on their systems (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Same thing. Speaker 1: --music and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: The train is almost automatic (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Exactly. So it's the same thing. They don't think they have to pay attention. Yeah. And also, anything rote is so boring, right? You need something else. I'm not condoning it (laughs). Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 42296 Speaker 1: So. After New York Newsday, now, you--how long did you stay at New York Newsday? Speaker 2: I think I was there two years or three; two and a half or three years. And while I was at New York Newsday, I as an adjunct professor at NYU [New York University]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I became an adjunct at NYU because I always wanted to teach. Like, talk about an early memory; I always had like the little kids in my room, and I had a little school. Like, I was probably, like, in the second grade, and I would have, like, kindergarteners or if I was in kindergarten, I had, like, nursery school kids (laughs). It's like I always--my mother laughs at that, that I always had a school in my room. And so, I always wanted to teach. And it was a teacher who kind of talked me out of teaching and said, "You should be a journalist. You're such a good writer, and you like these issues," and like, you know. I always thought that writing is just something you did, but not something you did, you know, for a career. So one teacher had talked me out of teaching, and then, you know, around the same time, seeing Melba Tolliver--and, anyway. So. So, but teaching was always my first love. Like that--. Like, if you would ask me, you know, anytime up to fifth or sixth grade what I wanted to be, and that was just naturally what I wanted to do. I always gravitated to teaching. And so, I had a colleague at Newsday who was teaching at Columbia. And I said, "Wow, you're teaching? Like, what are you teaching?" He said, "Oh, like what we do. Like, I'm teaching journalism. I'm teaching them in the journalism school." And I'm like, "Like, yeah, but how do you know how to teach them? What do you do?" So he told me. So I became so intrigued and I called NYU; I said, "You know, I'm one of your alum and, you know, I haven't been there in a while, but, you know, I had a pretty nice career and I think I have some things to offer, and if you ever have any openings for an adjunct, you know, I'd be happy to come and teach." And she said, "Oh, it just so happens we have this opening. When can I meet you?" So I come here and I meet Professor Quigley, and I had a teaching job. So I worked at Newsday in the day and at night, two nights a week, I taught a class, and sometimes I'd take my class out on stories with me. And I loved it. And so, I thought that that was a good balance. I taught, I had my journalism job. I was happy. But, once I had my daughter, I had to work Christmas, and then the teaching started looking a lot better because I noticed that they worked two days a week, they had summers off, no one worked on Christmas (laughs). I said, this could be a nice thing to do, you know, when--to raise a kid--raise a family. And I get to write and, you know, and I'm looking at what people on the faculty are writing. They're writing books. It's like, "Wow, I want to write a book." And so, serendipity. The professor, Dick Petro (ph. splg.)--as adjunct, someone as to come and observe your class. And so, he observed my class and he wrote this glowing report and I had good evaluations, and he said, "You know, I'm leading a search for--we have two openings. Would you be interested?" It's like, me? I thought I was too young. I didn't think--I didn't think--I had a BA; I didn't have a master's degree. I didn't think I was ready. And I got the job. That was many years ago. So, I'm the only person I know who got a tenure-track teaching job, got tenure, went back, got a master's degree, promoted to full professor, and I went back and got my Ph.D. (laughs), with nothing to gain but, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 42297 Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about your beginnings with NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And I think that--we have a note here that in '94 [1994], you were Scholar-in-Residence at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Spelman College. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: How was that experience? Speaker 2: Oh, it was nice. Johnnetta Cole was the president then. And I was invited--NYU has a--it's a faculty-resource network that brings together historically black colleges; brings scholars to NYU to study, and have a conference every year. And I spoke to a group one year and the Provost invited me to go down there to be a Scholar-in-Residence. It was amazing. I mean, I loved those young women. But the funny thing is, is was the Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] men who kind of took over my time, 'cause they just, like, knew what they wanted out of me (laughs), and they would just show up, and they had questions, and--yeah. It was a great experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Also, I didn't want to skip over this, but you became an assistant professor of journalism, and you said there was a strange kind of career tract, because you- Speaker 2: Yeah, my trajectory is not one that (laughs) that you hear about very often. I mean, I'm not the only one here who was hired with just a BA, because NYU is more into your experiences than your credentials for journalism, as is Columbia [Columbia University, New York City, New York]. Like, there are some programs that are very Ph.D. heavy. NYU is all about experience, and I think there were only a few people when I came here who had Ph.D.s; in fact, two. J. Rosen and Carol Sternhell. But, it's something I always wanted to do. It just seemed natural to me that once I had the opportunity to do it. But a lot of people thought it was strange (laughs). It's like, if you don't need to do it, why would you do it? But I didn't do it out of need. I did it because I wanted to. Speaker 1: Now, you became director of undergraduate studies here? Speaker 2: Twice. This is my second time in that position, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. This is early on too, you know, basically. Speaker 2: Yeah. Like almost right away. I think my second year here I was director of--they asked me to be director of undergraduate studies. And my new chair asked me to be--to do it again this time, and it's not something that I necessarily wanted to do because I'm working on a book, and it's time consuming. But, I have a hard time saying no. Speaker 1: So what does that require? Speaker 2: Well, you're responsible for all the undergrads. So, whatever issues they have and looking at any curricular issues. Like, right now, we're looking at some kind of curricular reform, and I oversee that. Like, anything dealing with curriculums, student concerns; you know, attending meetings with the deans, and, you know. A little bit of everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So-- Speaker 2: If someone needs transfer credits, I have to approve or, you know, it's a little bit of everything. Story_ID: 42298 Speaker 1: So, while here, too, you wrote for the Nation, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was writing all along for the Nation. In fact, the Nation published an excerpt from my first book before it was published. And a short time later I was asked to be a National fellow. And so I paid a stipend to just have the association and attend the editorial board meetings and that sort of thing. And it's been a nice relationship. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, you've been with the New York Post and with the Nation (laughs). Speaker 2: I know (laughs). Well, there was a time that they were very closely aligned. I mean, the New York Post was a progressive paper, you know, in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], when Dorothy Schiff had it. In fact, one of the stories that I wrote about was Ted Poston, who was one of their legendary reporters who, you know, covered all the Civil Rights battles in the South. In the, I think the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and I always looked to Ted Poston (laughs). It's like, if Ted Poston was able to do it, I could do this. But he was at the Post during its heyday as a progressive paper. Story_ID: 42299 Speaker 1: Okay. Now this leads to the book. I mean, I--'cause you wrote about Ted Poston, Lester Walton, George Schuyler, even Earl Brown, in a book you wrote called, Within the Veil: Black Journalists, White Media [2000]. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: This is your first book, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was my "tenure book." That was--like, it was just, to me, a luxury and an honor to be able to tell that story, you know. To be able to, you know, go into the archives and dig up these, you know, trailblazers who many in my generation didn't even know about. Like these are the people who were doing this long before we were born, and against much greater odds. And, for the most part, they became footnotes, you know, in the story of American journalism. And they were doing amazing work, you know, really early on. So, initially, I just wanted to look at race in the media. It's like to remove myself from, you know, my own experience. I didn't want to write memoirs, you know, about what I did. I wanted to tell the story of African-American journalists who, from the very beginning of American journalism, have had to swim against the tide. You know, these were the reporters, whether they were from the black press, you know, you were being threatened, you know, with lynchings and, you know, their presses being burned down. You know, Frederick Douglass, as prominent as he was, they burned down his press. Ida B. Wells was run out of town. They burned hers down, you know. So, from, you know, the inception of African-American journalism, you know, we have done our work against the tide. And so, when I initially set out to do the book, I thought, you know, I would look at the time, thirty years since the Kerner Commission report criticized the American media for biased paternalism for, you know, not fully telling the story of race in America, not adequately communicating to the American public what was going on and why African-Americans were so restless in the '60s [1960s], you know, with all the unrest that was percolating in our communities. And so, I thought I would look at the three decades since that report and what has happened in American journalism. But once I started doing the research on the book, you know, I kept coming across these early journalists who were writing for the white media too. And then I saw the commonality between journalists and the black press or the white press; it didn't even matter, right? You were still, you know, going against it. It was still a battle. So, yeah. That was my--that was my first book, and I was really honored to be able to tell what I thought was a story that had not been really told. There had been a number of books written about the black press, but there was nothing comprehensive that looked at the mainstream media and the challenges of African-American journalists, you know, swimming against the tide.' Speaker 1: Because it's a different--it's a different position to media. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 42300 Speaker 1: I know, we've interviewed a couple of reporters in the mainstream press that feel the pressure to report, do investigative reporting in the black community--. Speaker 2: Well, sure, to tell our dirt--right. And you're considered objective when you can write negatively about black people. But you can't write positively because if you do, then you're not objective. And why can't you just write about black people in the main the way you write about white people. Good, bad, you know, in between. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: It's part of my book. It's one of the things I looked at. I interviewed about a hundred journalists across the country and, you know, read all the studies and the reports, and it is the same thing. You know, looking at--I mean, I had experienced some of the things people talked about, but not all. And--but the common experience is, that black journalists in the mainstream media feel this pressure to validate, you know, the story of blacks as pathological is, you know, problematic as, or they're not considered credible objective journalists. And it's a real bind because, yeah, you can do those stories because they're there, but what about those other stories, and why is there such a resistance to the fullness of black life. So that's what my book turned out to be about. You know, just all of the different challenges that African-Americans face in the mainstream; whether they are at the top of the food chain, in the middle, at the bottom; they all had very similar experiences. Is there a--do you have a, I guess, a generalized or at least, prescription on how to avoid going to the nuthouse for things for (unclear) (simultaneous) in that position?-- Speaker 1: Well, yeah. I think the National Association of Black Journalists provided part of that, you know, as a place that at least you're talking to people who have like experiences and you know it's not you. You're not crazy. And, but yeah, I think it does take quite a toll on people. Story_ID: 42301 Speaker 1: One of the chapters I wrote was about the plaintiffs in the lawsuit against the New York Daily News. And those four plaintiffs went to hell and back. And it's really tragic how they all ended up, you know, kind of washed ashore, you know. They won the battle, but they lost the war. Speaker 2: Tell us--briefly summarize who they were and what--(unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yeah. One was David Hardy. Another one was Causewell Vaughan, Joan Shepard, and Steven Duncan. Wow. Amazing I remember those names. They filed a lawsuit against the Daily News. The first lawsuit against a major American paper that went to trial, 'cause there had had been lawsuits in the past, but they usually ended in some kind of settlement. You know, everything is hush-hush behind the scenes. But this is the first one that played out in the courts. Speaker 2: Now this--that in itself speaks to the determination of the plaintiffs, right? Speaker 1: Oh, because they were offered--yeah. Speaker 2: Because they were--you know they were. Speaker 1: They were trying to pick them off too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they went all the way. And, you know, some of the things that they alleged were pretty horrible, you know. Black people being called names in the newsroom. Like, just outright, like, Southern-style (laughs), you know, bigotry, you know, in the New York City newsroom, you know. And when was that, in the 1970s or '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. This is New York City, as they say in the barbeque ad. Speaker 1: New York--that's right. Speaker 2: But it's a lot like- Speaker 1: A lot of people called it "Up South." Yeah. So, anyway, you know, they lost a lot of friends 'cause people move away from you when you're going against the system like that, you know. Nobody wants to be associated with you. They know you're right (laughs). But, yeah, you know. Right. "Go away. I'm not going down with that ship." So, telling that story, it's a--it's part cautionary tale--part--just great heroics, you know, because they didn't do that for themselves. They knew they weren't going to come out of this on top. You don't come out of something--you don't go against a major American institution and sail off into the sunset, usually anyway. And they didn't either. Right? Right. They could not work. They could not find work. They could--you know, they were pretty much blackballed. And the people who did not side with them were rewarded, you know. A person who I respect tremendously, I mean love like a brother, Bob Herbert, was one of those people who would not testify on their behalf. He became the first African American columnist for the New York Times. You know, and that's not his fault. You know, that's just the system. You know, you are rewarded for, you know, not shaking--. Now he did plenty of shaking things up at the Times, and they probably--he--they probably got more than they bargained for, 'cause they probably thought he was one way because of that, you know. But, anyway, that was one of the kind of, I think, threads that run through the book. It's like, you know, how important is this fight. Is it worth it. And it's a question that you constantly come back to, because when you look at--. One of my students asked--this is really poignant. She had, you know, they read the book and, you know, they talked to journalists, they hear these stories. It's like, why, you know, like, what are we crazy? Why would we continue to do this? (laughs). We know the way the story ends. Like, this is insane. Like, why do this, and, you know, and I'm saying, "Well, you know, well, what is the option? What do you--just like, go curl up in a corner and you don't tell the stories that are there to be told, like you don't, you know, give voice to the voiceless, like you, you know, you don't have a say in policy, and you know, the public conversation?" Like, we don't have that option, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it does make you think, you know. It's like, she's right. Like, why would you subject yourself to that? Story_ID: 42302 Speaker 1: Like, I--but, you know, even hearing all the stories and, you know, talking to people even at the top; like, I interviewed Bryant Gumbel, who was at the top of the food chain in journalism, right. Like, who was better compensated, more famous; you know, he had it all, right? And, you know, he told me it had taken him five years to convince NBC to go to Africa, the only continent other than Antarctica, it had not gone to. And so, you know, you hear like these stories from journalists at every step, you know, at every station in journalism they all had these, you know, these battles, you know. And, you know, and you have to pick your battles. They, you know, you can't do this every day, you know. You have to--and it's just interesting to hear, like, "What's the thing that got you going?" Like, "What's the line that you said, this is it, I'm not--." You know. Everyone has that line, you know. Story_ID: 42303 Speaker 1: So, anyway, I was--I figured that I'd write the book [Within the Veil: Black Journalists, White Media, 2000], no one would take notice, and I'd, you know, hopefully get tenure, and that would be at least it's in the record books. I was shocked by the number of editors who invited me into their newsrooms to talk to top-level management to--it was really taken seriously by people I never would have expected to give it the time of day. So that was pretty gratifying. I don't know if it made a difference, but it was out there. They can't say they didn't know any more (laughs). Speaker 2: Now, these are mainstream white editors of papers who invited you in to talk. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, like Reuters. I went to their New York office to talk to, like, 50 top editors across Reuters, Gannett News Service, papers in Texas. I mean, I went all over the country, only by invitation. And, you know, people really were leaning in. I mean, it's usually really quiet (laughs) and really tense. But they listened. They did listen. Story_ID: 42304 Speaker 1: Now, did you deal with, at all, the dilemma or the crisis black reporters in mainstream or news media face when they do investigative reports of black people in the community. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Yes. Speaker 1: Like a Percy Sutton-- Speaker 2: Of course I do. Speaker 1: --Charles Rangel or-- Speaker 2: Yep. I talked about the, you know, the double bind. It's like, you get it--we get it both ways, you know. You know, I even talked about--I wrote about Milton Coleman, and even though that's one of those stories, Milton Coleman was the Washington Post reporter who overhead Jesse Jackson making an offensive comment about Jews, you know, in a private conversation with the journalist. Speaker 1: That was the Hymietown remark. Speaker 2: Hymietown. And he didn't report it at the time and other journalists heard this remark, and another reporter was doing a big story on Jesse Jackson and he shared with him this, and it made it into that story, that in-private remark, you know, Jesse Jackson refers to Jews as Hymietown, you know, to New York as Hymietown. So, you know, there were a lot of debates within, you know, black circles, you know, is he a sellout, should he have told, da-da-da-da-da. But I didn't, like, in this book, I never took sides. I wanted to just kind of present the dilemmas that--that--that black journalists have, you know, being in these mainstream newsrooms. You know that you're rewarded for, you know, revealing that, and you know that you're kind of ignored when you write about black achievement. Like, no one considers that news. It's not, you know, it's just--it's like what Kerner said. You know, you write about black peoples (sic) if they don't marry, die, and attend PTA meetings. They're just people with ups and downs. You know, we have the fullness of white life, but we don't have that with black life. We have the pathology. So that puts you into this kind of, like, well, what do I do when I come across these stories? It is a story. Like, he is a major public figure, and he should not make comments like that, and he's a minister, and it's like--so, it goes on and on. So, anyway, I presented the wholeness of it, and then I, you know, I kind of present the question, well, what if you're a white reporter and you hear a white public official making offensive comments about blacks or about women or about--I mean, this kind of like horrible stuff. And it gets to the heart of character. Speaker 1: You know, like--I guess like the Earl Butz story of the '70s [1970s], the Secretary of Agriculture made the remarks about. Speaker 2: Right. So I mean--so, I raised these questions, not to judge, but to show that, you now, like all of--. There's no science. It's like, these are just, you know, quandaries that black journalists face daily. Story_ID: 42305 Speaker 1: Now, is your book picked up as a textbook around the country as a--? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Yeah. And that was another nice thing. You know, I've gone to schools where, you know, 15 classes of if--have adopted it or like at San Francisco State, University of Texas at Austin. Like a lot of schools use it as, you know, regularly as their textbooks. And then it won the National Press Club for media criticism. Another thing I didn't expect. So, I thought I would just, like, kind of tiptoe in (laughs), put it out there and, like, walk away. But it got a lot more recognition and it's still in print after, it's like twelve years. Speaker 1: Well, telve years now, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So. Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I need to update it. I've been asked a few times to update it. Story_ID: 42306 Speaker 1: Okay. So. Okay, now. What is the Presidential Scholars Program at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: The Presidential Scholars at NYU are the top students who were recruited to NYU because of their academic achievement, and they are--it's like a separate little group. I think NYU has anywhere from 100 to 200 in a given year. And as part of their reward for being presidential scholars, they take overseas trips every year. Like, I'll be going to Abu Dhabi [United Arab Emirates] with a group in March, sophomores. They go to Abu Dhabi on spring break (laughs). Not bad. I took a group to Florence [Italy]. I took a group to Paris [France]. So every year it's a different trip, and they usually have some assignment associated with the trip. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you, yourself, became the director of NYU in Ghana in 2006, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a--we--. I started the program in Ghana. We--NYU has, I don't know how many sites now, but Ghana's was one of the sites where journalism had never had a program. And so, I took the first group of grad students, and now it's an ongoing program. We hired someone now to--who goes--who takes a group every summer for a semester. Speaker 1: All right. Think about John Henry Clark wrote for the Ghana newspaper when a Akumo was in office or just before Akumo was elected back then (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. And it tied into my research too, because my dissertation looked at the transfer of the Hampton-Tuskegee Model to British Colonial Ghana at [Chamoda?] So, while I was there, I was able to do research. Speaker 1: Oh, that's--the time was Jesse Jones, the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yep. Phelps Stokes Fund. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That's right (laughs). Story_ID: 42307 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. We probably don't have everything, but from 2008 on, like, what have been some of the highlights here at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, one of the highlights is--was directing the Urban Journalism Workshop, which brings high school juniors and seniors, twenty of them, to campus every summer for ten days of intensive journalism workshops, meeting with high-level journalists, many of color; to--it was started thirty years ago to expose minorities to journalism; you know, to deal with the paucity of African-American, Latino, Asian journalists, and it's, you know, it's been a wonderful thing to be a--play a role in keeping it alive, and, you know, raising the bar, and--yeah. Speaker 1: Now, is the part of the--have anything to do with the faculty in and of the city programs? Speaker 2: Oh, that's another--. I was just one of these people they asked me to do things when I usually say yes. So that's--that--. The faculty in another city was the brainchild of the president of NYU, John Sexton, who thought students are looking for more opportunities to have social outings with their professors. They are not. But, anyway (laughs), they put a lot of money into, like, building this program where you come up with these interesting outings around the city, and students sign up and they don't show up. But I got to go to a lot of fun places (laughs) with, like, two or three students (laughs). I loved--. You know, administrators always think students want to be with the professors. When you were a student, did you want to be with your professors? No. Oh, gosh. "Yeah, let me go to the museum with my professor. Let me go to Chinatown with my professor." So, you know, every month I'd go to some nice outing with a couple of students, who are the type who want to be with professors (laughs). Speaker 1: So this program is still going on? Speaker 2: You know something? I don't know. I wouldn't be surprised if they pulled the plug on it, because it was a lot of money for very low--. Oh, who knows. It--that was the--it was a pilot then. So maybe it's gotten better. Story_ID: 42308 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you became a full professor in 2009, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, after my last book, Letters from Black America [2009]. You know, every time for your promotion you have to have another major bio--you know, something that you added to your bio. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So that came before 2009? I mean, well, the book was finished then? Speaker 2: It came out in 2009. And I went up in 2009 and got it in 2009, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what's the scope of this book? I mean, well, it sounds--it's self-explanatory on some level, but then you (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: Pretty much, it's self-explanatory. It's three centuries of African-American letters beginning in the 1700s, and the last letter was 2008, and that was a letter that Alice Walker had written to Obama right after he was elected. Yeah. And I found that letter as the book was going to press. It was like, "Stop the press." So, yeah. It's African-American life in letters. Speaker 1: What's the first letter? Speaker 2: I think the earliest letter is a Phyllis Wheatley letter to George Washington. And after that, another letter is Benjamin Banneker writing to Thomas Jefferson. And that is a letter that everyone should read. It's basically a letter challenging Jefferson's assumption of African-American inferiority. And you have this brilliant black man saying, "I am as black as night, but check me out." Like, "This is what I do." You know, here was a man who was a scientist, who was a mathematician, who was, like, just flat out like a genius. And, you know, helped plan the Wash--you know, the Capitol from memory. You know, the way he did that was, the person who was hired to, you know, do the plans for the city quit. Speaker 1: [Pierre Charles] L'Enfant? Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. And Banneker--and took his plans back to remember them, because he was there. Right? So you have this genius, you know, hearing this man say that African-Americans are intellectually inferior. And he sent him a copy of his almanac. And, you know, his almanacs told with, like, startling precision when it was going to rain, what crops were best to grow when; and people relied on this white farmers--you know. So, the letter is just so brilliant, so beautifully written, so powerful. Seventeen hundreds, you know. Story_ID: 42309 Speaker 1: Okay. So, how was your book [Letters from Black America, 2009] received? Speaker 2: I mean it was very well received. And, as I mentioned earlier, I've had many readings around the country; quite a few in New York [New York City, New York] with major actors. And it has--it's really gotten a great response. The last major reading I did was at the Studio Museum in Harlem with Ruby Dee and Anthony Chism. That was, you know, standing room only. We did another one with those same two actors at Barnes and Noble on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Yeah, it's had a really good response. Speaker 1: Is the Jordan Anderson letter in that--included? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Who is Jordan Anderson? Speaker 1: Oh, he was a former slave who wrote to his master about reparations. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You know something? That came out later. That's recent that someone discovered that letter. Speaker 1: It's become like--well, it was published a long time ago, but it kind of got buried in history. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I know. I said, "Oh, I missed that one." Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I do have the letter that Frederick Douglass wrote to his master after, you know, saying, "Check me out now." (laughs) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A lot of letters from slaves. Many from people who were not well known, just, you know, checking up on loved ones, you know, husbands who had been, you know, parted from wives or mothers from children, and really poignant, heartbreaking. Speaker 1: So, now, did public television do anything with this or probably a radio (unclear) (simultaneous). Like I remember something. Speaker 2: No. Well, NPR [National Public Radio], yeah. NPR, we had an hour-long interview. And David Levering Lewis participated in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He's one of your colleagues and a professor of history (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Mm-hm, and one of his letters is included in the book, and he also blurbed the book. He really likes the book. So that's nice. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a Pulitzer Prize winner of four. Speaker 2: Double, double Pulitzer Prize winner. Speaker 1: Yeah, for W. E. B. DuBois by (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, two volumes; One and two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So--. Speaker 2: And I mean, when an historian likes your book, and then the historian of his caliber likes your book, that's nice. Story_ID: 42310 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you about your colleagues, like, since we've been rolling, but David Levering Lewis is one, great historian. Another one of your colleagues recently passed away. Speaker 2: Derrick Bell. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Derrick Bell. Speaker 2: He was dear--one of my closest friends. Yeah, that was a great loss for NYU [New York University], for me personally, for his family, friends; yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any sort of a formal association of black faculty and staff here? Speaker 2: I think there is. There's a council of black faculty in administration. I never--I'm very rarely in a group. It's just some of us are just friends. Derrick Bell, when I was writing Within the Veil, my first book, and they asked me, "Well, who would you want to write the introduction?" I said, "Oh, there's only one person, you know, Derrick Bell." And they said, "Do you know him?" It's like, "No, I don't know him, but, you know, I can ask." And they were, like, "Well, usually you ask someone you know, 'cause it's hard to get people to do it." So, I think I wrote him first and he wrote me back. He said, "I"--he called me and he said, "Oh, that's so nice, but, you know, why don't you ask Skip Gates [Henry Louis Gates]?" And it's like, "Well, with all due respect, I really gave this a lot of thought, like, you're the only person who I would want to write this book, you know, because of your courage, because of, you know, everything about you. Your integrity, you know, you're like my dream to write the introduction." And he said, "Oh, what about Cornell [West], what about--(laughs). So he's trying to get out. It's like, "You know, really, you know, Professor Bell, like, I really would--I just asked you to consider it, like, just look at the, you know, look at the outline and look at, you know, my first chapter, and you know, just--just give it some thought, like, you don't have to tell me today." He said, "Okay. Can you come now and just drop it off and, like, let the doorman know when you're here." And I'm like, "Oh, my God." I had my little kid, I didn't have a babysitter. It's like, "Okay, I'm just going to run up there," you know. I took her, we dropped off the book, told the doorman, "Here," I said, "Okay, it's downstairs." He said, "Oh, come up." It's like, "Oh, no. He's not going to see me as professional, I have my kid." I think she was about three years old. So I go up, his wife is there. She takes Marjani, and I go in the living room and he, you know, he tells me, you know, "I've already read the first part you sent me and I don't even need to see that. I'll do it. I loved this, I think you're brave," like, "you should do--." Like, "This is great, I'll do it." And he did it and a short time later he invited me to have lunch. I was like, "Oh, my God. Derrick Bell invited me to have lunch." And he is the most--he was the most humble, just so modest, so caring, so--just a--you forget he's Derrick Bell. Like, when you're in his company, you were just with, like, just some nice guy who just cared about what you were doing. I have to stop. Speaker 1: [Tape stops] Story_ID: 42311 Speaker 1: So--so, your degrees have now caught up with your position, you know. Speaker 2: (laughs) Exactly. Speaker 1: Now, what's your next project as an author? Speaker 2: Well, I'm deep into my next book. It's due next September. It's about Ota Benga. I don't know if you're familiar with him. Speaker 1: Well tell people. Speaker 2: Ota Benga was a Congolese man, about twenty three years old, who was exhibited in the Bronx Zoo monkey house in 1906. And there had only been one book done on the episode and it was written by the grandson of the explorer who both bought him from Africa and brought him from Africa. He actually paid money for him. He was a slave, and he brought him to his country to exhibit in the World's Fair in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: This is 1904 (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: That was 1904. And he went back and then he brought a bunch of pygmies to--so-called pygmies, because that's a contested term, offensive term. And when I look at the etymology, I see why it's so offensive; it was monkey. It's like monkey, you know. The original usage of it was kind of innocent. It was Homer. In Homer they talked about the pygmies as little people. But then, as--from the seventeenth century to the eighteenth century, it somehow was used to describe monkeys. And then when they saw these people in Africa, they called them pygmies, as in little monkeys. So, to use that term is, like, really problematic. Part of what I'm going to deal with in this book. But, so, anyway, the one book that was an extensive account, was written by the grandson of the explorer who brought him here and, you know, paraded him and was paid to, you know, get him and put him in the World's Fair. And then he brought him to New York, and he was trying to sell a monkey to the Bronx Zoo and they decided to say, "Yeah, we'll take your monkey, but what about that pygmy?" And they took Ota Benga, and they put him in the Bronx Zoo monkey house in a cage with an orangutan. Speaker 1: Now, this is forty years after slavery. Speaker 2: This is 1906. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is more than that if you talk about, you know, slavery was abolished in the 1820's in New York. Speaker 1: Right. Well, in New York, yeah. It's more than that in New York. But in the country, like, 1863, you know, 1865 (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. So, yes. Right. So this, yeah. This should not have happened. And, what interested me in the project was the number of highly influential people who played a role in this and, you know, it--. And also, the fact that the New York Zoological Society, the Bronx Zoo, and all of the people who have recorded the history of that institution, including this grandson of the explorer, have totally sanitized what happened to Ota Benga. And the book that he wrote was about the friendship between Ota Benga and his grandfather. Now, I don't know about you, but my friends would never put me in a monkey house and lock me up and have hooting, jeering people poking me, prying me, chasing me through the woods and treated--. I mean, he was treated so horribly against his wishes, and it's clear. All of the evidence shows it was against his wishes. The Bronx Zoo and its historical account basically says that it's urban legend and that he worked for the zoo, that he was never in a cage; that he may have stepped in a--. There's no question he was an exhibit in the Bronx Zoo monkey house, and it was one of the largest spectacles in New York City in 1906. One day, 40,000 people went to the zoo to see Ota Benga, paid money to see him. And he fought and that's the story that has not been told, that this book --. So, it's look at race in New York City at the turn of the century through the prism of this episode. Story_ID: 42312 Speaker 1: It sounds like an interesting book that people need to read. (unclear) It tells a lot about an age where you can buy and sell a human being after slavery's over. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And, you know. So you look at the factors as, you know, that make this somehow possible in the--. Speaker 2: Right. And you look at the science that was prevalent then. Like, who the, you know, the most renowned scientist and what their theories were on race, and how that worked its way in to, you know, the general view of African people, African-Americans included. I mean, and how that made its way into policy, into education, you know, in to, you know, all kind of social policies. Speaker 1: Now this is not a good time for African-Americans, so. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. This is a horrible time. But the typical story we hear is what happened in the South, right? We know about the lynchings, we know that the Niagara Movement started around this time, you know, because of all the lynchings and, you know, the segregated troops. I mean, all the things that were going on in this country. But usually it's told through the prism of the U.S. South. Very little has been written, really, about New York City and race at the turn of the century. It's a project that I wanted to do for a long time. I just didn't have the way into it. And this book was actually not my idea. It was my agent's idea, and I didn't want to do it. It's so dark, it's so bizarre, it's so--. But when I started seeing the way it had--the story had been rewritten and sanitized, and just outright untruths perpetuated in all of these accounts. Even the New York Times, when he died in 1916, when he killed himself in 1916, the New York Times reported that it had been urban legend that he had been in the Bronx Zoo monkey house, when it was the New York Times that broke the story. The New York Times covered it every day. So, it's just interesting how history can be totally rewritten by major institutions, and we hardly ever question it, because why would the New York Times not be right? Speaker 1: Now when--wait a minute--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Why would St. Martin's Press not be right? Why would this book not be true? (laughs) Why would the Bronx Zoo in its account of its history, why would the part about Ota Benga not be true? Who would--like, who would question it? Speaker 1: These are the guardians of objectivity, right? Speaker 2: Hello. Right. So that's what interested me. It wasn't the tale--. Because the tale I thought it'd been told, and it was sad and brutal and it's like, oh, it was, you know, just horrific. But, when I saw that there was outright deception being perpetrated on the public through all of these paragons of, you know, culture, it's like, how could that be? Now, that I hadn't counted on. Speaker 1: Who--did anyone befriend or take up the cause of Ota Benga when he was--? Speaker 2: Yes. It's a--. You just wait 'til you read it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It's an amazing story. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 42313 Speaker 1: And you know, it's like, you know, one person, you know. What one person, one person standing up against the justice, and it happened to be a white person. And, I mean, black ministers then, you know, it picked up steam, and they took--they took--took it on, but, it was this one influential pastor, who has been lost in the, you know, in--he's in the shadows in New York City history. It's like this larger than life figure that I would have never heard of. And even in the accounts you read about Ota Benga, when they mention him, you'd think he's a black preacher because no one knows who he was. There was never any depth to who this person was. So, anyway, it just allows me to look at New York, you know, in a really, in like, a close-up, personal way through this episode, but you're seeing who these--who the major figures were in New York, the major gathering places. It allows me to look at--I always wanted to do something on Weeks [Weeksville, Brooklyn, New York], though. You know that section in Brooklyn? Which was like this influential--like, upper-middle-class, you know, neighborhood, like, doctors, lawyers, you know, like, all of these highly successful blacks who had founded this area after the riots, the draft riots. You know, a lot of black people fled Manhattan because of the draft riots. You know, there was looting, killing black people here. Speaker 2: Hanging them from lampposts and such. Speaker 1: Right. So they--. So these--it's this neighborhood that came up and, you know--. It's being preserved in a kind of halfhearted way in Brooklyn. It's kind of a meager little, you know, museum. But I always--. I was always intrigued by Weeks. I was like, "Wow, I would love to be able to get into that story." Like, "What was happening," well, Ota Benga, ends up in Weeksville. So it has a lot. It has a lot of--. It has many, many layers. Yeah. Story_ID: 42314 Speaker 1: That kind of segues into the question we always ask. Ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: I think if there's one issue that just cuts across everything, for us it's education. I think when--. You know, when I look at the high school dropout rates, I always believe I'm not seeing what I see, because it's so glaring and shocking that, like, seventy percent of black males don't graduate at the end of four years. Like, seventy percent. Like, even in saying it, there's a disconnect between me saying it and believing it, processing it. Because it's so jarring to me, I cannot believe that any--that a white community could have that kind of staggering dropout rate become just routine and normalized, and there's no "stop the press." There's no major movement. There's like--. It's like, this is the way it is. Like, that's it. Now, we know that if you don't graduate from high school these days, that's a pipeline to prison. You know, the correlation between incarceration and not, you know, and dropping out of high school, is like (hand motions). So, it's so alarming, it's become so normalized that I think it is the major crisis. It's the Civil Rights issue of our times. But I don't see it being treated that way. But it really is. It is--it is just stunning to me. Yeah. Story_ID: 42315 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I just want to keep telling our stories. And I think it really matters to have those stories. I know--I know the impact reading stories about black achievement, the impact it had on me at a really, you know, crucial point in my development, because, otherwise, you just think, "but we didn't contribute." You just think something's wrong. And there are so--like, there is no shortage of stories to be told, good and bad, about African-American life; that it's part of American life, it's part of American history, and without that, Americans will never know their history. You can't know your history without knowing African-American history. It's an incomplete story. We're such a crucial part of this country of its story. So, I mean, that's what I plan to do until I can't work anymore; tell our stories. Story_ID: 42316 Speaker 1: When you look back again at what you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: I think, you know, I'm such a self-taught person. I'm learning everything as I go. Like, I, you know, if I could do my first book over, I'd know more now than I knew when I was doing it. But I'm glad I did it when I did it. My second book, I knew even less about, you know, doing an epistolary collection and the whole issue with copyright, and all the things you have to go through. That was such a learning curve, but it helped me do Letters from Black America. And I--and if I did another book like that, I would know even more so. You know, I just think everything I do it's, hopefully, I'm doing it with the benefit of what I learned from the previous thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't know if I--you know, sure I would do it differently, 'cause I can--I know more. But that was how I got to know more. I did it. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's an interesting way to look at it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't think anybody else has ever said that, that I've interviewed. Story_ID: 42317 Speaker 1: But, tell me this now. We haven't asked--we haven't talked a lot about your family. We talked about you met your husband [Michael Nairne] and--well, tell us about your family. Speaker 2: My children and my husband. Well, my husband--so, when I met him, he was working in government, and we were married in 1983. We lived in Albany and moved to New York, and I don't remember--'89 [1989], I think. And we had our first child in 1991, a girl. I have two girls. And my children are amazing. They have every advantage I didn't have. They went to really great schools. They both went to Dalton [The Dalton School, New York, New York], and they are well-traveled, they--they're, like, I look at them and say, "Wow, this is--this is," you know, like, they owe a lot more to society than I feel I do, because they were given a whole lot more. And I think they know that. I hope they know that, you know, you don't just get that. You got to pay it forward, so. Let's hope. But they want to do great things. My older daughter is now a junior at Swarthmore--or she'll be a senior at Swarthmore, and she wants to do--right now, she says she wants to do global health policy. She cares a lot about--. I took her twice to Ghana with me and I think that was a real eye-opening experience for her. So she--she wants to do global health issues. Last semester, she spent a semester going to rural villages in China, South Africa and India doing global health assessments--I mean health assessments. And so, she wants to do something. You know, she wants to do something to give back. And my younger daughter's a dancer. She just graduated from high school. She was a fellowship student at the Alvin Ailey School, and phenomenal dancer. She got to meet--go to the White House and dance at the White House with Michelle Obama hosting. She's going to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] in the fall, and she's not sure what she wants to do yet. I mean, she wants to dance, but she's also good at math, and she likes teaching, so she loves young kids. So who knows. But good people, I would say. Compassionate, you know, they care about the world. They care about, you know. They kind of know that they, because of my family, it's no--we don't come from affluence. You know, my husband and I are the first college graduates in our families. And they know it's a big deal, you know, what they're getting to do compared to what we had anyway. So, hopefully they'll do something with that. Story_ID: 42318 Speaker 1: Okay. And, are your parents still alive? Speaker 2: My mother [Gloria Newkirk Spencer] died about four years ago. My father [Louis Newkirk] is alive. He's 81. Speaker 1: Okay. Is he--I guess he has an opinion about what you're doing, I guess, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, he's always so proud. But I think, you know, my dad, he's just proud. Like, he would be proud no matter what I was doing. Like, he--he's just proud. He's just a good guy. Yeah. But, yeah, he's kind of blown away by what I do. Like, he can't quite process it sometimes. It's like, "How do you do a book? How do you write a book?" Like, he doesn't get it. But he's not surprised by it either, you know. He kind of, like--he kind of expects us to do well. My youngest sister--half-sister, we have different mothers--she is a high school principal. And my older sister [Dorothy Moran], she got married really young, like eighteen, and had two kids by the time she was twenty or twenty one. But she also went into education. She now is the--. She recruits for St. John's Law School. So she's the assistant or associate admissions director. So it's funny we all ended up in education. And she is passionate about it, like, she goes to all the historically black colleges, and is like really big on diversity. My younger sister, she was a teacher in the Bronx [New York City, New York], and she, like bleeding heart, you know, was spending all her money on the kids and schoolbooks and decided she wanted to have a school. So she has a charter school because of all the bureaucracy that prevented her from doing what she thought needed to be done. So she's just a real passionate, you know, educator. So I think my father has a lot to do with that. Speaker 1: That sounds like it, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, well, is there anything else we need to talk about before-- Speaker 2: Oh, my God. Speaker 1: --before I ask my last question? I got one more question. Speaker 2: I can't imagine what else can it be. You took me (making whirling sounds) (laughs). You had me crying, laughing. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Well--. Speaker 2: What's your last question? I'm almost afraid. Story_ID: 42319 Speaker 1: Well, the last question, it's similar to legacy but a little--phrased a little bit differently. A little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that is: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. I don't know. That's a hard one. I think, you know, teaching is a great thing, because your students, you know, over time you start to learn from them. Like, my students, I have so many students. I've been here almost twenty years, and I have--you know, I go to their weddings, I go to their baby showers, I, you know, they become--they're part of my life. And I think that's probably the biggest part of what I do. Like, having, you know, more than just a class. It's like, it continues, you know, the education process is not like some box, you know. It's life. So, I don't know. I think the most--. See, you got me crying again. The most important relationships from teaching, you know, it starts in the classroom but continues. And Derrick-Derrick [Bell] was like that too. Yeah. I think, you know, all of his books didn't really matter who it was teaching. You know. I'm sorry. You got me thinking of Derrick. So, I don't know. I don't know if I'm answering your question. I didn't see that one coming..