 Story_ID: 179747 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns; observing is Dr. Jan Hutchinson. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: Sure. My name is Audrey Rone Peeples. P-E-E-P-L-E-S. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 22, 1939, in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired social service administrator. Speaker 1: And you were once the CEO of the-- Speaker 2: I was once the CEO of the YWCA Metropolitan Chicago and now I am the unpaid chair of the board for the YWCA of the USA. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August 25, 19--2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my home in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179748 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type, light weight questions that I am compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is ma'am what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, I like the spring time. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, I like to go to Arizona. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Good grief. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 179749 Speaker 1: Let me ask you some questions about your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think I'll ask you about your mother's side of the family, then your father's side. So I'm not gonna leave either one out-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Thelma Shepherd Rone. T-H-E-L-M-A, S-H-E-P-H-E-R-D, R-O-N-E. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in 1899 in Woodville, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your father's full name? Can you give us his name and spell it too? Speaker 2: My father's full name is John, J-O-H-N, Drayton, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N, Rone, R-O-N-E. He was born in 1900 in Haynesville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179750 Speaker 1: Now, how much do you know about your mother's [Thelma Shepherd Rone] side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can go back as far as her grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. What were their names? Speaker 2: Her grandparent's names were Berthold Layman, B-E-R-T-H-O-L-D, Layman, and her grandmother's name is Emaline Montgomery, E-M-A-L-I-N-E., Montgomery. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories passed down through the family about your ancestors and what they were doing? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. There are a lot of stories about my mother's side. My sister is writing a book, called 'Another Way Home.' It's gonna be published by the University of Chicago Press next year, and that has the full detail of my mother's, the history of my mother's family and some details of my father's, but mostly it's my mother's story. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any, do you have a good story or a couple of good stories you could tell us? Speaker 2: Well, you mean about my mother or my parents? Speaker 1: About your mother's side of the family. Not, not specifically about, bout, bout your mother, but about your ancestors. Are there ancestral stories? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's an interesting story that my mother's father was killed by lightning. He was out--he was a British plantation owner, and he was out in the fields with a young black man and he got under the tree because it was raining, and the young black man was not allowed to sit that close to him, so they young black man sat out in the open, and the light, the storm came up and the lightning struck the tree and killed my grandfather and knocked the young man out. And the young man when he came to told my mother and her brothers these stories about how the devil came up with a pitch fork and killed my father, my grandfather, but saved him. So, from that point on my mother was just petrified of storms. But, it was interesting to me that because the black guy couldn't sit under the tree he lived and my grandfather didn't. Speaker 1: That is--(unclear)--. So your grandfather was a plantation owner? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. He owned plantations in Mississippi, the largest plantations in the county. Speaker 1: Okay, all right this is in Woodville. Speaker 2: Woodville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Any other stories? Now, now that, that's a really, that's a, that's a unique story, yeah. Speaker 1: Unique story, yeah. There are lots of unique stories about my mother's family in the sense that, you know, in those days people couldn't marry and my mother somehow and her brothers got their status in the community because their British father first of all gave him his name and built a house for them and for their grandmother. And her mother was killed in childbirth having one of his children, and he built a house for her grandmother and for those children to be reared in and educated them and paid for them and all of that. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: There's a, it's a different twist on those southern miscegenated stories, I think. Story_ID: 179751 Speaker 1: Well what about your mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone]. What, what was life like for her? Speaker 2: Well, you know, she grew up in the South and when she was fourteen or fifteen she moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and went to school and worked in New Orleans for a while and then moved to Chicago [Illinois]. And she had a brother who came to Chicago, and she moved here to be with her brother and that's where she met my father [John Drayton Rone]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and did she have a chance to go to school or? Speaker 2: She went to school in New Orleans, and then she went to school here for a while. She went to night school. She went to about eleventh grade. She never graduated high school, but she went to night school at Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], which is where we all went to high school, so it's kind of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but, that was pretty much what she did. Then, she came here went to work, lived with some relatives. And my uncle decided to pass for white, so he moved off in another direction and she moved off in this direction, met my father at one of those clubs where people used to, where people from the South would get together and introduce people. And she met my father and married him in 1924. Speaker 1: Okay, now your uncle who passed for white did he ever come back to the father or did he-- Speaker 2: He was always in the family. He was very much a part of my mother's life. He would bring his children to see us. He bought property in the western suburbs, and when he died and left that property to my mother the, the deeds had restricted covenants on them saying that no people of color shall own this land. Little did they know that he was a person of color, and he owned the land. So, when my mother went to sell the land we had to get the deeds, and these deeds were clearly articulated that said people of color shall not own this land. Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that's a feature of, you know, the, I guess the real estate world around Chicago that is, I mean, some features, I mean a lot of homes have that, those restrictive covenants, right, you can't sell to a black person, you can't-- Speaker 2: It was really sad because it was in, I mean the thing is, I mean it was an interesting kind of story because the land was in what is now Wheaton and Glen Ellyn and Downers Grove. And my mother when she got the land we were poor, couldn't afford the taxes on the land. Story_ID: 179752 Speaker 1: My parents [Thelma Shepherd Rone & John Drayton Rone] then sold the land rather than lose it for taxes, and they used that money to send us to college, so that was our college fund. Speaker 2: Okay. Tell us about your, your father [John Drayton Rone]? What, what about his ancestors. What, what do you know about them? Speaker 1: My father is the youngest of twelve, and his mother was a Choctaw Indian, and his father was a black man, and his father, his grandfather had been a carriage man on a plantation, you know who drove the carriages, and so his father learned to read as a result of that. And so his father was one of the few people who could read and so he became a school teacher in this one-room schoolhouse in Shongaloo, Louisiana, and-- Speaker 2: Shongaloo. Speaker 1: Shongaloo. Speaker 2: Can you spell that? Speaker 1: I think it is S-H-O-N-G-A-L-O-O, Shongaloo, Louisiana. It's outside of Haynesville [Louisiana]. It's a very small time, and so there was a one-room schoolhouse that they named after my father's father because he was the first school teacher in the school. It was a one-room schoolhouse, but he was-- Speaker 2: Your, your father's father had been a coachman? Speaker 1: Yes, my father's father had been the coachman and so he taught his children to read, and his original name was John Fryer Finche [ph.] and at the end of slavery he decided he didn't want that to be his name and so he just named himself John Drayton Rone, and named by father John Drayton Rone. There is a Drayton plantation in South Carolina, and he had read about that and so he decided he wanted to have this aristocratic name, so he named himself John Drayton Rone. He went from John Fryer Finche to John Drayton Rone and then named my father John Drayton Rone, and he named my uncle Fred Douglas Rone, so that my uncle was Frederick Douglas. But, those were the kind of stories about my father and his family. Speaker 2: Now, where does the name Rone come from? Speaker 1: We don't know, we don't know, and it's spelled Rone. It's not like the river Rhone, so we don't know. But, I was reading this book about--it's really interesting my sister gave me this book about slaves, and there's a John Drayton Rone in the book and he lived on the Drayton plantation. Now, we don't think he's related to us, but it's just interesting that it is the exact same name. It's in the book, 'Slavery to Freedom,' you know the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, John Hope Franklin. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: You think he may have met, you know, is it possible that he might have met John Drayton Rone? Speaker 1: I have no idea. I have no idea. We have all these information on my mother's side because my father was the youngest of twelve, and a lot of his brothers and sisters were dead of tuberculosis by the time he was born, so that in my lifetime I only knew my uncle Fred and my two aunts. My father had a sister, Betsy King [ph.] and another older, whose husband went off and joined Marcus Garvey and left her and her children. He went off--you know when Marcus Garvey was trying to get people to go back to Africa, well he went to Liberia and never to be heard from again. Speaker 2: His name was King? Speaker 1: His name was Walker. Speaker 2: Walker. Speaker 1: He named his son Marcus Garvey Walker. His name was Noady [ph.] Walker. Speaker 2: So he, okay, 1920 I guess or some, '21 [1921]. Speaker 1: It was about. My auntie had about six or seven children, and he decided he was going to go over there and he went and never came back. So, after a while she had declared dead, but we never knew what happened to him. As was a child growing up, these are all stories I heard about him going off to join Marcus Garvey. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: And that was my father's sister, one of his sisters. I only knew the two sisters, the brother, and him. Those were the only four that were alive when I came along. Story_ID: 179753 Speaker 1: Okay, so your father [John Drayton Rone] was born in Haynesville, Louisiana? Speaker 2: Haynesville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Now, now did, did he have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: He went to school, I think, to about the ninth grade, and then he, he, he, as I said he was the youngest and everybody was dead and so his sister reared him, his older sister who moved to St. Louis [Missouri]. But, he moved to Oklahoma with her, they moved to Oklahoma, and he lived in Oklahoma and worked a little bit and then in 1919 when he was 19 he came to Chicago [Illinois] to join his older brother, Fred, and the two--he lived with his older brother who had moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: That's in 1919? Speaker 2: 1919 he moved here. Speaker 1: Now, did he talk about the riot or was he here when the riot? Speaker 2: Oh yeah he talked a lot about the riot. I mean he, he was, he was a history buff. My father loved to read. He was probably one of the brightest men I've ever known and so that he was in to--he called himself a race man. He was really into what was then called Negro history, and he was all into the history of Chicago in terms of the black belt and what happened and how it happed and why it happened, so that we always had a historical perspective of the racial situation in Chicago. You know, he was always cautious. I mean the big thing about him is that he could read, and he loved the fact that he would read and so he read four newspapers a day. At that time, Chicago had the [Chicago] Sun-Times, the [Chicago] Tribune, and the [Chicago] Daily News, and the Herald-American [Chicago Herald-American], the evening American he called it, and he subscribed to four papers and he'd just read those papers and remind you that this is what happened and this is how it happened and took great pride in the fact that he knew how to get around the city because he thought that was real important and so as a result all of us loved to know things. We all are veracious readers. We love to know real facts that nobody else knows, and I'm sure that's a direct result of my father saying you need to know these things 'cause knowledge is power. And he loved particularly being able to get around the city. I mean, you would say to him like I live at 93rd and Hoyne and he say hmmm Hoyne, that's 2100 west and 9300 south, and so he loved being able--because a lot of black people couldn't get jobs because they didn't know how to get there. So, he knew how to get everywhere there was to get on the streetcar, and he took great pride, enormous pride in that. It's just kind of interesting when I think about it. Story_ID: 179754 Speaker 1: Now, what did he [Peeples' father, John Drayton Rone] say about the riot, do you remember? Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember a lot about it, but he was scared. I mean, he, he said people were afraid to go and he was--and I don't think it was the 1919 riots, but when the boy [Eugene Williams] was killed over at the beach-- Speaker 1: That was 1919. Speaker 2: Was that 1919? Well, he used to talk about that a lot and how people were really afraid to go out on the street and you had to be careful and how it was just really scary times. He was scared, and he said you know you just mind your own business and did what you need to do. But, my father had a certain sense of arrogance, and so he said, you know, he had to check himself out because he didn't want to do the wrong thing and get himself killed, that he hadn't come all the way to Chicago [Illinois] to get himself killed. But, he said it was scary times on the street. The police were crazy, the people were crazy, and it was a very dangerous time when that boy got killed over there on the beach. I didn't realize that was in 1919. I thought that was in 1931. Speaker 1: No, that's 1919. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, did he live in the black belt then? Speaker 2: He lived in the black belt. He lived at 32nd and Vernon. His uncle had a house there, one of those greystone, I don't mean his uncle, his brother. My uncle Fred lived there. They both worked at Armstrong paint company, and my uncle got him a job and that's where he worked and later in life he worked for the Mealy Printing Press [Co.] is where he retired from when he died. But, they, they lived at 32nd and Vernon, so they lived in the heart of the black belt. You know at that time black people didn't live on the other side of 47th Street, and so the black belt was thick and fat, but he, and black people didn't necessarily live west of State Street. You know it was like State Street to the lake, 22nd Street to 47th Street and that was it and then you had all the stores on 47th Street, you know the South Center store. Story_ID: 179755 Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your first childhood memory was? Speaker 2: My first childhood memory was probably going to kindergarten. I mean I was really excited about going to kindergarten because my sister is three years older than I, and she was going to school and I was, I'm the youngest of five, and so the fact that I now was gonna go to school and so to be one of the big girls; that's what I remember. The school was right down the street. We lived at 29th and Calumet [Chicago, Illinois], and the school was at 27th and Calumet, 2641, and I could walk to school. It was a safe time, you know, when you could walk to school. I had practice run. You know I had gone down there with my sister, and so I--that's really my first memory of just being able to go to school. I was five. Speaker 1: Okay, now how many brother and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: There were five of us. I was the youngest of five. I had two brothers and two sisters, and we're all three years apart because my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] believed if you breastfed your children it was a birth control mechanism, so she breastfed her children until they were two and then when she stopped breastfeeding she always got pregnant. So, that was her form of birth control (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179756 Speaker 1: Tell us about the some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: We--I lived in a great neighborhood. I lived at 29th Street in a four-story building. It was 2829 Calumet, and we had great neighbors. We had, I mean, it was just a wonderful neighborhood. You were totally safe outside. In my day, you know, the ice man would come and so you had those sounds of the city that Oscar Brown talks about, the knife sharpener used to ride his bicycle there and sharpen your knives. The vegetable man used to come screaming, the vegetable man and scream up what he had, "I got watermelon, corn, tomatoes," and people would go down there and buy their vegetables from them and take them up. You had children jumping rope. We lived across the street from a cinder place where the city would put the cinders, and my husband laughed at me later in life because I never thought about it. I used to call it the hill, and I, I would tell him we lived across from the hill and we did this on the hill and we did that on the hill, and he was from Pennsylvania and so he kept saying well where do you have hills in Chicago [Illinois], what are you talking about hills. "Oh we had the hill." We called it the hill because in the winter time it would get covered with snow, and we would take our sleds over there and slide down the hill, so to us it was a hill and you know there are a lot of greystones, a lot of brownstones, a lot of kids. So, the street was, it's full of people and happenings and smells and people cooking, people with their windows up. It was a great neighborhood, absolutely great neighborhood. A lot of people had friends that, people had brothers and sisters and so somebody who would be a friend of your sisters, her sister would be a friend of yours, and so that you had this natural groupings of kids. So, that's the kind of neighborhood it was. Story_ID: 179757 Speaker 1: Now what kind of little girl were you? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: I was really--I was a little girl who didn't like to do "girl" things. I was very active. We had a playground down the street and at that time the city playground had sports competitions. I think the reason that I've been successful as a business woman, you know all those books that people write about women who spend a lot of time with their fathers and do boys things are more successful managers, I think in my case that's true. I love baseball, and my father [John Drayton Rone] used to--some of my happiest times with my father is he used to take me to the White Sox baseball game and so today now all these people are Cub fans, all these yuppies, I don't understand how anybody who grew up on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] can be a Cub's fan. My father and I would have long discussions about those terrible Cubs. I mean, my father and uncle used to have huge arguments about the baseball teams, and I would be there listening, you know, and in going to--we used to sit out, you know, just sit outside. It was two or three dollars, real cheap to take your kids to the baseball game. So, I would spend time with my father at the baseball game and I ran track and in those days not many girls ran track. The pro, the city playground sponsored events. I mean, they had horseshoe tournaments. They had softball teams. I was a pitcher on the softball team. My mother saved all my metals that our team got for coming in first or second. They'd give you a gold medal for first, a silver for second, and a bronze for third. And we pitched horseshoes. We had girl's horseshoes. And the playground was the center of our lives. We didn't go to summer camp. The playground had events, and so that's what I did. I played baseball. I would not play, not baseball, we had a softball team. We played with a fourteen inch ball. We had hopscotch--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Fourteen inches. Speaker 2: A fourteen inch was a girl's size. The boys played sixteen and we played with a fourteen inch ball. And the playground had a maypole. You know you go down there and ride the maypole. They had events where you could make rugs. Then we'd do these hook things and you took rugs. And at Halloween time they'd have a huge Halloween parade where you put on your, your mother would make your Halloween outfit and you would go down there and they'd have--and now when I think about how incredibly dangerous it was we would make lanterns and put candles--the lanterns would be made out of crepe paper--and we would put candles in the lantern and we would have a lantern parade around the neighborhood, and the merchants would give the playground donuts and cider and stuff like that and so when you did your trick-or-treating you didn't go to people's houses. All of the stuff was there in the playground and so you'd go down there in your Halloween outfit and drink your cider and eat your donuts and then you'd get all this trick-or-treat stuff. It was great. I mean, that was just great. The playground was the center of activity. So, those were the kinds of things I did. I was a sports person. Speaker 1: Now, now what playground is this? Speaker 2: John B. Drake Elementary [Chicago, Illinois]. Now, they have a--they, they rebuilt the school. They built a new school there and they put the school where the playground used to be, but we would go--that was my sort of first interaction with white kids because we would go and have tournaments. I mean, there were skating tourna, rolling skating. We had roller skating, relay races, track, softball tournaments, and we would go all over the city and play these other teams and you know they were doing the same thing we would do 'cause our neighborhood was a black neighborhood. We had one white family that lived in the neighborhood for years, and they were the same kinds, you know, the mother, the daughter, the children. They lived at, right next to the playground, the Martins, and they, you know, everybody had--I had Carol Martin and Anthony Martin in my class. Everybody had a Martin in their class, and they were the one white kid who were in your class. They lived with their old Italian grandmother and they--she would sit up on the porch in her laced Mantu as she wore black all the time, her little black Mantu and her black laced clothes, her shawl, and she'd sit on the porch and watch the neighbors go by. It was a great neighborhood, just great. I loved that neighborhood. Speaker 1: It sounds like it. The park district seemed to be, seem, seemed to really highly organized, I guess from all of the tournaments and all the citywide events. Speaker 2: This was the city playgrounds. It wasn't the park district. It's a difference. Speaker 1: Not yet, okay. All-- Speaker 2: See Mann Park was a park district. These were city playgrounds. This was a program that was not part of the park district. When I grew up, the park district police were not part of the Chicago police. The park district had its own police and so this was the City of Chicago playgrounds, and they would have a woman there who's always my role model who had, who had gone to George Williams College [of Aurora University, Aurora, Illinois], one of those places where she was a recreation major. And then they'd have a man who did activities for the boys. They had activities for the boys. They called them shelter houses, and they would have this building in the middle of the playground, and the staff sat in there, men and women. They'd be there from 9 to 5 and you'd find them there and the playground was open and then when it got dark the playground was closed you'd had to go home. But, it was, it was the City of Chicago, it wasn't the park district. Speaker 1: Okay, so there were a lot of opportunities for girls to do things-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --then too as well as boys. Speaker 2: And Shoop school [Shoop Academy of Math and Science, Chicago, Illinois], which is where my friend Jan lived in that neighborhood they had the, the best track team in the country. There was a woman there named Ada Horney [ph.] who was, I think she ran in the Olympics or something, but anyway the thing that we always hated about them is they had spike shoes to run track, and we didn't have spikes. We ran in our gym shoes. But, they had the best track team. They were well organized. We always knew when we played Shoop, which for us, and I was down at 29th street, Shoop was out on 110th or 111th somewhere way out there, which seemed forever to me, we always knew they were gonna win track meets (laughter). Story_ID: 179758 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: What's interesting for us, my sister has this in her book too, neither of our parents went to church. Our parents [Thelma Shepherd Rone & John Drayton Rone] were, believed in church, but they didn't go. They made us go, and we had to get up and go to church. And my sister and I used to go in the beginning to the Methodist church, it was Hartzell Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois], and my older sister was dating this guy who was Catholic. He was--his family was Panamanian and he was born in Cuba, and she became Catholic because he was Catholic, and she ultimately married him and was married to him for fifty years. But, anyway and so the rest of us became Catholic because she was Catholic and we went to church with her, so we became Catholic. But, because there were so few Catholics in the neighborhood, in the summertime the kids in our neighborhood used to go Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] for bible school, and so we went to bible school and we would get up and go to church. So, you could go to any church you wanted. My brother started hanging out with some boys who went to Pilgrim [Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], and so he went to Pilgrim for a while. We were all baptized Catholics, but we could go to any church we wanted, and my sister became a big deal at the Methodist church. She loved going over to the Methodist church. So, we'd go to mass and then we would go to the other churches and see what was going on. But, our parents were not religious. They never listened to religious radio stations. My sister and I often talked about how that has affected our lives in the sense that we never listened to the church music on Sunday. We just never did. It was not part of our growing up. So, it was a piece of the culture, that real piece of the, that people really from those religious homes that we've always felt that we missed. Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of your home? Speaker 2: The big part of our home was a radio. I told you my father loved--he listened to the news all day long. Our radio was on all day on the news channels, and the other things that he listened to were crime shows. Story_ID: 179759 Speaker 1: I was saying off camera that your father [John Drayton Rone] sent you all to church, but your father and mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] didn't go. Speaker 2: My father and mother did not go. They never--they sort of, I mean, they taught us prayers. I mean, we had to learn all of our prayers at night. My mother would say our prayers with us before we went to bed, but they never went, they never believed in organized religion, neither one of them. Speaker 1: You said your father is distrustful of ministers. Speaker 2: My father was distrustful of ministers. He just always was questioning that the minister was always driving around in a big car and the poor people were going to his church and they weren't getting any better off, but they were tithing or giving him money, and so he was very non-trusting of ministers. He thought they were scam artists for the most part and so, but he insisted that we have a religious education. He thought that was real important, and he himself knew the Bible, knew Bible stories. My mother as a child had learned a lot of Bible stories. She was always going in some churches where they had the kids perform all the time, and until she died at 86 she could recite some of the biblical things or some of those speeches or some of those things she had done when she was a child. Story_ID: 179760 Speaker 1: Now we were discussing the radio too before we stopped, and what was your favorite radio show? Speaker 2: When I was a kid, believe it or not I loved 'Fibber McGee and Molly.' Speaker 1: Okay, now explain what that show is for those who are listening to this and don't know. Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a family show where Digger O'Dell the friendly undertaker [The Life of Riley]--it was sort of--it was sort of an early day 'The Jackie Gleason Show' or whatever that was Ralph Kramden and his wife. He lived with his wife, Molly, and the stories always rotated around their house and what was going on in their house. They had all these characters like Digger O'Dell, and I actually liked 'Amos 'n' Andy' on the radio. My father [John Drayton Rone] used to listen to that too, because my father had pointed out that there were a lot of lessons to be learned from 'Amos 'n' Andy.' You know Amos was the cab driver, and Andy was the buffoon and I mean there were all these characters, Sapphire was the fish wife and her mother, you know they had madam, madam queen, and there were all these characters who were in the neighborhood and you know you could identify with them. Speaker 1: King, Kingfish--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: It was king fish, of course, there was Kingfish, and Kingfish was always outwitting somebody or you know always getting something done and Andy played the nut role and rolled his eyes, well you didn't see his eyes, but you could assume he was rolling his eyes and always won. So, the king fish almost always came out on the top, you know. He always had some scheme going. There was always something going on and so after it was over we'd always talk about now here's what was going on and here's what it meant. So, I liked those radio shows. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We used to listen to 'Inner Sanctum' and the squeaking door, creaky door. With the lights out. My father would turn all the lights out and we'd sit there and listen to this spooky story. Those were the radio shoes we listened to. We never listened to the soap operas because as I said my mother was hard of hearing, so we never listened to some of those shows that came on that a lot of ladies listen to. Speaker 1: Your father was interested so-- Speaker 2: That's right and we did what my father was interested in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a very--my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] was very much her own person, but we had sort of a male-dominated household. Story_ID: 179761 Speaker 1: Tell us about school. Now what school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to John B. Drake Elementary [Chicago, Illinois] from kindergarten through eighth grade. I got double promoted in seventh grade and so I graduated--at that time you could graduate six months, you know, they had January graduations and June graduations, and so I got double promoted from seven A to eight A, which meant all of the friends that I had gone to school with my whole life got left behind, left behind me and I went into a new classroom and graduated in the winter time. So, I graduated in January of '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was school like for you? I guess--I suppose you did well since you, they, they elevated you. Speaker 2: I loved school. I loved school because we had a very interesting school. Again from a black perspective, we had a lot of black teachers. You know, when I went to college I met black kids who said they never had any black teachers and this and that. About 80 percent of our teachers were black, and so that we had role models. We had--I felt very strongly that the teachers cared about what happened to us and clearly role models for us saying you can be anything you wanna be and sort of continued to hear that kind of affirmation. And the white teachers who were in the school seemed to like us too. Most of them were Irish. You know at that time a lot of Irish--they were either Irish or Jews and a lot of Irish and Jews weren't into teaching and the black middle class went into teacher, and so we had teachers who cared about us and told us we were gonna make it, you know. I never once heard a teacher tell or call a kid stupid or--now we did have a rumor the kids didn't achieve and the kids affectionately called it the dummy room. And the kids who were in that room would say to you I'm in the dummy room, but they didn't seem to think there was anything wrong with being in the dummy room. It was like I'm in the dummy room and I'm gonna be in the dummy room until I get to be fifteen and then they're gonna put me out of school. But, they were--we just sort of accepted them as part of the kids, you know, they were in the dummy room, but they were okay they were nice kids, they played ball, they did this. So, I liked school. I really liked school. I was challenged by it. And then our school got over-crowded and so the put us in half days and you either went to school from eight to twelve or you went to school from twelve to four. And I liked going from eight to twelve all the time because then you get out of school at twelve o'clock and you come home and have lunch and you had the whole rest of the day except you couldn't go to the playground because they kids who were at school would be looking out the window. So, you couldn't go to the program, I mean the playground, until the kids were out at four, but I loved going to school a half a day. I liked school. You know if you finished your work early they had these things called units, and you could sit and read and you would read the stories and answer the questions and so you were always spent--your time was well occupied. You just if you finished your work you got extra work. You got extra credit for doing the units. So, I liked it a lot. Story_ID: 179762 Speaker 1: Who are some of the teachers that, that you remember that kind of stand out? Speaker 2: I remember a couple. One I remember clearly was the eighth grade teacher who's sort of a historical figure in the school. Her name is Grace Frederick [ph.], and Ms. Frederick she never married. She played the piano. She was a wonderful pianist. She probably could have been a concert pianist. She would close the door and play the piano for hours, not for hours, but for an hour. And she made the young men when girls came in the room the young man had to stand up. She was very much a pre, you know she wore the same brown surge suit from the time that my older sister went there who is thirteen years older than I, 'til I graduated. Ms. Frederick always had on her brown surge suit with a little cameo at her neck. Speaker 1: Every day? Speaker 2: Every day. She had two. She had a brown one and a blue one. They were the shiniest suits you've ever seen in your life, but she wore them every day. She came to school in her suit, and somebody told me later in life I went up there to see her and she wasn't there, that she was in a nursing home on 31st Street, but she had died when I went there 'cause I really wanted to see her. She just was a wonderful teacher. She cared about the kids. They taught them manners. She taught us culture, I mean, she would play her concert pieces and tell you what they are and what they meant. She would correct your grammar. She talked about how important diction was. She was a wonderful teacher, and I had another teacher when I got promoted, double promoted, Mr. White. His name was William White [ph.]. And I got double promoted in his classroom and as I look back as an adult I realize that he knew that I was kind of, you know, shy. I didn't know anybody in the class and so he, he did a lot of things to make me feel whole and feel like okay you don't know these people, you'll meet people, it will be okay because I had gone to school with these kids my whole life and now I'm in a classroom--I knew the kids, but they weren't my classmates and now I had a whole bunch of new classmates for six months. So, he was a--I remember one other one a woman named Margaret Underwood [ph.] and I always had trouble with my stomach. I always had a nervous stomach and I'd throw up a lot and one time I threw up and passed out, and she picked me up and carried me to the principal's office. She carried me. I remember that because she was pregnant, and, I mean that's the kind of people that were in the school. They were great, great people. Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: I was about seven or eight, and I remember her so clearly. She had long hair. Her name was Margaret Underwood. Actually one day when I was looking through the phone book I was looking for her too, but you know women change their names and you can't--I think Underwood was her married name because she was pregnant, but she carried me and I remember that so clearly. I remember the smell of the vomit. I remember everything about it, and her just, she just picked me up and carried me to the principal's office. So, those were the kinds of teachers we had. Story_ID: 179763 Speaker 1: Well tell us about high school. Now you went to Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I went to Wendell Phillips High School. I got there--my sister who is three years old, was five years ahead of me in school 'cause she got double promoted several times, so when I got to high school there was nobody there, none of my family, but the rest of us had all followed in the footsteps of--we all went to Phillips High School and then my first year at Phillips High School we moved out of the neighborhood and we moved to Kimbark, 66th and Kimbark, and so I went to high school and I didn't know--most of the kids from my--see the other thing is a lot of kids who would graduate in mid-year were kids who had fallen behind a year and were held back, so a lot of them went to vocational schools. They went to Dunbar [Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois]. So, I was the only kid from my school who went to Phillips. So when I got there I did not know anybody either and I was very short. I was very slow developing, so I was probably about 4 feet 8 and I weighed about eighty pounds, so I was short and skinny. Speaker 1: You were little--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: So, when I got there I looked like a little girl. I was short and little and all the other girls were like teenage girls, so that was kind of problematic. But the thing is I thought I was smart and so I thought okay I'm going to achieve by getting good grades and doing my own thing. And a lot of the teachers that I had had known my sister and so you know they were again identifying me with my sister. So, that was interesting 'cause she was a lot smarter than I was (laughter). Speaker 1: You were pretty smart you were there early, so okay. Speaker 2: Well I was there, I was only there six months early, but you know, I mean--so I just sort of, you know, made my own way. I made friends because I was a lot shyer then than I am now about meeting new people because I was very comfortable in my zone, but coming out of a zone. So, I met kids who had gone to other schools, [Daniel Hale] Williams Elementary [Chicago, Illinois] and they fit in Phillips Elementary and so we all met there at Phillips High School. So, pretty quickly I made my own friends. I joined a couple of clubs. I joined the Spanish club and things like that. Story_ID: 179764 Speaker 1: And the teachers at Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, one of the women that I met there I was so impressed with her as a woman who--Ms. Toles [Virginia F. Toles] was her name. She was the librarian and her, her brother was a famous judge [Judge Edward B. Toles] in Chicago [Illinois]. Her name was T-O-L-E-S, Clara. I think her name was Clara Toles, but anyway Ms. Toles had the Negro history club and since my father was very interested in Negro history, that's what it was called, I joined the Negro history club. And Ms. Toles gave us the total background, and I think the kids at Phillip High School probably knew more about Negro history than any kids who come out of normal schools because this club--I mean we all, we would go back and talk about Haile Selassie and how that worked and she presented slavery in a whole different way and so that we learned a lot about Negro history that wasn't in the history books we were reading. You know, we had, you know the '60s [1960s] hadn't come yet, so that the history books didn't reflect our contributions, which she told us about everybody. So, you know, we learned about E. Franklin Frazier, Alain Locke-- and people like that, people didn't know about, but Ms. Toles knew about. Virginia Toles that was her name, not Clara Toles, Virginia Toles. Speaker 2: So did that--did you feel at the time that you were getting information that nobody else, I mean really felt-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I really felt good about that because it was sort of different than we read in the history books, and so we would be in history class and somebody would say, "Well Ms. Toles said," you know, and the teacher would be a little taken aback because it was in the book, and so we were getting some mixed messages but we trusted Ms. Toles and we felt that she was, you know, doing that. She had a real influence on my life. She and a woman named Margaret Donahue were the people who--Margaret Donahue was a south side Irish woman who taught history. She lived in South Shore and she cared a lot about the kids at Philips, you know, you really felt that. She was another one of those people who kept saying, you know, don't do this. You know I went to the prom when I was a junior, a guy who was a like a rogue. I was an usher at a big event, a spring event, and he just got--I was all dressed up for the event and he came up and said would you like to go with prom with me and I said well yeah. You know, nobody had never ever invited me to the prom and I go out with this guy and Mrs. Donahue came up to me and said now you know you don't want to be with this guy (laughter). What are you doing here with him? I mean, she cared that much. And she said now when this prom is over you go right home. You make him take you right home, which I did, and that's the kind of people, you know, they were really--she was sort of shocked first of all that I was with him, but he asked and I said yes. I was happy to have a chance to go, and, but that's the kind of people we had. I mean, there were teachers who really cared about us. So, that high school was a wonderful experience for me. I became the editor of the year book. I was the editor of the newspaper and that was just a sort of interesting kind of experience. And we had a guy there who was a great English teacher who gave me my come-uppance. He was the first president of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]. His name was Maceo Bowie and I was in his class and I worked really, really hard. He was an English teacher, and my first grade was a G+ and we had superior, excellent, good, fair, and a G was fair, and I was appalled. I mean I had, I got all E's and S's. I got excellent and superiors, and I got this G+ and I went to him I was in tears, and I said Mr. Bowie I don't understand this. How could I get a D+, and he said the man who wrote the book is superior, I teach the class and I'm excellent, and you're the best student in this class, so you get a G+ and I, I was just dumbfounded and I rode him and rode him and rode him, and the next marking period he gave me an E. And I was such a smart aleck I went to him and said well know I'm as good as you huh Mr. Bowie, and he was livid. But, he was such a good English teacher, and he was hard. Every time I could take his class I took his class. I had him for English 1, English 3, English 6, and English 8. I mean, I would just do my whole program so that I could get Mr. Bowie as an English teacher. He was a great, great teacher, great guy and then he left that high school and went on to become the president of Kennedy-King. Story_ID: 179765 Speaker 1: Now, is Cecelia Bowie over there related to this Mr. Bowie? Speaker 2: I don't know her. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His name was Maceo Thaddeus Bowie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was not married, so I don't think it's his wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, she might somehow be related to him. Speaker 1: Should would be, she would be the age of a daughter or somebody--(unclear)--I think or-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't-- Speaker 1: --or some other relative--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He wasn't married. I don't know if he has any children, but he went to the University of Wisconsin is where he had gone to college, but he was from the South. But, he's an excellent, excellent teacher, excellent. Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: Okay all right, so it was English? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was excellent. He was absolutely excellent. When I got to college, I felt really prepared because he had us do term papers, and we had to do bibliographies and footnoting and all that stuff and I actually the first year I was in college I went back and told him that, that I felt so prepared. I was one of the few minority students who didn't have to take rhetoric 100, which was a non-credit class when you got done with the unified because I could write and it was through his efforts and I knew how to do research, I knew how to write, I knew how to do bibliography, I knew how to do all that, and how to footnote a term paper. And he kept saying one day you guys gonna thank me for this, and he was right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a skill that, that's invaluable-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --for whatever you do to learn how to write when you're in high school. Speaker 2: Yeah write when you're in high school and you know I would sometimes give him my editorials and ask him to read them, even though we had a woman who was a journalism teacher, before I would--she was the sponsor of the newspaper. Before I turned them in, I'd ask him to look at them and tell me if I had any grammatical errors or anything like that. He was great. I mean, it was a real loss, I think, to the school when he--I was gone, but I, you know, I know he went over the Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois]. I think he died. I think he had cancer. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179766 Speaker 1: The other things I was involved in high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, I wanted to be more round--I was in the GAA, which is the Girls Athletic Association. I was in the Honors Society. I was in the Spanish Club. Those were the major activities. Speaker 2: Did you play any major girl sports in high school? Speaker 1: We didn't have any sports teams for girls. Speaker 2: Not, not even track or volleyball or anything like that. Speaker 1: They didn't have track, volleyball. They didn't have any of that. You could do it in gym, but there were no girl's teams. Once I stopped going to the playground and once I got to be about fifteen--well we moved first of all. Now I used to go back kind of to, you know, see what was happening in the playground, but when girls got to be thirteen and fourteen they stopped doing sports because there were no organized activities for girls beyond that age. Now, as I said, we had the Girls Athletic Association, but that was just something that you did. You know there were the girls who were the modern dancers, and they had, they had the modern dance club and had the GAA, which was the Girls Athletic Association, but we didn't have any teams. It was just a club. Speaker 2: So, what did you do in the club? Did you-- Speaker 1: We did do much of anything. We talked about health, you know, fitness, but we didn't do any exercises. We didn't have a team. We didn't have--it was just a club. There were no athletics for girls at that age. That's why I was so happy Title 9 came that said they had to provide athletics for girls because girls didn't get sports scholarships. Girls didn't do anything. There was just, there was nothing. Story_ID: 179767 Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] towards the end of high school did you have a clear idea of what you wanted to pursue as a career or where you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: I've never, well, I only applied to about three colleges. No, it didn't occur to me. I was in a band. I played the French horn. No, it didn't occur to me. I knew I was gonna go to college, you know. I just sort of didn't kind of like know where I was gonna go. So, I got a scholarship to Knoxville College, Tennessee, and my father [John Drayton Rone] thought it'd be a bad idea for me to go to the South. He had all these bad feelings about the South. Because I had run track and my father heard at the time Wilma Rudolph was running, and my father would look at Wilma Rudolph and say that could have been you, that could have been you. You could have been Wilma Rudolph because I ran track in the playground. But, he didn't want me to go to the South to school, so Tennessee State was out. And so I applied to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, also "U of I"] and that's where I went. It was close to home, wasn't that far away, but it was far 'cause you know you had a dorm, so I went to the U of I, Champaign. Story_ID: 179768 Speaker 1: Okay, now how'd you like that? Now, that's-- Speaker 2: It was a strange experience at first because it [the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] was a large--I mean, there were very few black kids down there, and the time I went you had to send in your picture to get a roommate and so I sent in my picture and they assigned me a roommate, and she was a junior and I was a freshmen. So, I went down for a freshmen orientation. I was the only black freshmen in my dorm. So, all these white girls were there and a lot of them were Jewish girls who had come from Sullivan [High School] and Senn High School in Chicago [Illinois], and the other were southern Illinois girls from towns like Ohio, Illinois, Greenville, places I had never heard of, places--and my roommate wasn't there because it was freshmen orientation, and she was a junior, so I got to know them and some of them became friends. And then when the school started and the black girls came, then I realized that the black girls kind of hung around by themselves, and I had made these friends with these white girls so it was a very interesting time. Speaker 1: So, how did you resolve that? Did you, did you-- Speaker 2: Well, I was gonna pledge a sorority and then I decided I really didn't want to pledge a sorority. I--you know the whole--I've never been a person who can conform a lot and so first I pledged and then I said this is just not working for me. You know they would come and knock on your dorm door and come and get you in the middle of the night and say you gotta go to the store or you gotta do this, you gotta do that, and I thought oh I don't think so. So, and some of the girls thought that was funny. They were still friends of mine, and then I had a roommate who was a sorority girl, and she had moved back from the sorority house because she was about the flunk out of school. It was just, you know, taking up so much of her time. So, she became my second roommate, and we were roommates. So, it was an interesting experience, but it was--they were just not, you know, you'd go to the student union on Friday that's where people would be playing cards and stuff like that, but there were not enough of us to make a real difference on the campus and especially for men. I mean, they said one time there was an article in the Daily Illini that said there were for white girls there were ten men for every one girl because whites traditionally send their boys to college. For black girls, there is one man for every ten black women 'cause we traditionally in those days sent our women to college, so the dating scene wasn't too swift down there. Story_ID: 179769 Speaker 1: Okay, so see now who were some of the professors and--or people that you ran into were down University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, also "U of I"] who made an impact on you? Speaker 2: Actually very few. There was a guy, David Riesman who wrote 'The Lonely Crowd.' He taught at the U of I. There was a guy named Orie Eigsti who was my, botany professor who used to proudly say that he, he discovered the seedless watermelon. But, I didn't have, I mean, I just went to school down there. I mean, I didn't--it didn't have any--I don't think the professors had any interest in you. You know, you were just there. It was big. You would, you know, you had the big lectures and then you'd go into the small groups for your meetings, but didn't think that it was--I didn't have any favorite anything down there. I just went to my classes and came home. It wasn't-- Speaker 1: So, you didn't have-- Speaker 2: --a friendly environment. And I was an English major and I thought I was gonna teach school. I got out of college and decided that other things were going on, so I never did, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179770 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in what, what year? Speaker 2: '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay, you started-- Speaker 2: Graduated in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, also "U of I"] in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started college in '57 [1957], yeah okay. Now, were you when you were in college did you, were you paying attention to what was going on with the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: It wasn't much going on in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: We had like the Montgomery boycott and, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, but you know-- Speaker 1: --and it was on the news I just wondered, yeah-- Speaker 2: --it was on the news, but you know, I mean, it was sort of like the southern kids were in the Montgomery boycott. It was kids who--a lot of them went to black colleges. I remember Diane, what's her, she married-- Speaker 1: Nash. Speaker 2: Diane Nash, yeah, Diane Nash was involved. She had gone on to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I think. Didn't she go to Fisk? And then because my friends again were in that June class I told--(unclear)--were in January, I was friendly with a lot of kids who graduated high school in June and so that those kids, some of those kids went to Fisk and they knew Diane and so I knew her from there, but I wasn't really paying a lot of attention to it. Speaker 1: Okay, so well-- Speaker 2: It was in the '60s [1960s] from my perspective when the Civil Rights Movement really got going, and I was already out of college. Story_ID: 179771 Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the issues that you noticed, you know, national issues that you noticed while you were in school [at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois also "U of I"]? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I noticed is, you know, [Dwight D.]Eisenhower was the president, so there wasn't a whole lot going on and people are not particularly in, involved, or people I knew, were neither involved nor invested in what was going on. You know the Korean War was over. I don't even know if Vietnam had started then or if I wasn't even aware of Vietnam. Speaker 1: No, it hadn't started then. Speaker 2: And there were a lot of older guys who came back to the U of I who had been in the Korean War and were, you know, coming back to school, but it just seems to me that it was a time of other than the sit-ins there really wasn't a lot going on. Nothing was going on much under Eisenhower or [Richard] Nixon, so I don't really remember politically much of what was going on. I was spending my time at school that, you know, that was my emphasis to get in and get out and so until I started working in '61 [1961] I was just sort of zoned out. I was in school and that was my interest with my friends and my thing, and so I wasn't involved in anything politically, nothing. Story_ID: 179772 Speaker 1: So did your father [John Drayton Rone] ever talk about Brown v. the Board [of Education, 1954]? Speaker 2: Well, he knew about it. I mean, you know, he, he read about it. My father as I said was a race man, and he firmly felt, and I in my own heart now, I'm starting to see some of the stuff that he said that I thought he was crazy 'cause I was busy being an integrationist, and he said that integration was, this, this is a quote from my father, "integration is going to lead to the demise of us as a people," and what he meant by that was people were not gonna have stores. You know in our neighborhood the stores were owned by the black people. The cleaners were owned by the black people, but the, the neighborhood was a black neighborhood, but it was also a neighborhood where the teachers lived, Post Office people lived, the, the people who didn't have jobs lived, you know, the taxi cab drivers, you know not taxi cab drivers, but they were driving jitneys, which were the, you know those were the taxi cabs, and so that the neighborhood had teachers, doctors, lawyers, etc., and he was saying now as soon as people can get out of here the people who have the means are gonna leave and the neighborhood is gonna "go to hell", and his prediction came true. As we got educated and got money, we moved. I mean, who wants to stay in the hood when you can move out, so people moved out and so the kinds of kids that I had an opportunity to know and interface with, my children have not necessarily met because they've had a more insulated class filled lives and in our neighborhood you crossed the classes. I mean, you know, you knew that there were people down there, there may be a guy down there who beat his wife and everybody knew who he was and though they respected that, but you knew he was there. And then there was Dr. Kress [ph.], you know, who lived across the street and you know there was a lawyer who worked at the Post Office who was a lawyer, but, you know, there were not necessarily--unless you were an ambulance chaser, the lawyers were not going into corporate law firms, so this was the lawyer who if your kid got in trouble you went to or if you know got a ticket or he had an accident. As the neighborhood, as integration became more prevalent, the lawyers joined the white law firms, the doctors moved out of the neighborhood and so the projects, they started building those tall projects. People were living in 22 story projects and so the neighborhood loss a sense of, of neighborhood. Now people who have lived in those tall projects tell me that they had a sense of neighborhood in the projects. Now, I didn't live there so I didn't know. I just sort of, I think I got in that when I became my on consciousness aware of what was going on and my sort of sense of lack of social justice for people. I mean, I'm very interested in this theory that my father had about what happens to people when they move away and leave the neighborhood bereft of sort of intellectual capabilities, bereft of ambition. You know, you just have generations of people now who are either the girl has a baby at fifteen and then her baby has a baby at fifteen and then that baby's baby has a baby at fifteen, so you got grandmothers who are forty-five years old. Speaker 1: Or even worse when they, they have them at eleven and twelve. Speaker 2: Well, I know, but I was just, you know, just saying fifteen and so that you know that whole neighborhood extended family, that kind of nurturing that comes from, you know, the people sitting down, I mean, for instance--my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] babysat my children and taught my daughter to read. So, when my daughter was three years old she could read because my mother sat down with her and you know made sure that happened. She had the time. You know, my mother was forty when I was born, so my mother was already seventy-two when my daughter was born, but at seventy-five she had the time to sit down and work with my daughter and teach her to read. And so, you know, like at forty-five if you're a grandmother or a great grandmother you're out going to work and trying to get your own life together, you know, trying to do whatever you can. I mean, you're still in the scene. You're out at parties and, and so I don't think that-- Speaker 1: Or even in your scenario and it's not, it's not farfetched at fifteen you can be a grand, grandmother at thirty. Speaker 2: Well, yeah you can be a grandmother at thirty and a great grandmother at forty-five. And so at thirty, you know, you are--I had my first child at 32, you know, (laughter), so some of these girls I could be their grandmother or the great grandmother. So, I think that, that's, you know, like I just sort of think there's something wrong in our systems, so I'm sort of interested in mixed income housing. I'm interested in a lot of kinds of things that I think were part of the old neighborhood where you had role modeling, and we don't have that, and that there is that kind of interaction. I mean, I knew kids who lived in the projects. I knew a lot of kids who lived at Ida B. Wells [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and so I've been in the projects, you know, and those kid's houses were just like my houses and Ida B. Wells was a place, it's a halfway place, it's a place where you go, save your money, and then go buy a house. The kids I knew who lived in Ida B. Wells moved to Park Manor when Park Manor opened up and the white people moved out. Those kid's parents were buying houses at 71st and Calumet, 73rd and Vernon, 75th Street. Now, it's a stopping place. You know you get in there and you never get out, so I would like to see some things in place that will change that. And you know that's why I get involved in those kinds of activist organizations. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179773 Speaker 1: But in those day, the days right after college [University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, Champaign, Illinois], you graduated in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: And I went to work in a bank. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, now you were an English major in school? Speaker 2: I was an English major and thought I was gonna teach school, and at the time the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was marching around telling the banks that they had nine days to start hiring and firing. I mean, the Civil Rights Movement was starting to work. And my father [John Drayton Rone] said to me why don't you go down there and look for a job, you know. Why don't you go down there and see what they're doing, and I said to my father they're not hiring Negroes, and he said how do you know? So, I said I'm gonna prove it to you, so I picked up the phone I called, first I called First National Bank, and I said to the guy, "Do you hire Negroes?" And the guy said, "Well you have to come down to the personnel department." and hung up. So, then I called Continental Bank and said do you hire Negros, and they said, and they said well you have to come down to, you know, we hire people, blah, blah, blah. So, I went down to First National Bank and nothing was going on, and I thought I don't dare go back home and tell my father I didn't find anything. So, I went over to Continental Bank and I had an interview and they told me to come back, and I went back. I had a test and then they hired me, and the lady who hired me said you know you might be the first Negro that we hire and that you might not--you might here some things here that are not gonna make you happy and you're gonna have to learn to deal with that. And I said, well that's their problem not mine. So, I got hired and they were starting to hire people for their management training program, and so they hired me into the training program and I, you know, got, I got assignment in the stock transfer division and I started working there, and the third day on the job I was walking through the bank and I looked up and I saw a black guy who was a teller and I thought you may think that I'm the first Negro you've hired, but there is one here you don't know it. And he nodded at me and I nodded at him and then I walked on through the bank. I never said a word. Every day he would nod at me and I would nod at him. He was an older man, and he was clearly to me a person of color, but they didn't know. Then, they started hiring other people. They hired [HM] Roland Burris and Ron Greer. Speaker 1: So, this gentleman that you're referring to never goes down in history as the first Negro at Continental Bank. Speaker 2: No, no (laughter). I knew it (laughter). He knew it. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: But anyway so, so I worked there in their training program. Then, I was doing a rotation in their education and training division and one of my jobs was to work with the young men, mostly men who were getting tuition reimbursement for going to graduate school. Story_ID: 179774 Speaker 1: And so I thought well how come all these guys are going to school, how does this work? So, I read up and said they paid for you to get an MBA if it was related to your discipline. So, I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And let them pay for it (laughter). Speaker 2: So what year was this? Speaker 1: That was--let me think about it I had been there awhile. It was probably--let me think about it--. It was probably about '67 [1967]. It was probably '67 [1967], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right so you, so you're working and went to school at the same time? Speaker 1: I went to school at night--(unclear). I had a guy write me a letter. I applied at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. I didn't get into the U of C, and then I applied there and I got in there. And it was amazing because all these guys, as I could see the handwriting on the wall that this is who got ahead the people who were doing this and they were paying for it, and so I thought, you know, if I'm gonna have a career here and this is what I'm gonna do and I had decided I was gonna have a career there and you know like anything it was--I was having a fast track career because I was a single woman, worked long hours, worked hard, persevered, was probably more like them than different, and then I got married in 1971. Story_ID: 179775 Speaker 1: And my career came to a screeching halt because it was the way they looked at women. They had a policy in the bank for instance if women got married to a man who worked in the bank the woman had to leave, and you know the white guys used to call me two-three. That was my nickname. Two-three, the routing numbers on the check because I was like Ms. Continental Bank, you know, working and doing my thing. They had a--while I was there they issued the first electronic stock transfer in the world. Computers were like coming in, and it was the first time they had ever issued stock certificates off of the computer, and I was the person who was chosen to supervise the operation. They hired about 500 part-time people, and a lot of people worked part-time, and it was translating, it was called COMSAT Communications Satellite Corporation, the first electronically issued stock certificate. And they hired all these people to do all the coding and it was called the grandmother's stock. It came on the market at like $17 and in about a week it was like $52 because people were buying it to save for their grandchildren. They thought it was gonna be this huge--it's called COMSAT. Yeah, and they hired all these people. They had to be trained, and we had to train the supervisors. But, anyway, so that was my big, my making myself, making the powers brokers at the bank aware of what I was doing. And from that point on, my career was just on the really fast track. Story_ID: 179776 Speaker 1: And then I got married and it was like, oh no she's married. She's a woman and she's married and then six months after I got married I got pregnant 'cause I was already thirty-one years old, and it was like, oh no you're gonna have a baby. And so I worked in personal trust and they thought it was an embarrassment for me to be walking around in personal trust pregnant 'cause you had to wear maternity clothes. So, they put me in trust operations, which I hated. I just absolutely hated it, and by that time I had gotten on the national board of the Girl Scouts and the bank let me have the time because I was, it was good for the bank and it was good for publicity and you know. So, I would go to these national board meetings in New York all the time, and when I got pregnant I told them I was gonna take maternity leave and I would come back after my baby was born, because black women go back to work. Well, they had never had a white woman who got pregnant who came back to work, never. And so after my baby was born and I came back nobody took me seriously. I mean, first of all they put me in trust operations division, which was a division where young kids who were training to be supervisors were coming, and I made at the time $10,000 more than anybody they had in the department, but it was sort of like, you know, we're not taking you seriously anymore because you obviously are going to stop working, you know you're gonna be a mother and a wife. So, I went to a board meeting with the Girl Scouts and the lady said, "How do like being back at work?" I said I hate it, I just hate it, and she said, "How would you like to come and work for the Girl Scouts?" and I said--I didn't even ask her what the job was. I said what are you paying? And she said what are you making? And I told her and she said well we could probably match your salary. So, I took the job and I went back and quit. I was shocked at myself. I didn't think I would--I had a incredible encouragement from my husband because the bank was I had ever known, I had been there fourteen years already and it was like oh no what am I going to do, I can't leave the bank and he said sure you can. So, he was an incredible supporter, and so I left, and I think had I not left I never would have achieved the success that I achieved in my life, so I'm glad I left. Story_ID: 179777 Speaker 1: Okay, what position did they hire you for at the Girl Scouts? Speaker 2: They--I was the associate regional director, and it was a seven state region and what they were looking for is I had management skills and they were looking for somebody to provide management skills to Girl Scout councils in seven states. It was Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, and North and South Dakota. Those were--and you know the Girl Scouts have always ran like a business from a corporate perspective and so you know they did strategic planning. They did organizational development. They had things like that that most non-for-profit didn't have. And so it was a, the regional director's job was to supervise the people who provide those consultative services and consultants go in and work in a region and help them develop finance strategies, you know, membership plans, things of that sort. So, I went over there and became the associate regional director, but what I didn't know, I hadn't thought about it I was just so happy to go. I had not, I had only been married a short time, had the baby, I didn't realize how I wasn't going to be able to travel. I had been doing whatever I wanted to do in my whole life and all of a sudden I had a baby. It was like well where are you going? So, so I was having a very difficult time in a job that had me traveling all the time. I was traveling all the time, and my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] and my husband who at the time was in educational sales so that he had a flexible job, he and my mother were doing all the baby-sitting. And so in my consultant work with the regional I found out that they were going to be looking for an executive director at the Girl Scouts of Chicago. And the woman who was leaving said to me you know you might get this job, why don't you come over here as my assistant director and then when I leave you can move in and take the job and so I quit the national office and went to work for the local office and then I didn't have to travel anymore. So, that's how I got to the Girl Scouts of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 179778 Speaker 1: This is working out pretty good so far. Speaker 2: Well, yeah it was working out pretty good so far, but, I mean the big thing is I didn't get the job. That was the-- Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't. Speaker 2: --shocker for me. It was the first time I had ever--see I haven't had to look for a job in so long that I didn't, you know--and I didn't get the job. They hired a woman who was a Ph.D. who was the training, the national training director of the Girl Scouts of New York and she was gonna retire and she wanted to move back to the Midwest, so she was gonna come here and work for two years and retire and so when she came I quit. I, I got a, I got another job offer from an agency in Chicago [Illinois] and they, they were hiring the assistant director for the first time and I was out looking. I mean, I was out looking for a job. I, I was just furious that I didn't get the job, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so who, who did you work for in Chicago? Speaker 2: Who? Her name was Ann Freitas [ph.]. You mean, oh the woman-- Speaker 1: Yeah the, well the organization. Speaker 2: Oh it was the Girl Scouts of Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah, but you, you said that you didn't get that job because, but there was another job, oh okay. Speaker 2: No, no well I go the job. No she hired me as her assistant director-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --and then when she retired I had applied as the executive director. Speaker 1: Yeah and someone else got that, right. Speaker 2: And someone else, Ann Freitas got it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so I went out and found myself another job. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then I went to Ann Freitas and told her I was quitting, and she said please don't quit. She said the reality is I don't know anything about Chicago. I don't know--(unclear)--you know, you grew up in Chicago. If you will stay and teach me everything there is about Chicago, she said you really don't know anything about being an executive director and if you teach me everything I need to know about Chicago I will teach you everything you need to know to be an executive director, and I'm only gonna be here two years. And so I said okay that will be a deal and so when she left, then I became the executive director. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179779 Speaker 1: And I stayed there until a search firm came and got me for the Y [YWCA] and I stayed there, let me see--oh I forgot that part. When I went over to the Girl Scouts, I found out I was pregnant. I took a month off and I got pregnant with my second child, and the major difference in working for a women's organization and working for a men's organization presented itself because the Girl Scouts were absolutely wonderful. They--I was pregnant and they just said you know this happens, you know, you need any time for the doctor do what you need to do. But, anyway so then I had my baby. So, by the time I became the executive director I had two babies, two children. But, the, the thing was is that when I went to the Girl Scouts I loved my job. I did a real good job there. I loved it. And then the search firm came and said, you know, we've got a job at the Y would you like to interview, and I said no. And the guy was really good. He has a search firm in Chicago, Willie Carrington, Carrington and Carrington, and he said, "Well can we just meet for dinner." I said I don't know--(unclear)--and he said please just come for dinner and when I went for dinner with him I had no idea the Girl Scouts, I mean the YWCA did so many things. So, I said hey I might be interested in this job and it was a lot more money. So, I with a bigger agency, had more staff, you had a broader array of opportunities, so I went for the interview. I went for about five interviews and when I got the job in 1987 and I stayed there until I retired in 2000. Story_ID: 179780 Speaker 1: Well tell us about the Girl Scouts? What do the Girl, I mean the YWCA-- Speaker 2: The YW-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there, there's a--what's the history of the black involvement in the YWCA or some of it so we have-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --some sense of. Speaker 2: When I came to the YWCA, when I left the Girl Scouts, the Girl Scouts had almost a $2 million dollar budget. When I came to the Y, they had a $4 million budget and when I left it was $13 million, that's how much I had grown the program and the YWCA has in Chicago [Illinois], has an interesting history in the sense that the YWCA's mission is the elimination of racism and the empowerment of women. And so it coupled for me two things in my life that I'm very interested in. So, I thought okay well I'm just gonna see what this is about. And the YWCA nationally had the first interracial charter in the '4's [1940s]. They opened up their lunchrooms. They had the first desegregated lunchrooms, and in Chicago they had black branches and white branches and they had built a brand new building in 1971 at 62nd and Drexel, the Harris YWCA. And when I was a kid, they had a residence at 44th and King Drive, 45th and King Drive they had a six or eight story residence where a lot of women lived. So, the YWCA had always been a place that provided those kinds of things. As it got older in my day, they provided child care. It was the largest sexual sought program in the state for boys and girls. We had programs that taught women who to get involved in the political process. We had leadership programs for girls and then we had the gym and swim. So, we had seven child care centers in Chicago and in Chicago area Dupage County. We had a suburban office in Crestwood and in the Homewood area. We had a day care up on the north side. We had a day care center in the Ida B. Wells [Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. So, you know, the YWCA has always been involved. And then we started developing anti-racism programs where we worked with Crossroads to have people work on their anti-racism behavior. Speaker 1: Crossroad Ministries. Speaker 2: Crossroad Ministries. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Crossroad Ministries. They're Bethel, Beth, Bethel, I think, I think their Lutheran or they started out being Lutheran. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they had like a coalition of denominations now, Episcopal-- Speaker 2: And they were following Martin Luther King. Speaker 1: --Church of the Brethren, yeah. Speaker 2: They were involved in a lot of old Civil Right stuff and so we brought 'em in and they helped us develop programs where we worked with corporations to train their staff and anti-racism behavior and sort of understanding racism. You know, the sort of way of, you know [HM] Dorothy Height who started in the YWCA, and she started the office of racial justice and that's where she, I mean, she retired from the YWCA when she was sixty-five and then started the Council of Negro Women. She had been running that ever since. But so the YWCA had that kind of history that I liked. It was kind of an activism. The YWCA had a tolerance on gender issues. They'd always been feminists. They were very out for race and gender and so I thought it would be a good place to work. Speaker 1: Was the Harris Y the first YWCA on the south side or, or in the black community in Chicago? Speaker 2: 45th and you know that, that, they tore down, 45th and King Drive. The Harris was the first new YWCA that was built, and they had all kinds of programs for girls and women and children, and unfortunately it has just been sold. The Park District bought it. Speaker 1: And just bought, bought the Harris? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. The YWCA is gonna lease it and have some programs there. They got a program for unwed mothers there. They got a sexual assault program, and they have child care and they have a girl's leadership development program and they have after-school care. So, the--we closed the swimming pool because when I was there, because we just couldn't, it was too expensive to keep it open and you know Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] did, was losing its community and nobody was coming. Story_ID: 179781 Speaker 1: Now the Harris Y [Harriet M. Harris YWCA], we were just talking about the importance of the Harris Y on the South Side for the cultural life of this city, you know, not to mention the programs that you discussed the child care, sexual assault program all those things going on at the Harris Y. Speaker 2: The Harris Y was a major player in the community, and if, if you look at the money that was built, that was given to raise that, the money that was raised to build the Harris YWCA a lot of people like [HM] John Johnson and if you look at the old list of contributors a lot of money was raised from black people on the south side of Chicago [Illinois] that put that building up. And you know R. G. Johnson that used to be the old superintendent of schools well her daughter-in-law was the first director of Harris, and she ran that YWCA and had the community involved. There was a lot going on and when I came there in '87 [1987] JoAnne Evans was the director, and she was continuing to get involved, and as you said [HM] Abena Brown had all of her things there and she was the program director for the YW. Speaker 1: You mentioned off-camera Cynthia Armster Worrill I think was, yeah. Speaker 2: That's her name Cynthia Armster Worrill-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She was in the board of the YW, and so there were a lot of people who were involved in getting that Y-[HM] Barack Obama's wife was involved when she first came to Chicago. Speaker 1: Michelle Obama. Speaker 2: Michelle Obama, Mary and, I can see her now. I wanna call her Mary Evans. She was very involved in the YWCA and so there were a lot of people who were, you know--Lucille Boysaw. There were people who were really, community people. There is a room named a chapel was John Johnson's mother. He gave money to build the chapel for his mother. So, that it was really a community center in its day. Speaker 1: The community room was in the round if I remember, and, and it was sunken-- Speaker 2: That's right, it was like an atrium. Speaker 1: Atrium right, I mean a wonderful place to do community events and those naming ceremonies as you discussed before with the cab drivers, Nigerians--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: It was a place where the community came together, and I think as the community started getting decimated and they started tearing down so many buildings in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] and other venues were opening it goes back to my father's [John Drayton Rone] statement a long time ago, you know. Harris used to have weddings. Everybody had their wedding at the, especially after the Parkway closed. There were a lot of weddings held at the--it was an inexpensive place. It was in the neighborhood. It was clean. It was nice. It had the atrium. It had a kitchen for catering, and then things started opening up. You know people could go downtown and have their weddings and so it ceased to be that kind of place and it fell on hard times. Speaker 1: So that, that's the only Y on the south side. Was that, or is that the only YW on the-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--the only YW, the YM opened up its south side, you know, they had a south side YM-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on 63rd and Stony Island. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: But, it was the only YW. It was the only building after awhile that the YWCA owned because they sold all their property and built an endowment and used the income from that endowment to support the program activities, so if we could have a loss leader, but we could get money off the endowment to run the programs and that kind of fell apart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so it just got too costly. So, they're still going to provide the services. The Y is still gonna, but they're gonna lease the building, you know, part of the building that they use from the [Chicago] Park District and the Park District is gonna open up the swimming pool and the gym. We had a lot of midnight basketball there and we had, you know, kids come and people in the neighborhood would come and play basketball and use the gym, use the pool. As one of the women said, it was an Olympic sized pool, so we had the largest pool on the south side because the YM pool is not as that big, but, I mean, it was sort of like a catch 22. One of the ladies said the thing she loved about our pool is there was never anybody in it and that was the problem; therein lies the problem. There was nobody in there and so the cost to keep, to maintain that, you know, pay for the filtering--so, we closed the pool down about three years ago. Story_ID: 179782 Speaker 1: So, what were some of the challenges in running the YWCA of greater Chicago [sic, YWCA of Metropolitan Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I think some of the challenges are rape is something people don't wanna talk about, sexual assault, child molestation. You know you go to talk to a corporate person about raising money for those kinds of programs, and they don't want to admit that exists. They wanna think of happy smiley faces in children and sometimes you talk about daycare and you talking to people who say you know I go to work every day and I pay for my own day care. So, you start talking about subsidized day care. Well people go to work they need to pay for their own day care, why would I subsidize that. So, when you talk about eliminating racism people don't want to talk about racism. They say we get along fine, we don't need to have talks about that, so the fund raising challenge or running the YWCA when you're not running a gym and swim program and there's something that somebody can feel good about and say, I'm taking twenty little poor kids of projects and teaching them how to swim and their playing basketball and they all look happy, when you're talking about those issues that nobody wants to talk about--they're not sexy hot issues; it's difficult, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a challenge. That was a challenge. The other challenge was in terms of getting a board people who were people of substance because again the YWCA is a women's organization, and we don't have men on board. We have men, women, and so- Speaker 1: Is it, is it by, by design or no, no, no-- Speaker 2: By design. It provides women an opportunity for leadership, so that's one of our goals to empower and, and, and train women for leadership. So, we never have the top people in the corporation on the board. Speaker 1: So, so the corporate people, well the top corporate people are the white males basically? Speaker 2: White males. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So that even if you get the top corporate female she's always in a position of begging up. You know if you were a corporate male and you're on the board you can say we have an event, the tables are $10,000, you call up your buddies at Baird & Warner, Sara Lee, at Quaker [Oats] and you say I want you to take two tables. So, they say okay. Well, they're the CEO so they can say that. Then you get a woman who's a vice president. First of all she's gotta ask her boss can she buy the table, okay. Then, she doesn't have counterparts that she can call up at Sara Lee and Quaker. Story_ID: 179783 Speaker 1: And for me one of my crowning achievements is the YWCA has, has something called the Leader Luncheon, which is an event. When I came, was raising $200,000 a year and when I left we were raising $700,000 a year, and it's a luncheon that recognizes women in, in their field for excellence and it's in like education, the business world, non-for-profit, community service. That's a major thing, so that we've recognized women of achievement. It's called the Women of Achievement luncheon, Leader Luncheon. For twenty-eight years that's been going on. So, most of the women who are the movers and shakers in this city have been recognized. After I came, I said if we couldn't and we were recognizing women in education, business, and I said well how come we're not recognizing women who are doing work in racial justice because there are very few people doing this. So, why don't we give a racial justice award and give this award to a woman who is doing outstanding work to improve race relations in the city. And, if, if we come in a kind of occasion where we can't find a woman who's doing it, we won't give the award and that will say a lot to the community about what's happening in the way of race relations. And so we've given the award to Julia Stasch, you know who became the mayors', working in the mayor's office, but at the time she worked for Richie [Richard] Stein because that, Richie Stein was a large developer in Chicago who Julia was his top woman and she made sure that women and minorities were including on all the construction projects, so she really did a good job. We gave it to a little Jewish woman named Marian Epps who, Miriam Epps [ph.] who lived in South Shore and worked really hard to keep South Shore an integrated community and worked with the National Council of Christians and Jews. And we gave it to the woman who used to head up the Community Renewal Society. I can't remember her name. She was very active in Trinity Church. She's a minister. We gave it to [JM] Willie Barrow one year. And we've only given the award--we gave it to Lucretia Bailey who works for the Urban Affairs Institute. And then we gave it to two doctors. One's black woman doctor and a white woman doctor who worked on events to bring children together and its kind--it, it was children of violence. It was taking children out of violence and they're both doctors. One worked on the girl X. Remember the girl X who was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the other one worked on that-- Speaker 2: The girl X was just for those wa, watching this she was attacked with some chemicals or something. She was raped and then, then-- Speaker 1: In Cabrini Green. Yeah she was raped and attacked with chemicals in Cabrini Green-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --left for dead and is blind now, can't talk, etc. And this doctor was the doctor who worked--both of them were from the Rehab Institute. And the other one was the doctor who worked with that young black boy who was beat up in Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Right yeah. Speaker 1: --where he was over in the park over there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and so they were walking with white children and black children to talk to them about how violence affects your lives and how you can live a peaceful coexistence, and so we both, gave both of them the Racial Justice Award. So, we hold that award very seriously, but at the same time it highlights that this is what the YWCA is about too. Story_ID: 179784 Speaker 1: Now, the Chicago YWC, I mean the, the YWCA was, was it founded here in Chicago [Illinois] initially? Speaker 2: Founded in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Boston, but it was founded on those two, those same two principles. Speaker 2: In the, in the original YWCA was founded on the idea of--the mission of the YWCA is to have peace, justice, and freedom for all women; that's in the original mission. It's--and, and we're nourished by our Christian roots, but open to women of all faiths so that in the early days in the 1800s when they started it, it was Christian women who came together to find a safe place for women to live and to work, etc., etc., and as the conditions changed in the country, so did the YWCA. You know, when we got out of housing they used to housing forever and they'd have residence of women who would move into the city. Well, in the '70s [1970s] when women started moving to the cities and women could live alone. You know in the old days women had to go and live with other women. They had to live in group housing and well in the '70's [1970s] people started moving in Sandburg Village and Lake Meadows and Prairie Shores women didn't need to be in an environment where they were, couldn't be alone. So, a lot of the, so a lot of the YWCAs turned those into shelters, like the YWCA in Evanston has a battered women's shelter so that women and their children who are battered and get put out of their houses can come and live there. They can take children up to twelve years old or boys can stay with their mothers until they're twelve and then they have to move on. Speaker 1: So it's, it's the mission of the Chicago YWCAs that--(unclear)--deals with racism and women's issues and race issues? Speaker 2: They, they adopted the, the one imperative for the YWCA in 1957 it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the elimination of racism where ev, ever it exists and by any means necessary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what programs thrust was supposed to be and in the last five years we have, in the la, we've developed this thing where it says, I mean, nobody held people's feet to the fire so people could do whatever they wanted to and in the last, this new board that I was in charge of we moved ahead we have set up two core programs and those two core programs are elimination of racism and the economic empowerment of women, and we say to YWCAs around the country we don't care whatever programs you do, you can do child care, you can do training for women, you can do dance classes, but if you're not in YW having two programs that affect those issues then you cannot be a YWCA, 'cause you cannot be under the banner of something that you don't believe in, so this is causing some interesting issues. A couple of YWCAs have said well maybe we don't wanna be YWCAs, and we say okay you cannot have our logo on your door if you're not gonna do this. So, it will be interesting to see what happens over the next couple of years. My term is up in May. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179785 Speaker 1: Now Chicago [Illinois] has this rich history of Jane Addams and Hull House and, and Ida B. Wells [Ida B.Wells-Barnett House] on the south side, you know, fighting against racism and women's issues-- Speaker 2: But Jane Addams doesn't have it as part of its mission. Hull House was, you know, housing and I don't really know what their mission is. Speaker 1: Settlement house basically. Speaker 2: Settlement house okay, you know, safe place for kids and their families and helping immigrants, etc. Our mission is economic empowerment of women and the elimination of racism. And as far as I know, we are the only organization that has a mission to work on racial justice program that effectively eliminates racism. You know the Urban League has a mission of working in race relations and so does the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but it's not, the Urban League is more in housing and jobs. The NAACP is still a little fuzzy to me now about what they are doing, but clearly this is our mission and we wanna work with any organizations that have a common mission with us, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179786 Speaker 1: Well, what, what are some of the other organizations that the Ys [YWCAs] work with? Speaker 2: Well, right now the way we're collaborating is the urban affair--the Urban Institute, which is what Lucretia Bailey runs. The YWCA nationally has joined the Civil Rights Coalitions because we moved our office now. We closed the New York [New York] office, and we moved the national office to Washington D.C. because we want our office to be an advocacy center that is going to affect legislation that affects our two issues. So, we're hiring an advocacy staff and we change, we, we've reduced the staff from fifty to thirty, reduced the budget from $13 million to $2 million, and we moved the office to D.C. That's what they're gonna concentrate on, and we want them to develop coalitions with organizations that work on our issues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's what we're holding them accountable for. We hired Patricia Ireland. Story_ID: 179787 Speaker 1: Right, now that was a controversial hire and (unclear) made the internet and all the newspapers-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --you know, so a lot of, lot of fundamental type Christians didn't like it and it scared a lot of people. Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: Yeah, now tell us about that now. Who is Patricia Ireland and what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, Patricia Ireland is the former national executive director of NOW or president of NOW, which was a National Organization for Women which works on some of our issues, but not all of them, and there are a lot of people who didn't really understand what the YWCA did. We just entered into a major branding campaign because a lot of people thought we were the women's auxiliary of the YMCA, and they'd say aren't you just like the YMCA. No, we're not, we're the YWCA. So, people just didn't know. So, we reorganized ourselves in the last two years and set up our office. We were trying to clearly articulate who we are and a lot of small YWCAs hide under the cover of not talking so much about our two-core programs, elimination of racism and the, and they sort of deal with the Christian mission. Well, we are not a faith-based organization, and are nourished are--in our mission statements it says nourished by our Christian roots, but open to women of all faiths, so that we were started by Christian women, but you don't have to be a Christian to be a YWCA person and so the fundamentalists got very concerned that Patricia Ireland is not a Christian, that they were interested in her sexual preference or sexual orientation I should say, and so they took us on, on those issues saying how could a Christian organization hire a woman who is not a Christian. YWCA has been a pro-choice organization for the last 30 years. A lot of people don't know what. So, they said, you know, how could you be a pro-choice, you know, how could you be a baby killer. I got calls in the middle of the night calling me a lesbian baby killer, 4 o'clock in the morning phone calls. So, once they got themselves organized and put it out there on the internet it had an incredible ripple effect for us. I got five, we kept track of them, 5,088 emails, but really I got about fifty because a lot of them were the same form letter saying the same thing and so that the Christian right is very organized and we ever get as organized as they are and we learn how to get out to our constituents we believe in the elimination of racism and economic empowerment of women and get them to attack the way they did us, we would be light years ahead. Story_ID: 179788 Speaker 1: I often wonder why organizations don't do that or maybe is that, you know when you really look at it is it a really good use of time to organize people to write form letters and send them in to Pat Robinson or somebody to tell them to knock or off or somebody like a Rush Limbaugh or somebody, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, they're effective in the since that they affect our funders. For instance, the YWCA in Nashville [Tennessee] lost $700,000 dollars as a result of this campaign because, you know, it's the South and they're a little more conservative and the tone of the letter, I mean, you know, then you get in a defensive position where you're saying this is what we're not rather than this is what we are and so you're constantly saying and, and we have such a wide tent. We have some people--like I was on a radio show for instance in Alaska where a guy asked me did I believe in abortion and it was over this issue and I said to him well let's presume, I'm a Catholic, so I don't believe in abortions for myself, but if my daughter got pregnant as a result of a rape I would have to reevaluate my position on abortion and his response to me was, "Oh come on Ms., come on you know that nobody gets pregnant the first time they get raped." So, I said to him how many times does somebody have to get raped before they get pregnant? Well, you know what I mean we're going to commercial, so he went to commercial and then he came back and said, "This is really going to be rough," and his callers started calling me and saying how did we call ourselves a Christian organization and, and I told you earlier when I was a kid I went to Bible school and one of the things we had to do in Bible school is learn the Bible verse for every letter in the alphabet. So, I think he met his match because I said to him sir all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, and he was floored. He just--(unclear)--(laughing) and didn't know what to do and then he was clambering on and on and I said to him be still the Lord is in this holy temple. So, then I started running down my ABC's about judging, not lest ye be judged, and finally he hung up and he said, "All right well we're just gonna have to agree to disagree, God bless you," (laughing) and I thought all that Bible school training came in handy. But, it's that right wing, you know, they are, they're very organized and they can affect your funding. You know, we got a lot of letters from people saying I'm never gonna give the YWCA another dime and please take my name out of your records and then we had a little press release that said ask them what is their name so we can take their name out, and they would hang up because they weren't contributing to us anyway, anyway. Story_ID: 179789 Speaker 1: Yeah, these are the politics of fear, I guess, activities that try and scare you. Well, what's the, what do you see as the future of the Y, the Y at this point, I mean, the Harris YWCA seems to have lost some control, I mean, in the south side of Chicago [Illinois]. What about the other Y's. How many Y's are in this area? Speaker 2: Well in this area-- Speaker 1: Chicago area? Speaker 2: --around eighteen, I mean in the, in-- Speaker 1: YWCAs. Speaker 2: --well, we have something called the Great Lakes Alliance, which is Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan. There are sixty YW's in that area. Close by to us there is Aurora [Illinois], Rockford [Illinois], Evanston [Illinois], Gary [Indiana], some pieces in Indiana. Those are the ones that are close to us. There is one in Champaign [Illinois]. So that--and everyone sort of does it own programming. Like as I said Evanston and what we're trying to do is to say okay you can do whatever you want. So, I think the future is that the YWCA tries to serve community needs and at one point we were like the largest women's membership movement in the country, and the thing is, is that you sort of had to be a member of the Y to join and people joined to use the physical fitness facilities and then after we stopped doing a lot of physical fitness and we started providing program now we're building back up again to do other than social service program. We were providing a lot of services for poor people who couldn't afford to pay for their services and that why a lot of YW's went out of business. And so now we're trying to attract the women activists again who wanna work on our issues, who wanna do some entrepreneurial stuff. Like the YWCA in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], for instance, is a very growing YWCA. They have a plastics factory. They have, they, they have taken over the whole W2, the Wisconsin Works. The Welfare Department is housed in the YWCA; they run it. They do job training. They have moderate and mixed income housing. They have senior housing, like a senior housing in Birmingham, so that YW's I think are looking to be more entrepreneurial and, and at the same time meet our mission of helping women and girls grow. So, I think the growth is gonna be like sort of like a swat analysis, you know. One of the opportunities to programming in the community, whatever threats, and then developing programs that meet those needs. So--(unclear)--what I think is the future of the YW. I mean, it's been around 137 years, 140 years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --just changing to meet those needs. My own daughter does not belong to a YWCA. She's more politically active in other things. She's in Boston [Massachusetts], so. She's trying to get it together there. Story_ID: 179790 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is something we ask everyone about. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, I have several. One of my concerns is that young people are leaving the community and are moving into the mainstream and feel no affinity for their brothers and sisters who are being left behind, and you know I really worry about that. I worry about how can we connect the have nots with the haves. I worry very much about that. That's one of my concerns. One of my hopes is that we can remember where we came from and sort of hold true to some of our own values and cultures. I mean, I think you can move into the mainstream culture and lose a part of who you are and so I very much hope that we will have some kind of something that will allow us to integrate, but at the same time allow us to give us a sense of ourselves and our history. I worry very much about that, the loss of, the loss of history as we mainstream and move into other communities. So, that, you know, I just hope we can do that kind of thing. I hope that we--I'm very concerned about the young poor black males that I see on the street who have no respect. They don't respect themselves. They don't respect women. I don't, you know, when I say I'm concerned about it I don't know how we get to them. I mean, what do we need to do to bring those males in? I mean they're not--I worry about all these young women having children and having no male figures in their home. You know when I was a kid there were kids whose fathers and mothers were separated, but those kids knew where their father was and they would go over there, you know, and visit and we would go with them and you know their father was very much a part of their lives and so I worry about that loss, that pure--I was looking at a book on Bronzville [Chicago, Illinois] the other day and it was, it was in a bookstore, it was at Borders, and they had pictures of some young black men on a car they had on their suits and it was a picture book women going to church and you know, and I was just sort of musing with myself, I was in there by myself, thinking how did we go from this, these young men who have sort of a sense of pride and are all dressed up and were very black, there was no question of "being white boys" to the hip hop generation with those baggy pants and those, you know, gym shoes and their hats turned backwards and no and calling women bitches and hoes. How did we go from that, to the sort of pride you saw in those young men to this in like one generation or two generations. So, I worry how do we get back to that? That's what I worry about. Story_ID: 179791 Speaker 1: But you had a story about Two-gun Pete and your father [John Drayton Rone]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --there was like a, yeah. Speaker 2: We were talking about the differences, I guess, in times that are in terms of the way the police are respected or responded to now and then. And my father was a legend in our legend in our neighborhood because he took on "Two-gun Pete." I had two brothers, and-- Speaker 1: Two-gun Pete, Pete was a Chicago cop who-- Speaker 2: Two-gun Pete was a Chicago cop who was notorious about, he carried two guns and he was a black Chicago policeman when they didn't have many black policemen and everyone was afraid of him because he was supposed to be quite brutal and quite tough and nobody ever took on Two-gun Pete, and he has a legend around Chicago. Well, my father became his own legend because he called him Pete and he took my two brothers and took 'em by the arms and said to Two-gun Pete, "Pete I want you to see these boys they are my two sons and they're good boys and I don't want you to mess with them because I don't want to have to mess with you myself, and so don't mess with these boys," and Two-gun just kind of look at him and my father walked away. But, there were several neighbors around and they were just, 'Mr. Rone," you know. "Mr. Rone is crazy. He's just as crazy as Two-gun Pete," but Two-gun Pete never messed with my brothers and my brothers never messed with him. I don't know what would have happened 'cause my father had this expression about you can do anything that you want to me, but leave my children alone and so I'm glad it never had to be tested, 'cause who knows two-gun Pete might have killed my father. Speaker 1: Or maybe not. Speaker 2: Or my father may have killed Two-gun Pete, okay, so. Speaker 1: The essence of the story is that here's a man who stands up for his children, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Clearly. Speaker 1: --yeah, but at the same time demands another standard of behavior, you know. Speaker 2: Well, my father used to have all these little things that he'd say. He would say, you're no better than anybody, but you're as good as anybody and so that was sort of the cradle that we grew up with that we were not to look down our noses at anybody, but at the same time we were as good as anybody else, so nobody was to look down their nose at us either. So, it gives you a certain sense of confidence that I think we all have, all four--five of us. There are three of us left, but all five of us had it. Story_ID: 179792 Speaker 1: When you look back over what you've been able to do so far and you're still not finished with public life that I wouldn't suspect, you know, but what would you see at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think that I've had a care about the community. I think that I've sort of helped people grow in many ways. I think I have affected people's stereotypes and places that I've been and jobs I've had about what women can do, about what women of color can do. I think that I've sort of paved the way for people to be given opportunities to do things that they never thought they could do. So, I think the legacy that I have is that I've done it. I've done a lot of things I never thought I would do and so just like those school teachers at Drake school [John B. Drake Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], you know, who said you can do anything you really wanna do, you can be anything you really wanna, be, I think that's true. So, I think the legacy I leave is this is what I've done you can do it too. Story_ID: 179793 Speaker 1: Okay, and this is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I--that's an interesting question. I guess I would really like to be membered, remembered as somebody who really, really truly cared an incredible amount about their family, and was able to contribute to her community at the same time having a deep commitment and sort of an abiding love for my family. My family is the most important thing to me. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 179794 Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of me when I was in sixth grade there was a studio in Chicago [Illinois] called Deloris Studios on 31st Street where everybody used to get their pictures made and I think that was when I was going into seventh grade. Speaker 2: This was my Kindergarten picture when I was in Kindergarten and the reason it's blown up like that is that the [Chicago] Sun-Times had something called the cute kid contest, and I convinced my father [John Drayton Rone] to take my picture and have it blown up and sent to the cute kid contest and I was shocked when I didn't win. Speaker 1: We have--my favorite place to vacation is Arizona, and this is a house that we bought in Arizona in this place, and my husband took that picture. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] right before she died and my daughter. It was the last Christmas before she died. This was in 1986. Speaker 1: Those are my two children, Jennifer and Michael. That was probably two years ago, so that'd be 2000. Speaker 2: That's my husband and me. My husband--that was a year before he died. He died last year. Speaker 1: One of the things we always did is a vacation as a family is to go skiing and that's my son going skiing and me taking a picture. Speaker 2: This was sort of a family reunion we had, the Rone family reunion, and that's--all those people have on Rone family T-shirts. That's our family. We had a softball game. Speaker 1: Oh that's my husband again. Speaker 2: Those are my two children again. Speaker 1: This is our last family portrait together. This was Christmas 2000, and my husband died in April of 2001. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother in 1924 when she was going to be married. Speaker 1: We have a picture of my father in 1924, but this is the last picture we have of my father before he died in 1965. Speaker 2: This is my father in 1926 with my older sister who also died in 1993. My brother died in '68 [1968] and my sister died in '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: (BRIEF PAUSE) Speaker 2: This is my brother Arthur [ph.], my sister Ronnie [ph.] and me at a wedding, at my niece's wedding last summer. Speaker 1: That's in 2002. Speaker 2: 2002..