 Story_ID: 531979 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Desiree Rogers, D-E-S-I-R-E-E, Rogers, R-O-G-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And what is your maiden name? Speaker 2: Glapion-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --G-L-A-P-I-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Place of birth, New Orleans, Louisiana, 1959. Speaker 1: Okay. You don't want to give us a month or day? Speaker 2: Oh, sure-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --June 16th, 1959. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am president of Peoples Gas [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company, Chicago, Illinois] and North Shore Gas [North Shore Gas Company, Waukegan, Illinois], so president of a natural gas utility here in Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is 4/27/2007 [April 2, 2007]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois at my home. Story_ID: 531980 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, French fries-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and chicken. I only have--can have one? I have to say chicken then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The world (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Let the good times roll. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 531981 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and then your father's [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] side of the family. But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Joyce, J-O-Y-C-E, Smith [Joyce Smith Glapion]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 8th, 1937. Speaker 1: Okay. And where? Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know too much. I can trace back to her grandmother. And so, I know that my mother's parents [Marie Williams Smith and Benjamin Smith, Sr.] both came from a place called Pachuta, P-A-C-H-U-T-A, or P-A- yeah, Pachuta, A--U-T-A, Pachuta, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: And so I was able to actually meet her grandparents. Speaker 1: Now, is Pachuta on the gulf? Speaker 2: It is not, it is not, it's near Meridian [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's southern Mississippi, but it's not on the coast [Mississippi Gulf Coast]-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, you were able to go there when you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was a child, we would go to what we called the country, and go to Mississippi where my mother's--both her parents came from that small town. I can remember my grandfather on my mother's side basically saying that he was at my grandmother's home when she was born, and decided at that point that he would marry her. Speaker 1: So, he was old enough to remember (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was about twelve, so very good friends with her brothers and her family. So, I guess he was thinking ahead (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, planning, yeah. So, in Pachuta, were they farmers in Pachuta or did they-- Speaker 2: They were, they owned land and were farm- farmers in, in Pachuta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The families--my mother's mother and father lived, you know, right not, not far from each other. And the families were friendly. In fact, my grandfather and grandmother had a double wedding with her sister, and not one of his brothers, but another gentleman from the same area. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that your great-grandmother tells about life in Pachuta in those, back in-- Speaker 2: My grandmother? Speaker 1: Your--I guess it'd be your great- well, your great-grandmother, I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is my great-grandpar- Speaker 1: --or whether your grandmother would say-- Speaker 2: I, I barely just kind of remember them. I don't remember any stories from my mother's grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just remember that's who we would be going to visit-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because, remember, my grandparents, my mother's parents, moved to New Orleans-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when they were in their teens, I would say-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or early twenties. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about Pachuta that have passed down at all about how your family got land or how, you know, what the race relations were there or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not that I can recall. I would say the race relations absolutely were not, you know, would, would be what you would expect in the Deep South during that timeframe, you know, stay in your place. I mean, they basically had their land. I don't know that they were in town that much, particularly, you know, my mother would, as children or, you know, only an adult would be escorting them quote unquote into town. And they pretty much stayed to their property, grew their own food, and, you know, enjoyed themselves, among themselves, so to speak. So, I don't get the sense that, that it was much mingling with people of different races in Pachuta. And I ca- I mean, when I went, we were usually just at our own property. Story_ID: 531982 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your grandparents moved to New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: They moved to New Orleans to start their life in, in New Orleans. So, they obviously knew each other before they got there, and they started their family in New Orleans. My mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] had two brothers [Benjamin Smith, Jr. and William Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, is there a reason why they moved to New Orleans, rather than going north to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, for work and to, you know, to not to be in the city. I don't think they were interested in being farmers. And I think that they were more attracted to what opportunity there might exist in New Orleans. And so, I think they picked kind of the next big town--not wanting to stay in Mississippi, but moving to a place that they felt was a little bit more progressive. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what kind of work did they do? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Benjamin Smith, Sr.] was a longshoreman, so that probably was one of the reasons he went there because there was work there for young men at that, at that time. And my grandmother [Marie Williams Smith] was--started, I would say, as a domestic. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did they talk about growing up in New Orleans and, oh, I mean not growing up, but the little in New Orleans in those days, this would be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they talked about, you know, mainly, they talked about, you know, how, you know, great it was, and then to grow up there. And they both--neither of them finished high school. They were very progressive people, I think, to even move, you know, move to the city, and to strike out on their own, and to be determined to do something. You know, as I look at their brothers and sisters, they were the two most successful out of the group of their, of their siblings. And so, my grandfather was a longshoreman. But then, my grandmother started a business probably, maybe in her thirties. She started a daycare center. So, she started a daycare center, and then they also were investors in property. And so, they bought a lot of property in New Orleans over time and ran the family business, which was this, these daycare centers. And so, my grandfather worked there at the daycare center. Aunts and uncles worked there. They helped him employ other members of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they really had the--grew from just a family daycare to a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Much, yeah, to two, actually three centers at one time. Speaker 1: Okay. But do you remember the name of the centers, yeah? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, it still exists. It's-- Speaker 1: What do they call it? Speaker 2: It was Tommy Tucker [Tommy Tucker Preschool, New Orleans, Louisiana], Little Tommy Tucker, after the nursery rhyme ['Little Tommy Tucker']. And then, there was another one that was called the Glapion's Academy [Glapion Preschool Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I actually went to the daycare center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, myself and the cousins, we were some of the first customers, if you will. But my grandmother could see that women were starting to work, and that in the neighborhood, both, with both the men and the women working that had made sense to open up a place in the neighborhood that could be trusted to care for people's children. And so, she started that business, along with my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I would say, it had to be, you know, probably forty-five years ago that they started that business. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this would be-- Speaker 2: The two of them. Speaker 1: --be shortly after World War II [WWII], I guess, maybe about (unclear)? Speaker 2: Right, it would have been probably in the very early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: The '60s [1960s], okay. Speaker 2: Right, like '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, does--did your mother talk about growing up? Speaker 2: She did, she did. My mother grew up in New Orleans. She grew up, went to public school system, through the public school system. She was an athlete. She was very good at- athletics, running-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --track. Speaker 1: What did she run, did you know? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did you know what she ran? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she had her medals. And also, she was a singer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, she gave up her career actually to marry my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.]. So, she had headed out to Los- Los Angeles [California] to start her career, you know. She was locally singing around town, but then went out to Los Angeles to really give it a shot, and then came back to marry my father. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when she married your father, she kind of gave up the singing (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She gave up the, the singing and, you know, had two kids, I have one brother [Roy Anthony Glapion]. And she and her mother started the daycare business. Story_ID: 531983 Speaker 1: My father was in the armed services. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So my father was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: All right. So, he was a career Army-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: He was just in there for-- Speaker 1: Yes, called back--I guess he was in the Army, then got called back a second time. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Let's see, well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 1: Sure. Roy, R-O-Y, Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Glapion [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: December--12/03/36 [December 3, 1936]-- Speaker 2: Okay. December (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) nineteen thirty-six [1936], the 3rd of December-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --nineteen thirty-six [1936]. Speaker 2: Okay. What do you know about the ancestors on your father's side (background noise)? Speaker 1: I don't, I know, I know some things, but I know less. I think that they originated as best as we can tell from New Orleans [Louisiana]. The--you can read about the Glapion name in, in history in New Orleans. Marie Laveau, who was a Voodoo queen of New Orleans, she's a Glapion. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They were, I think, furniture makers. Speaker 2: Is there a--do you know the direct relationship to Marie Laveau? Speaker 1: I think she married into the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, she's a famous-- Speaker 1: So, she married a Glapion. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's--her grave is still, is down there-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --is there St. Louis Cemetery [St. Louis Cemetery No. 1, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: St. Louis Cemetery, correct. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: From what we can tell early on, they were furniture makers in the city. Speaker 2: Now, were they considered Creoles? Speaker 1: They were--are Creoles still, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, my--I didn't know my father's father [Roy E. Glapion, Sr.] well at all, but I certainly knew his, his mother [Mercedes Tervalon Taylor] is still alive. And I knew my father's grandmother very well 'cause she lived, they all lived in New Orleans. So that side of the family all lived in New Orleans, all Creoles. My grandmother on that side had probably five siblings, and they all lived in New Orleans. Speaker 2: Okay. Any stories from that side that-- Speaker 1: I re- I--growing up the biggest story I remember is that--my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] is not Creole. My father is Creole. It's the whole argument over who could cook the best. What cuisine was the best? Was it this more what I would call rusty and hardy southern cooking, or the Creole cooking with more of the filet and the, you know, red sauces. And so, there would be, you know, weekends with these kind of cook-a-thons where people would be bringing in their best dish, and putting it for a vote, you know, the filet gumbo versus the okra gumbo, and just, you know, constant arguing about who had the best cuisine is what I recall the most about this whole Creole, non-Creole issue. Is--that was a constant (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And also, the, the Catholicism versus the Baptists. The--my mother's side of the family was Baptist. My father's side of the family was Catholic. And we were raised Catholic, but there was a constant tugging, you know, "Oh, don't you want to come and hear some real music?" And, "Don't you want to come and really, you know, be involved with the worship, and, you know, not be so stiff?" And so, many Sundays, my brother [Roy Anthony Glapion] and I would, you know, when we were much younger, would go to both churches. We'd go to Catholic Mass with my father. And then, we would go to Baptist church--not Mass--church with my grandparents because we, we thought, we just got a kick out of, you know, people getting the spirit and all. But none of that happened at the Catholic church [St. Louis Cathedral, New Orleans, Louisiana], so we'd sit there in the, in the church holding each other and just, you know, just be, oh, my gosh, what is going on here? Just so excited about the whole--the ushers in their uniforms, and the smelling salts, and, you know, all that kind of thing. So, I do remember that. Speaker 2: So you got a full range of spiritual experiences then (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I saw everything, yes, I sure did, I sure did. Story_ID: 531984 Speaker 1: So, that was the other--because it's, it's two very different families, you know, and, and ways of looking at things and, and, you know, one is rural, one is, is, you know, the city has always been in the city. You know, one is Creole, one is not Creole, and everything that involves, you know, all of the racial issues associated with that, and really, you know, here in the '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], merging those, you know, those two families together. Many of the Creoles that I grew up with--we lived in a Creole, you know, predominantly Creole neighborhood [7th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana]. You know, Creoles marry Creoles. And so we were a little different in that my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] was not a Creole. Speaker 2: Now, did your mother go to college? Did she-- Speaker 1: My mother did not go to college. My father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. My mother did not. Speaker 2: Okay. So, now what did your mother, what were her talents and skills, and what did she do for a living? Speaker 1: She ran--remember she ran the daycare centers [Tommy Tucker Preschool and Glapion Preschool Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ran daycare, yeah. Speaker 1: --with her mother [Marie Williams Smith], so I think she was more the saleswoman, you know getting the, the business off the ground, hire- managing, you know, managing the people that worked there, and also just a very good salesperson, of why your child should come there, how they were going to be taken care of, what they were going to learn. They hired teachers to teach the children. They had graduation. My mother is very artistic, so all of the decorations, you know, all of the--I mean, she would paint on the walls the different nursery rhymes, you know, all of that, you know. So, the look of the place and feel of the place was done by her, as well as the materials, the putting together, the various selling materials, the guidebook, the guidelines, you know, what their vis- what we could call vision and mission statement of the, of the institution was, that would be her forte. My grandmother's was more keeping everything neat, the cooking, maybe some of the discipline, the training because at that, when they started, they took babies as well as older kids. As they got more established, they stopped taking babies, and only took kids from two to six. So, you would have a graduation in kindergarten, big production, big play, and everything else, where these kids would act and sing and dance, and get their--march out with their graduation. And there'd be sales to--like a, a book, you know, where you took out an ad. You know, they had all of that, so they'd have ads that you could take out for your child, congratulating them on their graduation. And then, that would, you know, they would graduate, and go on to first grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I would say that at two levels--my father was a teacher. And so, at two levels, my family was very much involved with education in the City of New Orleans [Louisiana]. And my, my father passed away in t- in '99 [1999]. You know, we were--had estimated that he probably educated almost a half a million children in that timeframe, coupled with the kids that came out of the daycare center 'cause as you can imagine, they would come back. And even today, up until Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] we had people whose children were in the daycare center, who went themselves. And so, the centers had a very good reputation in New Orleans. And people--it's kind of a pride. I went there. My child's going to go there. Speaker 2: Okay, Little Tommy Tucker. Story_ID: 531985 Speaker 1: So your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and he, he, he s- majored in education, I guess then? Speaker 2: Well, my father was extremely interested in being a physician. And so, he was gifted academically, and also a basketball player. And so, he was recruited by the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], but his mother [Mercedes Tervalon Taylor] would not stand for that. So, she said no, no, that's not going, that's not what we want to do. His father [Roy E. Glapion, Sr.], who he was estranged from at the time, was a successful businessman who owned motels in the city [New Orleans, Louisiana]. My father was on scholarship at Xavier, but once he was sent into the [U.S.] Army, was not able to complete a medical, you know, venture into the medical profession, so that fell to the way- wayside. And I think, by the time he came back, as, as I said, he'd gone into the Army, and then, was called back in a second time. I don't know what, I don't know what the history is, other than I know he was called back into the Army. Having two children [Rogers and her brother, Roy Anthony Glapion] when he came back, he went straight into teaching. So I don't think that it was necessarily a lifelong dream to be a teacher. I think it was more what's available to me where I can make money for my family--okay, that's what I'm going to do. Speaker 1: So, when he went in the Army, he was with the--did he go to Germany or-- Speaker 2: Yes, he did, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, for--I guess the U.S. peacekeep- whatever their force is over in Germany. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was in Germany. Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, okay. Story_ID: 531986 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met and-- Speaker 2: Yes, there is. My mother [Joyce Smith Glapion]--as--my, my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] went to Catholic school. My mother went to public school--I think, Cohen [Walter L. Cohen High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was the name of her school that she went to. And she was the scorekeeper for her team at a basketball game. He was a player on the opposing team. She noticed him, and I don't know if they were at--I don't know. They must have been, maybe at his school, and she was the scorekeeper for her school. She said she broke her, her point on her pencil, and went over to him to ask him if he knew where she could possibly get her a new pencil, or her pencil sharpened. So that's allegedly how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they met in high school and-- Speaker 2: Yes, met in high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Story_ID: 531987 Speaker 1: Now, is your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] tall? Speaker 2: Yes, he is. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you're sort of tall so I thought that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah-- Speaker 1: --maybe he--how tall was-- Speaker 2: --yeah, he was, he was very tall, not that--I mean, probably 6'2". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's not, you know, in today's standards, that's not huge. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was recruited by the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], and he must have been-- Speaker 2: Yes, and apparently, he was a pretty good basketball player. He did--he was a teacher and coached basketball for thirty plus years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: He was sort of like athletic director of the New Orleans schools [New Orleans Public School System] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he--right, he, he, you know, he decided over ti- my father was very into his teaching, very into his coaching, won many, many championships over his, you know, lifetime. At the same time, he was an organizer for a teachers' union, and very much--not militant, but almost a little bit, and not really wanting to be part of an administration. Over time, he changed that and did become part of the educational administration, and ran the athletic department for the City of New Orleans [Louisiana]. So, I mean, that was his progression, starting as a teacher, kind of an organizer of teachers. My father always felt the need to be the protector of the little guy. And so, I think he felt comfortable, you know, staying a teacher that he, that he'd really do that role a lot better than to be in some office somewhere, and not be on the ground, and not be involved in the work himself day to day that, you know, by moving into an office, he might lose the feel for what it was really like to be, you know, in the trenches. And so, it took him a long time. He had many offers to be principal and all this other stuff that he just said, "No, that's not what I, what I want to do." So, finally, you know, very late in his career--I don't remember the year--but late, he decided to go into, to administration. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, he went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], too, at some point, right? Speaker 2: For a master's degree, for a master's degree. He was very, very interested in working with young African American boys, growing them into men. And so, that really was his lifelong mission, and part of, you know, the bold, the discipline that it takes to play in a game, you know, and to be part of a team, as well as, you know, trying to get those academics integrated in there. He was a stickler for players doing, you know, at least average work, if not above average work, and--in order to be able to play on the team, that they should not be allowed to play if they weren't pulling their weight in terms of their academic work, and spent, as well as I did, spent many hours tutoring them. So, I, as a, as a child, I tutored through high school many of his ballplayers in their, in their schoolwork at my house. So, I probably did a little more than my brother [Roy Anthony Glapion]. But he felt that community service, working in the community was really an important lesson for children to learn and important for, you know, some of the players maybe that didn't have the circumstances we had--not that we were wealthy, but we certainly weren't poor, but that, you know, it was important to give back to your community from the very beginning if you were lucky enough to, to be doing okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there other school teachers in your father's family, on your father's side? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there many college graduates on his side? Speaker 2: Yeah, some, yes, yes. His, his cousins, many of them were college educated--lawyers, doctors, accountants. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I figured they probably would be if they've been in New Orleans a long time. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 531988 Speaker 1: Now your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.], at some point now, there's a lot of information about this apparently. In 1972, he joins the Zulu nation [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: This, again--go ahead. You want to-- Speaker 1: Well, just to preface (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about it? Speaker 1: I suppose it--now, the Zulu nation is one of the Mardi Gras krewes, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And just tell us something about it. I mean-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --you know more than I do. Speaker 2: Right. My father's, I mean, in my life, remember what I said about this, this whole idea of really trying to be in a position to ensure the strength of African American men ultimately. And so, the Zulu club, in many respects--well, it really is, it's the largest organization, Mardi Gras krewe, only Mardi Gras krewe of African American males in New Orleans [Louisiana]. It's the only one, and so, they actually started back-- Speaker 1: Now, it's different. I mean, it's distinguished from the Wild Tchoupitoulas, and some of the other groups or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're not a krewe. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: The, the-- Speaker 1: --okay, I didn't know. Speaker 2: When I, when I saw krewe that means they actually parade with floats. They have a ball. They have a clubhouse. They, you know, do philanthropic work. They have members. They have a board--all of this, whereas something like the Wild Tchoupitoulas, they come together, it's less formal. So, they come together to parade each Mardi Gras season. Zulu exists year round, and so, it's like a men's club, and, you know, they have a membership. There's a process to, to get in. It's all men--men only, and it's a social, it's a social organization. And they, at Mardi Gras, organize themselves, and have a krewe and co- you know, costumes. They dress up in blackface. I think, early on, I believe they started in 1916, early on. Louis Armstrong was of their kings. And when my father joined the organization in the '70s [1970s], there were--there's another organization that's called the Mustangs. The Mustangs were more what you would consider kind of a--at that time, like a kind of a higher class African American male group, more the Creoles, more the people that maybe were, might be perceived as more middle class that just happened to also probably be more Creoles. So, there was this kind of like distinction-- Speaker 1: So, you would think your father would be part of the Mustang- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a member of that. Speaker 1: Oh, he was? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 531989 Speaker 1: We were talking about the nature of the Zulu group [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Organiza- so-- Speaker 1: --in New Orleans [Louisiana] and, and the, you know, they were roundly criticized in the '60s [1960s] as being a, just an abomination, you know, to go down, and see how people dress in blackface with crazy wigs on, and grass skirts, and barefoot, throwing coconuts and stuff. And it just, you know--I think some of the civil rights groups said, we di- this is not what we're trying to do. And I think '61 [1961], there were actually some lawsuits or something about it and-- Speaker 2: Right, well, there's a couple of things. I mean, remember, I'm--my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] became a member in, in the '70s [1970s]. And there was, as I had mentioned, another group called the Mustangs that was more the--what I would call the elitist African American male group. And then, there were the Zulus, which were more working class, blue collar type of group. So, people were shocked when my father decided to join the Zulu organization. Speaker 1: Now, you were explaining off camera, like what Zulu is really about. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you know, though, I mean for most people, they go down and see it, most black people say, oh, no, what in the world are they doing? But, what are they doing? Speaker 2: Well, it is really tongue in cheek. And so, much of the costuming, if you will, is really, you know, just tongue in cheek, a mockery of, you know, the, the times when white people were in blackface. This is, we're going to get ahead of you. We're black people in, in blackface, and so it really is tongue in cheek. It's meant to be just fun and, you know, I, you know, you can take it too seriously. It was really, it's really not meant to be that serious. But part of it also is just the masquerade, you know, this whole idea of, of being in blackface. It really is a true masquerade of who is under there. And so, in many instances, you've got, you know, the darkest of black people underneath the black, and you've got the whitest of white people also. It allowed a complete costuming, or changing, or masking of who you really, really are, which is part of the whole Mardi Gras season, is this whole idea of masquerading, and being whoever you want to be underneath the, that, that mask. Speaker 1: Now, they had--Zulus were known for the music, and the floats. And you said, Louis Armstrong, one of his fondest aspirations was to be the king of the Zulus. Speaker 2: Right. Well, the other thing you have to remem- they started in 1916. They're one of--and the krewes, which are really clubs that participate in Mardi Gras, were very, very segregated. And so, you had, you know, Catholic krewe, you had Jewish krewes. I mean, you really, you know, starting with Rex, which was like the biggest krewe, no one, other than whites, could be members of Rex or parade in Rex. So Zulu was one of the first parades to go through the African American neighborhoods. And so, as an African American, you'd have something to look forward to where you could see your own people participating, and being involved in Mardi Gras in a significant way. And so, that's what people remember, and people just cheer, and can't wait to see, you know, Zulu come through the streets, and see the costumes, and the coconut, which is the prize, the collectable from Zulu, and the, the bloom with the, you know, the Zulu king and queen coming down. It's some--more a, you know, very much a lot of pride in the African community because, still today, they go in neighborhoods that the other krewes do not go in. And so, it's more of a, a rejoicing. And one of the things my dad wanted to do is to really try to have that group be as professional as it could be. So, you know, making certain that they invested in a clubhouse, making certain that they were able to participate in the charity organizations, you know, in a more significant way, and really running it like a professional organization. And so, over his lifetime, he really helped to build that organization to an organization that is known all over the, the country, if not the world, and getting their history down, and really having people understand what they're about. Story_ID: 531990 Speaker 1: In contrast, what would the Mustangs do, the group that-- Speaker 2: The Mustangs were much smaller, you know. You know, I don't know what their membership is, but let's call it thirty-five at most. Zulu [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] is three hundred. Mustangs would, you know, much more social, you know, family picnic, card games with the male members, moving from house to house, and having, you know, what you would expect from, you know, maybe like a Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], or something like that, kind of, except smaller, you know, moving house to house, you know, poker games for the men, picnics for the kids and the wives, and then maybe like an annual ball, you know. And so, their annual ball might be--call it two hundred people. The ball for Zulu is twenty thousand people. And so, it's just a much bigger platform for my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] to really try to, you know, push his agenda, which really was all about self-love, and we can do this if we just organize. Look at all, look at the world, and what's available to us as black people if we just organize, and pull together. So he was all about pulling people together regardless of their race, regardless of their religion, regardless of their economic standing that he felt that in numbers, you know, all of us could be successful. And there was opportunity for everybody if we worked together, as opposed to being separatist. So, you know, he was all about trying to get more Mustangs to, to apply for membership to Zulu. And, ultimately, Zulu became the prized club. And Mustang became kind of the afterthought. It switched in his, his lifetime. Story_ID: 531991 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and talents, you know, your mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] was a talented businesswoman and an artist, and your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] involved in education and touching--both of them must have really touched a whole lot of people. Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: And those-- Speaker 2: They did. We, our family still is very well known in New Orleans [Louisiana] and just, you know, so involved in the community, involved with all kinds of, of things. They were educating young children. My father's at, you know, in high school, and both involved in different churches. After my mother got married, she raised the two of us [Rogers and her brother, Roy Anthony Glapion] Catholic, but then moved back to her church. So she was very involved in a very large Baptist church down in New Orleans as the treasurer. So, she had that whole collection of, of people to know, and worked with young girls, as my father was working with young, young boys to encourage them to be all that they could be, and to be young ladies. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look at their--when you think about their personalities and talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my father, I would say, probably my, my father would be the one. But I, you know, I'm a combination, though, without question, definitely a combination. Speaker 1: Okay. What--why, your father? Speaker 2: I would say because I have spent much of my life wanting to try to bring people together. In the work that I do, I am not interested in sitting in an office day in and day out. I like to work with people that tend to be more blue-collar types of employees, less advanced degree types of employees because I think I can add more value with the other group, in terms of creating an environment, where they can be everything that they can be. And I enjoy that more, as opposed to sitting around debating with people that have their educational training that I have, sitting around with a group of M.B.A.'s analyzing, or developing a strategy versus, say, working with union leadership to, to develop ways that we can assist that union membership to do better work is more interesting than developing a corporate strategy. Story_ID: 531992 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Probably one of my earliest is walking across--we had a big porch, and walking across, and my grandmother [Marie Williams Smith] lived next door--my mother's mother--walking across that porch, to go to have morning coffee with her. I probably had more milk than coffee, but I thought it was coffee at the time. So, it was probably more like cafe au lait (laughter) than coffee, but, you know, this is like three years old or four, going to, you know, before she went out to work, going to have my morning coffee, get the day started. Story_ID: 531993 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in? Speaker 2: I lived in what was called, and still is, the 7th Ward of New Orleans [Louisiana], which is, as I had mentioned before, at the time, was more of a, a Creole bastion or ward. And, actually, I'm trying to think--we don't call them wards. I'm bringing my Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: It's a parish, yeah. Speaker 2: Parish, the 7th--we didn't call it, yeah-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: --parish, parish is bigger. Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess so, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're smaller--I'll think of it. Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it is a ward, isn't it? Isn't it just a ward? Speaker 2: 7th Ward, yeah, actually, it is. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, it is, yeah. Speaker 2: You're right, 'cause there's the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, 7th Ward. Orleans Parish [Louisiana] is where we lived. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was, right, not far from downtown, but very close to the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And so, we lived probably, you know, fifteen blocks from the French Quarter. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, in your household, is--you have a brother, a younger brother? Speaker 2: I have one brother, yes. Speaker 1: Named Roy [Roy Anthony Glapion]-- Speaker 2: Roy. Speaker 1: --after your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: My mother [Joyce Smith Glapion]-- Speaker 1: --your mother and your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did--was that the household or-- Speaker 2: That was the household. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But at some point, my grandmother [Marie Williams Smith], my mother's mother lived in an apartment 'cause this house had another apartment. She lived there for a period of time with her husband [Benjamin Smith, Sr.]. And my uncle lived downstairs, so this was a big old house that had been kind of cut up a little bit. And so, my grandmother and her husband lived upstairs. And my uncle lived downstairs. And an aunt across the street, so really was--and then my grand- other grandparents around the corner. And then, we had some other properties. They bought up properties in the neighborhood, and family members lived in many of those properties. So, we're a very close-knit family in the early years. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, people were very nearby. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 531994 Speaker 1: Describe growing up for us, and, now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, you know, was very interested in school. I was almost a little bookworm, you know, especially grades first through eighth [at St. Louis Cathedral School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I would say, very interested in, in studying and, and learning everything that I could learn. At the same time, we had--the daycare center [Tommy Tucker Preschool, New Orleans, Louisiana] was downstairs. And so, I had an opportunity to really practice, if you will, my leadership skills at a very young age. I mean, I thought nothing of, you know, the age of seven, eight, sitting down with a group of kids that are three and four, and trying to teach them something, whether it be alphabets, or songs, or music. You know, I loved doing that, and I loved also riding--my [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Smith, Sr.] was the driver, so to speak. He would drive the children home at the end of the day. And so, that's really how I saw the city. So, when you think about sights and sounds, we would get in the bus, get all the kids in. And then I would go with him, a ride, have a list, and we'd check it off: "Okay, Billy, we're dropping him off, what's his address?" Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Even though my grandfather knew the addresses, he would have me read them off. You know so, I'd have a little job to do, doing, so many evenings, I would ride with him in the bus to drop off the, the kids. And then, come back, and finish whatever homework I had, and have dinner, and start my, my next day. We played, you know, we rode our bikes in the neighborhood [7th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana]. We had areas, block areas, we could go to. I had a cousin across the street that, if he took us, we could go further. So, we'd go to City Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time, and, and ride through there with all the beautiful big trees with the moss hanging off of them, or we'd ride down towards the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I love old historical buildings. And so that has always been a love of mine to live in history. So, I like to live in old buildings, and just pretend that it's--I'm back in whatever year that building was built, or pretend that I hear the, the walls talking, talking to me about sometime before myself. On many occasions, we'd have, like I said, big family meals, other families coming to our house. We were kind of the central, central location, central to downtown, never really lived in the suburbs at all. We were raised in the city, and so that really was, you know, our lifestyle. And, you know, we went to school in the French Quarter. And so, that was a whole, another exciting world as a young child. You can imagine some of the sights we saw just walking through the streets of the French Quarter, whether it be, you know, people that had, had a little bit too much to drink, or prostitutes on the sidewalks dressed in--at the time we're thinking, well, that's a colorful outfit that she has on, or short skirt, or whatever. We saw many sides to life, and many different types of people. The French Quarter was very, very integrated with people that were not from New Orleans [Louisiana], musicians, you know, artists. And so, we saw all of that, and learned very early on to move freely between all types of people. So, I don't feel that I was raised in a segregated environment. I really was not. I was raised in a very mixed atmosphere, even though I went home to a predominantly black neighborhood. I was out of that neighborhood all day, every day. Speaker 1: Now, did the people in your neighborhood speak with the Creole-- Speaker 2: Patois? Speaker 1: Patois. Speaker 2: Some of them did, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you learn any of it (unclear)? Speaker 2: Very little, very, you know, certain words, you know, that we, are things that we say, banquette or (Patois word), or just the medium, which is you know the neutral ground. You know, they--we have different words for things, but not a whole, not anything I could really string together. Story_ID: 531995 Speaker 1: Was there a lot of music around you when you were growing up? Speaker 2: There was because remember I went to school [St. Louis Cathedral School] in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And so, you know, there's--were lots of jazz clubs in the French Quarter. And my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] having had a musical background, she, you know, there was always music, you know, in the house. This was earlier on, and then she kind of got away from that. By the time, then, my brother [Roy Anthony Glapion] and I had our own music, you know, in the house. And her u- her brother, one of her brothers, was very, very interested in music as well. So, we did have, you know, music around. We were ver- I would say, very integrated into what, what you would traditionally expect New Orleans [Louisiana], a person from New Orleans to be. The food, the, you know, the Catholicism, the music, the French Quarter, the old house, you know, all of that kind of commingled, you, you would say. Yeah, that's pretty typical of what I'd expect a New Orleans family to, to be like. Speaker 1: So, it's all true? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true, you know, nobody wants to leave. We all stuck together. You know, when you go somewhere, I mean, our family was the type of family that, "Why are you going there on vacation when you can stay here?" "Well, we just want to--let's just go see, you know, Washington, D.C. Maybe we want to see the, the White House [Washington, D.C.]." "Uh, why?" You know. "Okay, well, you know, you try it." And so, you know, a couple of people would go out to D.C., and try it--look, look around. They come back. Next year, like everyone would go together (laughter). You know, it's kind when you see Asian groups. That would be New Orleans groups. Everybody's going together. People aren't venturing out so much on their own. So, the whole family would then--extended family would go to the same vacation spot. And somebody would say, "Well, let's try, you know, what about Canada? Anybody been there?" "Oh, well, you try it." And then everybody would go to Canada. So, I remember those types of vacations that my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.], being a teacher, there were conventions, you know, each year. So, we would go to whatever that city--was typically with another couple and their families. And then, the whole family would then go. If we liked the town, the whole family would go back to that town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Always driving, he liked to drive. Story_ID: 531996 Speaker 1: So you did some tutoring when you were growing up. So, I assume you're a good student in school? Speaker 2: I did okay for myself (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, what school did you go to first? Speaker 2: I went to St. Louis Cathedral [St. Louis Cathedral School], that's my elementary school in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's the same, that's where Marie Laveau is buried right there [St. Louis Cemetery No. 1, New Orleans, Louisiana] Speaker 2: Right nearby, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's, all the tourists walk by there every day. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So, you were right in the middle of all the cosmopolitan stuff and (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. So, that was my elementary school. And then, I went to Academy of the Sacred Heart for high school, which is in the Garden District, my other favorite part of New Orleans [Louisiana]. So, I have two favorite parts of town: the French Quarter and the Garden District. Speaker 1: Okay. In grade school, did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I liked, I liked all the subjects. I--probably math. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have a--was there a particular teacher that was a mentor, or have a special interest in you at that time? Speaker 2: I'd like to say all of my teachers had a special interest in me because I, I feel like I had so much support in, at that el- elementary school. I really was a good student, and so, I think for teachers, if they have a good student, they sometimes, they gravitate to that student. So, probably in my eight years there, I was at the top of my class every year. That just shows you probably wasn't that hard if I was at the, at the top of the class every year. But-- Speaker 1: There's some smart people from New Orleans, so that's not-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I can't, I can't pick out just one, you know, a lot--it was all nuns, mostly nuns, you know, so lots of nuns, Sister Maryanne [ph.], Sister Julia [ph.]. Speaker 1: Was St. Louis integrated? Speaker 2: Yes, it was integrated, and there was--also very international. So, there were a lot of students from other countries that were going to that school I think probably because of its location. And, you know, people whose parents were artists or musicians living in the French Quarter, so they could easily get to work in the evening, sent their children there. Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates there that we might know? Any of the musicians we know (unclear)? Speaker 2: Only backup I mean, some of the, some of Harry Connick's [Harry Connick, Jr.] backup musicians went to my high school, his drummer. One of his drummers went to St. Louis Cathedral. Story_ID: 531997 Speaker 1: Was radio and television a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Radio and--both were, certainly we listened to radio we--on the way to school, in the morning, driving to school, or also I think in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], television was everything for kids. You know, whether it be starting off with your morning cartoons, or moving into your horror movies. They used to have these like cycles of, you know, three hours of horror, you know. And actually, there was a local gentleman that used to dress up like a professor, was a scary professor, and do this whole horror show, so we'd watch that. And then, all the c- all your sitcoms, you know, when you're little, when, in those early years, you're watching, you know, 'I Dream of Jeannie,' 'Julia.' You're watching 'Star Trek.' You're watching, I mean, and 'I Love Lucy.' You're watching, you know, all, you know, all the, all the sitcoms. We watched all of them--'The Brady Bunch,' 'Batman,' 'cause I had a brother [Roy Anthony Glapion]. So I--had to go back and forth with the stuff he wanted to watch (laughter). And then, just all those old--I loved all those old shows, and all those sitcoms. And so, we would negotiate time- bedtime, with my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion]. You know, we had a seven o'clock bedtime, then we negotiate to 7:30, to 8, 8:30. That was a big thing, getting a half an hour, so you could watch one more show. Speaker 1: Now with a, with a, in the aftermath of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], there's so much on now, so, so many retrospectives about New Orleans [Louisiana] culture. And where they talk about all the music going back to Fats Domino, and other of the writers, early R and B songs that were on the radio, or the early days of what we then call rock and roll, which is now I guess we can call R and B now. But did you have a sense of, when you were growing up, that New Orleans had made such a contribution to the world in terms of music? Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't think we really thought about it that way. My aunt, her family are the Toussaint, the Toussaint family, and so, we just--they were just there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's the songwriter [Allen Toussaint] right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Neville-- Speaker 1: What's the-- Speaker 2: The Neville Brothers. They were--we--they were just around. And so, you'd go to, you know, Jazz Fest [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival], and that was just an annual event, you know, and, and your class, your school will take you. I think, probably by eighth grade, my final year in my elementary school [St. Louis Cathedral School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and my final year as a s- class going to Jazz Fest, did I realize how special that was. Because I looked around, and I said, oh, my gosh, look at all of these people from all over the world at Jazz Fest. And look how much they're enjoying this. And we kind of take this for granted, you know, and just, you know, looking around, hearing all the different music, seeing all the different cuisine, and all of the things that were really unique to New Orleans through their eyes. I still didn't get it because I'm always in New Orleans, so to me, it's not that unique because I don't have anything to compare it against. Not until I left for college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] did I really realize how unique and special New Orleans was. You know, in terms of how we do things in the culture, and how, you know, it really is a gem of all American cities, and it's not the same. You know, there's nothing about it that's the same, or typical of an American city. Story_ID: 531998 Speaker 1: Tell us about high school now. You went to Academy of the Sacred Heart [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I assume you did well in high school, too? Speaker 2: I did pretty good (laughter), I did pretty good. I went--selected Academy of the Sacred Heart, had a tremendous reputation, the school did. It's all girls and, even though it was across town, I felt it was important to challenge myself and to really, you know, see, you know, how smart I was or not, or at least be able to learn some more from people that were allegedly supposed to be, you know, some of the smartest girls in the city. And so, my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] pushed me to go to Academy of the Sacred Heart, and so there I was. I many mornings took the streetcar, just because somehow I knew that we wouldn't always have streetcars with the seats that push back and, and, and forward, so you could sit either way on the streetcar. And I could also look out the window and really, to see the whole city. And so, you know, starting from the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] and going uptown on that ride each morning was a pleasure for me just to, you know, just to, you know, be back, like I said, to think about history, and just all the trees. It's a great ride, great ride, very historic way to get to school. At any rate, at that particular high school, they were very few minorities. And so, that was really the first time that I started to think about and feel that there really were, you know, these different worlds with barriers. And that people weren't all the same, and people didn't all want to get along with each other, and that sometimes people made their differences, you know, artificial barriers. And so, many of the young ladies that were there, were very different than I was. They grew up in a different part of town. They were very wealthy. And they had been together since pre-kindergarten. I came in at ninth grade. Many of them had been together since they were four. And so, I had some time to, to make up. So, I was feeling a little bit isolated coming into that school in the ninth grade, and it was a different neighborhood [Garden District, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I really hadn't spent that much time in that part of town. And so I struggled in my initial, my first year, struggling with the curriculum, and struggling socially. Lucky for me, there was another African American Creole girl, who turned out to be my best friend growing up, and is still a very good friend of mine whose--our parents knew each other. And she lived in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] not far from where I lived, lived in Gentilly [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And so we became very close friends. And she had been there, she had integrated the school, so she had been there since she was four. Speaker 1: What's her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she knew the families that were receptive to African Americans and those that were not. Speaker 1: Okay. What's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Vanessa Monconduit [Vanessa Monconduit Ashford]. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell that? Speaker 2: M-O-N-C-O-N-D-U-I-T. Story_ID: 531999 Speaker 1: You spent the first year [at Academy of the Sacred Heart, New Orleans, Louisiana] just trying to get up to speed, right, you're saying (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First year trying to get up to speed. I had not taken a foreign language. There was foreign language requirement, you know, and really just trying to get my, you know, feet wet, and get acclimated to what it was I needed to do because I was determined, you know, to graduate in that top group. I could see that people were sorting out, you know, that there was a kind of a little advanced group, and there was the rest of the people. And so, I was determined, and gave myself, you know, that first year to kind of figure that out, and get with the, the more aggressive academically, that group. I wanted to be in that group. I was very driven and competitive to be with the top ladies, girls, whatever. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your sophomore year, did you make it to-- Speaker 2: I made it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I made it. And so, I, you know, I was able to do well and got myself, you know, acclimated. And I was well on my way, studied hard, studied extremely hard in those four years that I was there, and did, did well. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you graduate near the top of your class or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember what my number was exactly, but I was in the, no, somewhere in that, that top ten, you know, group. I was not the top, no, but probably ten or twelve is what I recall, something like that. Story_ID: 532000 Speaker 1: Did you play sports in school? Speaker 2: I did not play sports. I, I was involved in some community work. I was also involved with some theater. And so, I directed one of our school plays [at Academy of the Sacred Heart, New Orleans, Louisiana]. That was the big thing--to work your way up to directing. So, I did that and, and that was, you know, those were kind of, you know, my, my life at school. I don't recall that I did that many things at school. I had a very full life at home. I was still doing things with the daycare center [Tommy Tucker Preschool, New Orleans, Louisiana], still spending a lot of time with my grandparents, and my grandmother [Marie Williams Smith] in particular, my mother's mother. And so, I had a very involved life on the sidelines, and also a very in- involved social life. And so, I was at every party--Vanessa [Vanessa Monconduit Ashford] and I--we were at every party, every football game, every ball game, every concert, you know. We were discovering our teenage years. And so, Vanessa wasn't as academically driven as I was, so my time was limited. I did all my fun stuff. And then, I worked through the wee hours to get my schoolwork done. So, I didn't have a lot of time to do a lot of extracurriculars. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what football team did you follow 'cause I assume that you all didn't have one (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], we didn't have one, St. Augustine was the, the African American Catholic boys school. So, my brother [Roy Anthony Glapion] went there, and her brothers went there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that school was located in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]. So, my brother's experience in high school was much different than my experience was. I went across town to high school. He walked to high school. Speaker 1: Okay. The 7th Ward is all-black ward basically? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, did they have some kind of a prom at the school? Speaker 2: They had--we had our own proms. And they had their proms as well. So, but they would have homecoming and the homecoming game. They'd have lots of dances. We went to all of their dances. We-- Speaker 1: At St. Augustine's? Speaker 2: At St. Augustine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, we went to all dances. And there were also African American female high schools. Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was one of them. And St. Mary's [St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] was the other one. So, sometimes we would go to some of their parties as well. And we would also go to, you know, as we got older in high school--let's say juniors and seniors--we would go to parties at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] or Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, right there in the city (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 532001 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from Academy of the Sacred Heart, New Orleans, Louisiana], had you, had you figured out a area of concentration at that point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I had not. My father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] wanted me to be a doctor, hence his, you know, kind of longing to be a doctor in his life. And so that had always been in the back of my mind, and in the back of his more than mine. And so we kind of like said okay, you know. I had not argued about that, but that was kind of in the back of my mind, although my mother [Joyce Smith Glapion] knew--she doubted that, that was going to work for me, just, just based on my personality, and that she really couldn't see me working in a hospital in a uniform every day (laughter). That, that she, she thought, okay, well, we'll see, so it was kind of in the back of my mind. Speaker 1: Well, you were diligent, a good student. I mean, it seems to--I mean, what factor in your personality did she think was (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would want to be in a more fun atmosphere; that I would not want to be working in a hospital operating on anybody or, that, that wouldn't be what I would want, want to do. Speaker 1: It's too low key or too--it's not as, or it wasn't fun, I guess (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I guess it's fun for the right person, but sh- just that I'd be wanting to interact more with people versus you know, someone who is obviously, can't interact, they're getting surgery, that I would want to be more with people, and talking with people, and having a conversation and, than fixing somebody. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you considered college, you know, what were the options? Speaker 2: It was pretty simple. I, I had said to my cousins--I had two older cousins that went to school out east. And I had always, from a young girl, felt that the best institutions, or the more prestigious institutions, were in the East. That was just in my head somehow. I don't know how, I can't recall, but that I was going to go to school out east. I said that from the time I was six, or five. And so, I never even wavered, or even thought about any, any schools other than what I had ident- I identified as the East Coast. My cousins, older cousins, one had gone to Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts], and the other had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And so, I said, "You know, well, I'm thinking, you know, maybe I should apply and try to get into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]." And they said, "Oh, no. No, no, no, no. You're going to go to Wellesley, and then you can go to Harvard for graduate school. That, that's what you're going to do. So, you know, I know you like Georgetown [Georgetown University], and our uncle lives there [Washington, D.C.], but, you know, you're going to go to New England, and you're going to do Wellesley, and that's going to be really good for you. And then, you can apply to graduate school and go to Harvard then." So, that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was lucky enough to get into, to Wellesley. My parents, of course, wanted me to stay and go to Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 532002 Speaker 1: So, what was Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] like? Was it a big cultural shock from New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was in that, you know, here you are, thrown into this environment as a freshman, living away for the first time, very, you know, academically challenging. And I was tired by this point 'cause I'd spent four years really studying hard. So that first year, and my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] kind of pre-picked my courses for me 'cause remember he's still thinking pre-med. So, I think I had biology, and German, and calculus, and some other god-forsaken, I don't know, physics, let's say, or chemistry or something. So, you know, I am struggling. I'm thinking, you know, what is this? I don't like it. I don't want to know it. I, you know, what am I going to do here? I don't think I'm doing so hot (laughter) in these subjects. And so, I changed them. I changed them pretty early, early on--some of them, not all of them--changed them pretty early on, and started really kind of struggling with, what do I want to be? I'm not going to do this doctor thing 'cause I see that's not working for me. You know, so I began this, like kind of search for, uh oh, what should I be studying? You know, so I was kind of in this turmoil of what should I be studying, knowing that the clock was ticking against me because grades would be coming out at the end of the, you know, semester, whatever. And I would have to talk with him about this whole pre-med thing, and that probably wasn't go so well. So, I was stressed, to say the least. So, I got through the first semester, actually got through the second semester. And that summer, decided to take a, I think a physics course at Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And my father kept asking for my grades, "Where are those grades, where are those grades? I know they must have put out something." He wrote a letter to the school saying, "We don't seem to be getting our grades here. What's the problem?" And so finally I had to show him that the grades that summer of whatever--let's see, must have been '78 [1978]--not a good conversation. I think I probably had like a C average. And I had switched around a number of courses, and he wasn't too thrilled with me. And so, that's when we had our conversation about me not being a doctor, and thinking about something else. So, I said to him, I said, "Well, probably just a lawyer. I'm just, you know, I'm going to be lawyer." And my father would say to me, "You better get it together because this is no good. I can, you know, I can see this is going nowhere fast. So, you know, we can easily get you--." The whole thing was--see, I like clothes. The whole thing was, scare me, and they'd say, "I can see you in that, that Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] uniform behind the counter right now serving those, those malted drinks," (laughter) he goes, "with your little name tag. Yep, that'll be you, with a little apron and--" (laughter) "serving those--" you know, whatever, those soda drinks. I said, "No, no, I don't want to wear a uniform," (laughter). "No, I'll do better," you know. So, that was the running joke, I was going to work at Woolworths. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you, that kind of prod you into (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how he kind of like, you know, the whole uniform thing got me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 532003 Speaker 1: What was Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] like? Were there other black students at Wellesley? Speaker 2: There were black students at Wellesley. I mean, it was integrated by, by that point, certainly not tons of African American students, very international mix, women from all over the country. My roommate, really, my first roommate had never met anyone black. She was from Montana. And so, that was a learning experience for both of us in that first semester because she just knew nothing about black culture, or African American culture, nothing at all, you know. I can remember her asking me, "Is your whole body brown?" (Laughter) Yeah, it would be. Not just my hands and my feet, or my face. You know, just, but very naive, you know, very naive, mainly because she grew up in a, a lumbering community, lumber, you know, I don't know if her father was a lumberjack, but, you know, just, you know, very insular. And so, at that point, I began to realize what a melting pot New Orleans [Louisiana] was and you know, that I had been exposed to international people from all over the world living in New Orleans. And, you know, just whites and blacks and, you know, I didn't feel the need that I had to just be with blacks, or I had to just be with, you know, this group. And so, I think I was doing some sorting through in those initial two years of my own identify, from a racial standpoint, and wound up in my second year taking some African American history courses. Speaker 1: Now, I know that Tony Martin was at Wellesley-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --'cause he--did you take any courses from Tony? Speaker 2: I did not, did not. Tony Martin, the African American--yes, the man, not Toni Morrison, Tony Martin? Speaker 1: Tony Martin, yeah. Speaker 2: I did take some courses from Tony Martin, yes. Speaker 1: He was the Garvey scholar who-- Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, I sure did. Speaker 1: --rescued Marcus Garvey's-- Speaker 2: I sure did. Speaker 1: --reputation (unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: I absolutely did, I absolutely did. And there was another gentleman, Weldon [ph.], who was also there. I took courses from both of them. And it was a time where I really, not ever studied my history, you know. And I won't say I was running away from that, but my father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] was a type of person say, "Integration, integration, integration. Why are you wasting time on this separatist literature?" I mean, and I don't know if he was doing that just to push me because my father was certainly very much involved with African American history and, you know, having pride in that, and working to make certain the Zulu club [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] got its place in history. And so, but maybe he was evolving in those '80s [1980s], and then, you know, '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], when I was, was in college, or maybe he just wanted to make certain that I had the full experience. And I didn't segregate myself only to the African American table in the dining hall. He kept saying, "Mix it up, mix it up, mix it up." And so, I did se- spend some time learning about my culture in my, my years at, at Wellesley. Story_ID: 532004 Speaker 1: Was there an attempt when you were grow- coming along, now you graduated from high school [Academy of the Sacred Heart, New Orleans, Louisiana] in seventy-- Speaker 2: Seven [1977]-- Speaker 1: --seven [1977]? Yeah. Was there an attempt in New Orleans [Louisiana] to teach black history and culture in the classroom in those Catholic schools (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very limited-- Speaker 1: You're in Catholic school. Speaker 2: --very limited. I recall working on, during Black History Month, working on--I said, "Why don't we have a, you know, black history display?" And I remember working on--they said, "Well, you can do that." Working on it myself, and putting that together, because in my sophomore year in high school, I became very militant. I got, grew my big Afro. I had my big earrings on. I had, you know, I was the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis of my high school. You know, read--I read all the H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]; the Angela Davis story; the Soledad brothers, I mean prison [Soledad State Prison; Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California]. You know, I read, I was reading all of that, you know, black literature, say, in my sophomore year. And, you know, just kind of feeling my oats as, you know, black is beautiful. And, you know, all of the black pride, especially in this environment that was all white. So, we got to have some- something, some black, red, and green around here, you know. And they said, "Sure, then you do it." And so, I did it. So, you know, and then by my senior year, I'd gotten rid of the Afro, and I was, you know, a little calmer. Story_ID: 532005 Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you pick as a major finally at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I majored in political science and economics as a minor at Wellesley. I decided, sometime after my sophomore year, j- my junior year, that probably the law school or business school, directionally, was where I wanted to be. And being in a liberal arts college I felt that those two disciplines would prepare me the best for an entree, or entry, into either of those fields. And that, and taking art was not going to really help me. This is my naive way. I wouldn't counsel that way today. You know, with a liberal arts education, I would--if my daughter [Victoria Rogers] winds up in liberal arts, I'm going to tell her, take everything, learn everything about everything. It's the only chance you get to really sit back and learn all of these different areas. But at that time, again, with my father's [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] influence behind me, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, I really focused in on, on disciplines that I thought would translate into graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what were you thinking in terms of graduate school then? What were you thinking you'd-- Speaker 2: Law or business. Had not decided, I spent my junior year in Switzerland in international business. And so, that gave me an opportunity to like, kind of understand what a business course was, as opposed to an economics course. And so, you know, I was able to, you know, get a better understanding of application of economics in a business, and what that meant. And so, I spent that spring semester in, in Geneva, Switzerland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then came back for my senior year to Wellesley and graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you graduated in--is it nineteen eighty-- Speaker 2: One [1981]. Speaker 1: --one [1981], okay. And with a degree in--B.A. (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Political science. Speaker 1: Is it B.S. or-- Speaker 2: B.A. Speaker 1: Okay, B.A., okay, political science, okay. Story_ID: 532006 Speaker 1: Now, you went on to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for an M.B.A. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Did you go right away? Speaker 2: No, I spent two years working. And so, by the time I finished my degree, I'd figured out that, you know what? I probably, if I want to go to business school, it makes sense to get some business experience. So, I was leaning towards business school, and I took a job at--I wanted a job managing people. But there was the phone company, at the time, was hiring people to do just that straight out of college, which was, was hard to find at that time, that they'd give you a whole group to manage. But they, they, you know, I was moving along, moving along, got a call, there's going to be a hiring freeze. So, I just missed that. So, then, I had to like, figure out, okay, what are you going to do now? And so, I took a job with Xerox [Xerox Corporation] in their sales training program, mainly because I felt like, you know, I never really going to be, or want to be in sales. But it's a good opportunity to learn how it works, and what makes it work, and what it takes to be good in sales. So, I did that. I t- I went into that program. And then. I got a call about a year into that program, that they were ready to take me at New England Telephone [New England Telephone and Telegraph Company; Verizon Communications, Inc.]. The freeze was over. They pulled up my application, and they were ready to hire me if I was ready to come. So, I spent one year there and the second year I spent at New England Telephone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I applied to business school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you lived in, you were living in-- Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Still at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 532007 Speaker 1: You applied to Harvard, and you were admitted to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Business School, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, any stories about the program there-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or any mentors in school? Speaker 2: You know what? I don't know if it was necessarily mentors. I was lucky in that I did know people, like Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire], for example. You know, he was a very close friend, and he was there at the same time because there were people. He did the J.D./M.B.A. program. And so, and people like Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.], you know, who had been through the program, or Al Haymon, or, you know, [HistoryMaker] Deborah Wright, you know, all of these people, you know, were still around to some extent, whether they had started, just started work, work in New York [New York], or they were doing J.D./M.B.A. programs. And so, I had known them through my, my Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] timeframe. Or people like Gloria Mayfield [Gloria Mayfield Banks], who's at, you know, at--oh, what's the pink ladies that do all the selling--Mary Kay [Mary Kay Inc.]. They were around. So, these people were around that I knew during my Wellesley years. And so, they could help me, and kind of teach me the ropes, and help me to, to get through the program. I mean, I knew a couple of things. I knew that, you know, basically, it is, you know, a mind game. It's you against the rest of your classmates, and you against yourself, and they do things to, you know, keep you a little unsteady at the beginning, you know, cold call, you know, first day, co- come into class. They cold call someone that they know is going to really have done, a really excellent job of preparing that case, just to set the, set the pace. So, it's kind of like a race. So, if they, you know, if you have a group of ten people, and you know one of them used to be a track star, you pick that one, and you say, okay, you're going to run first (laughter). So, everyone else is like, oh, my god, how did she do that? How did he do that? I'll never be able to do that when they pick on me, you know, or pick me, which you pick on me, pick me. You know, how, you know, what am I going to do? And I also was lucky enough to be living with a second year student. And so, she had gone through the program, and she was a great counsel, and is still a, a dear friend, Cynthia Torres, who lives out in Los Angeles [California]. So, you know, I had kind of my own like network of people that I could depend on. And then, we had study groups, although I, I spent, you know, it's amazing to me because I, again, I--you think back on things. I, I spent less time in a study group than most of my classmates. Almost everyone else was in a study group. I wasn't. And I don't, you know, I don't know why I wasn't. I, I just, you know, I was in and out of a study group. Maybe 'cause I, I'm a free spirit. I didn't want to be locked into every night, you got to meet at this time. Like, ugh, what if I'm watching TV? I want to meet later (laughter), or, whatever, you know, what I mean? But I managed, I managed. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you got out of there. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did fine-- Speaker 1: And it's not easy either so. Speaker 2: --I did fine, but I, but I probably could be easier on myself if I was in the study group because then you've got the varied skills that's of all the members, you know, of the study group. I'm just, you know, today, coming out of a course I just took at the University of Chicago business school [University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois]. And part of the reason we were able to get through some of the work were the study groups. Speaker 1: Okay. So, if you had to do it again, you'd-- Speaker 2: I'd be in my study group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wouldn't second guess that. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 532008 Speaker 1: But at the same time, did you, did you feel it was real tough and did you think that-- Speaker 2: I think it depended on the courses. I think, you know, the most eye-opening thing for me was the first quarter grades, and realizing that, you know what, Desiree [HistoryMaker Desiree Rogers], you're not going to be able to just get by here. You're going to have to really buckle down and do, do the work every night, you know, and really focus because I had been able to kind of, you know, get by, maybe up until that point and, in some respects--not all the time, but once in a while. That's when I thought of as a kind of a door closing. You know, how sometimes, if the door is closing, you just kind of get by, and, and make it. And when I say, just get by, that doesn't mean I was getting a C. I mean, I got my A, but I just got by, you know. I like that thrill of am I going to make it? Am I not going to make it? You know, I mean, everybody can make it if you study all night. There's no fun to that, you know, let's add a little pressure to this. And so, I said, that, that process of that door closed, you're not going to make it, honey. You're going to get caught, so you got to prepare a little longer and work a little harder on this work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, that was a major lesson for me. Speaker 1: So, did you have to write a thesis or something for-- Speaker 2: No, we didn't. You know, mainly, the bulk of your grade is participation at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. And you've got lots of papers and lots of, you know, exams, where the rest of your, your grade is based on that. And so, mainly the bulk of it is preparing the work. That's what's so grueling about it, is preparing those cases every day, and not knowing whether you're going to be called on or not, so you need to be prepared. That's the pressure, and you don't want to be called on, and I wouldn't say it's not necessarily about not having the right answer, it is about having a thoughtful answer. And if you haven't read the material, you couldn't possibly have a thoughtful answer. And so if you're called upon, you are actually being asked to lead that discussion for the day. And so, they will start with your analysis of the situation, so you've got to, you know, have that analysis done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and that's--parts not easy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Were that many black students in the program? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I, I don't remember exactly how many. Let's say, we had eight hundred in our class. Maybe we had under a hundred minorities. Speaker 1: Okay. That includes all minorities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Something, something like-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yes, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 532009 Speaker 1: So, you finished Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in--? Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], okay. And what did you do? Now, and you got married [to HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] right after? Speaker 2: Right--soon after. Speaker 1: That's right. Soon after, yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I moved to Chicago [Illinois]. I didn't want to go back to New York [New York] because I felt it would be kind of school, outside of school, with the same group, you know, all my friends from college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and graduate school. But now, we'd all be working. So, I felt it was important to, to move out of that and, and see what else was, was there, what was, you know, what else was in the world. And so, I decided I would move to Chicago. That was the next b- biggest city if I left the East Coast. I didn't want to go south, 'cause to me, the South was all about New Orleans [Louisiana]. And I didn't want to go to the West Coast. And so, I picked Chicago. And I showed up here in the summer of '85 [1985] having taken a job with AT&T [AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.]. And so, again, I was looking for a job that would allow me to manage a large group of people. That large group was probably about seventy people. And so, that's what I wanted to do. I wanted to see if I could accomplish something through another group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's why I took that job. Story_ID: 532010 Speaker 1: You're at AT&T [AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.], nineteen eighty--? Speaker 2: Five [1985]. Speaker 1: Five [1985], okay. Speaker 2: Summer of '85 [1985]. So, I moved to Chicago [Illinois] and I take a job in operations. And, you know, I really enjoy that challenge of going into an organization where, you know, I'm the only female. And I'm basically the manager of about seventy people, many of them engineers, and many of them with long tenures with the company. And so, I decide if I can manage through this group, and get them to do outstanding work, then maybe I'm on to something in terms of just how I manage an overall development of what I hope to be in the future--just challenge myself. I thought of it as my little laboratory. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did it go? Speaker 2: It's probably one of the most difficult jobs I've, I've ever had. A couple of things happened here that I didn't know. Typically, they wouldn't bring an M.B- M.B.A. student into the operational area. Chicago had kind of gotten out of line, if you will, and I don't mean that in, in a bad way, but just out of sync with headquarters. And somehow, my application had slipped by, and I'd been hired to, to be in this position, even though they would have preferred to have had me in a more traditional M.B.A. type of role. And so, my colleagues, my peers, were not very happy that a woman was coming in, much less a woman with an M.B.A., somebody that, you know, may have some different ideas than they would have. And, you know, they were, felt threatened by that, so they made it extremely difficult for me, you know, day in and day out, you know, jokes, uncomfortable, you know, you know, taunting. Speaker 1: Well, were you supervising mostly white males? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Older? Speaker 2: It wasn't them, though-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was my peers. The other men that were at my level. They resented the fact that I was coming in there at however old I was, twenty-five. And they were, you know, fifty-five, in the same jobs, and, you know, I hadn't even worked with the company. What would I, what did I know about engineering? You know, why did I have this job? And so, they were going to make it difficult for me to do my job. Speaker 1: Okay. What kind of things would they do? Speaker 2: Oh, anything from, you know, making certain that the group that I had was loaded up with problem performers, you know. And so, my group was kind of put together from other groups. So I would get kind of the people that had the most problems, you know, whether it's attendance or performance. Somehow I ended up with a large group of people with problems. All kinds of sexual jokes. You know, that was another, another means of trying to level the playing field, if you will, trying to, you know, make me nervous, or what have you, you know, comments about my appearance, stuff like that, like uh, you know. I just kind of brush it off and keep, keep moving. I really never thought about any kind of sexual harassment at that time. I was very, very focused on doing my job and getting my job done right. That's all I cared about. And so, people could say things to me and I just keep moving. I wasn't interested in trying to do a lawsuit. And I--like, whatever, okay, what do we need to do today (laughter)? What do I need to get done? And I was very interested in having some way of measuring that. I wanted to have a, a way of being able to look back and see what I had done, because in my mind, regardless of--if people are going be fair in evaluation or not, I could have my own record, you know, based on the performance and the work that we were doing. It would always stand. And so, I was able to create an environment with many people that had been told they couldn't, remember, I got those slow performers, or no performers. I could talk to them and say, you know, "Okay, we're the underdogs, you know, they say we can't get this done. Let's show everybody how we can get this done." So, from Xerox [Xerox Corporation], I learned all this, like posting of results, right, and the sales--. So, so, I start posting our results. And, sure enough, you know, the backlog we had, you know, those numbers start coming down. And with that, you know, people starting, getting more prideful in the work that they were doing, and it caught on. And so, it became this, like game among our team, you know. Well, they say, we can't do it. We can do it. And so, we were actually--our numbers at the time were extremely, extremely good. Unfortunately, I got promoted to move to headquarters (laughter), which is exactly where I didn't want to be. Speaker 1: Now, headquarters for AT&T (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is in New Jersey. Speaker 1: --is in New Jersey, okay. Speaker 2: New Jersey. And so-- Speaker 1: So how--well, what year is this now? Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986] probably. Story_ID: 532011 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, just one more question about Chicago [Illinois]. You c- you were here in Chicago during the heyday of the Harold Washington administration. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: How, how, what was the atmosphere of the city like? Speaker 2: You know, I didn't know very many people here in '85 [1985]. I did know some, and I just remember thinking, boy, this guy is having hell. What in the world is, is going on here because in my city, there's only eight aldermen. Here, there were fifty aldermen. And they're just constant, arguing, constant--Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak]. And then, I just thought, what a dreadful job. It's all negotiating. It's not working very well. And so, I didn't realize how historical that was at the time. I was also here for the Bears [Chicago Bears] winning the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XX]. And so, to me, it just was all exciting. There's lots of arguing going on. The Bears are winning, you know. Speaker 1: And they played in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Right. I lived, you know, I lived very, you know, nearby where the celebration was. I lived a few blocks from here, which is close to Division Street. And so, I could hear all the, you know, honking, and all the, you know, partying going on from my house over- overnight in that, you know, whatever it was, January, February, of '86 [1986]. So, it was an exciting, you know, time for me. And it was a city that I, I knew that, eventually, you know, I could really grow into. And so, I wasn't real convinced that I should be moving to, to New Jersey. But at the same time, I said, well, let me just see how this is going to work, but I never moved really. I kept all my things in, in Chicago, and I took a very small--wasn't even really an apartment. A woman was subletting a room in her apartment. So, I sublet a room from a woman in New Jersey. And so, I moved out to New Jersey to my one room, and began to work out at headquarters [AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.]. And that lasted really, maybe a couple of months max, maybe a little bit longer, but not very much longer. Story_ID: 532012 Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Well, I never moved my, my things. And, at the time, I was dating John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.]. And I came ba- he asked me back for a business dinner actually with some of his clients, and proposed to me. And so, I said to him, I said, "Well, that's great, except I live in New Jersey. You're in Chicago [Illinois]. I am not going to move back to Chicago without employment. I'm not going to, you know, be the girlfriend, or the housewife, or--that's just not going to work for me." And so, we--he said, "Well, what, what do you like to do?" I said, "Well, lots of stuff." And I described how I just met this--heard a lecture by this gentleman who seemed to understand the integration of marketing and operations, and how it was important to be able to deliver on the promise that you prom- what you promise to your customers, and how you had to work hard to be able to do that with all employees to deliver on that promise. And his name was Larry Levy. And he said, "Well, I know him, why don't I call him and see, you know, if he'd be willing to talk to you?" And, and I'm thinking, well, okay, you know, if you think you can do that. Speaker 1: Larry Levy is related to the Levy distribution family here in-- Speaker 2: No, Levy Restaurants [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Levy Restaurants, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so, I said, "Well, if you think you can do it, you know." And sure enough, he called, and next thing I knew, I was talking to Larry, and next thing, I knew, I had a job with Larry. And so, I left my--retired, whatever you want to call it, retired after two years [at AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.], or whatever it was, and I, I came back to work for Larry Levy. Speaker 1: So, you worked with him managing these restaurants or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was starting, he had a newsstand division that he was starting up, and so, I worked in that newsstand division. And it was very nice newsstands in office buildings, one in the train station here, but it was the beginning of buildings wanting to have that competitive advantage by having their own sundry shop that didn't look like your typical kind of haphazards and--sundry shop, but a more professional, wood-paneling, you know, nice interior sundry shops. And so, I opened about twenty-five of those for him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now, he's not related to Charles Levy and Sons [Chas. Levy Co. LLC, Chicago, Illinois] or-- Speaker 2: Charles Levy--we--is different. Charles Levy is a supplier of the distributor of the magazines. And so, we did business with Charles Levy. Speaker 1: Okay, but they're not related, right? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. I always thought that (laughter). Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. He's the restaurant guy. Speaker 1: All right. So you set up twenty of these? Speaker 2: I think when I left, we had over, like about thirty-three of them. And so, we did most, the bulk of them in Chicago. And then, the last ones that I worked on were in Boston [Massachusetts]. And then, Larry wound up buying the largest purveyor of newsstands in the country, Eastern Newsstands, and then selling that to a French company. So, I left in the midpoint of that. I was pregnant with my daughter [Victoria Rogers] in eighty- '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, you know, '88 [1988], '89 [1989], probably--not '88 [1988], it had to be '89 [1989]. Eighty-nine [1989] is when I left-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause John and I got married in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, in '89 [1989], I was pregnant, yeah, that's right. Story_ID: 532013 Speaker 1: And wound up doing some consulting, my own little entrepreneurial venture doing some consulting for museum stores doing retail. So, trying to get the retail to be more professionally run at institutions, museums that had the traffic, but maybe had a volunteer force in there, so doing the buying, doing the build out of the stores, and trying to, you know, get some more revenue for those institutions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I-- Speaker 2: What are some of the institutions that you worked with in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: We worked main- mainly with stores, institutions in San Antonio [Texas]-- Speaker 2: Oh, San Antonio. Speaker 1: The Witte, Witte Museum [San Antonio, Texas] is very--turns out that the model, it, it didn't completely work because it's very hard to get into those institutions. And so you have to kind of take the ones you get. And they start being scattered all over, you know, or if they call you to do a temporary exhibit, some of these dinosaur exhibits. So, we were doing that all over the country, but it's hard to, to make money and sustain that, and it's exhausting. You're flying here, you're flying there, and you're setting up a store literally overnight. And so, we did quite a bit of work for the Chicago museum [Chicago Academy of Sciences] that is now closed [sic.]. What was it--not natural history, but the one on Clark Street. I can't think of the name of it anymore. The zoo [Lincoln Park Zoo, Chicago, Illinois] now has that building [Matthew Laflin Memorial Building, Chicago, Illinois], but it was between the zoo and the historical society [Chicago Historical Society; Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois]. And they mainly did, like minerals, and they would do the dinosaur exhibit (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that the Peggy Notebaert [Peggy Notebaert Nature Museum, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Is that the nature museum there? Speaker 1: It's now the nature mu- museum. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But at the time, it was called something else. It wasn't the, it's not the nature museum. Speaker 2: It's not the Peggy-- Speaker 1: It's a combination of the historical museum and nature museum, which now is closed, and now you got the new nature museum. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it's gone--it no longer exists, but it was located on, on Clark. And so, we wound up mainly just being buyers for these institutions, and mainly--almost like a processing house. And so, that wasn't real interesting, you know, just processing, ordering this, ordering that, backfilling orders, that kind of thing. And then, trying to operate these stores from long distance was also difficult, you know. So, the model over time really didn't, didn't work. Story_ID: 532014 Speaker 1: And in 1990, I dissolved that partnership, and took a job, or maybe it was 1991. It was '91 [1991], 1991, took a job with Governor Edgar [Jim Edgar] running the Illinois lottery [Illinois State Lottery]. So, I was the youngest agency director, and also the first African American to run that agency. Speaker 2: Now how did you, how did that come about? Speaker 1: Well, I think they were looking for a businessperson to run the lottery 'cause it really is a business inside of state government. And they were looking for someone who they felt was trustworthy, that they felt was mature, that couldn't be bought. And so, I think, and also, that someone that had experience with marketing and, you know, some retail because literally the people, the establishments that I set up for Larry Levy, would be the retailers that sold lottery product. So, some of those same people I'd hired to run stores for Larry Levy, wound up selling lottery products during the time that I was the lottery director. Speaker 2: Those are some of the primary outlets for lottery tickets-- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: --in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], I know-- Speaker 1: Right. So, I had some experience being, you know, selling lottery really when I was with Larry. We actually sold lottery tickets, so I knew what it was like to be on the other side. And now, someone figured out--not me--but figured out, oh, maybe your skill set makes sense for the business of the lottery because the lottery is, you know, retail management, marketing, advertising, coming up with new games, sales, you know, inspiring your sales team to sell those instant tickets into the retail distribution channel. And then, you got the, the government side, which is the side I didn't know, which I had to learn was, you know, going in front of the legislator--lature [legislature], to get your, your appropriation for your department. And, you know, just learning what it's like to be an executive branch of, of government, and work with the other pieces of, of government, really was the piece that I learned. And I also learned public relations and communication skills, how to, you know, give speeches, how to be on camera, all of that, how to do an interview. All of that was learned in those early years at the lottery. Story_ID: 532015 Speaker 1: That's ironic because I think a lot of people who first saw you in relationship to the lottery [Illinois State Lottery] assumed you were a model they hired to do these things until they found out you were an actual--the director of the lottery. Speaker 2: Um-hm, it's true. I was asked all the time: "Don't you have to hurry up and get to, to the station to do the, the drawings?" And I would take offense in that, you know, at, at thirty being--wanting to be, you know, no, I'm smart, I can, I run the business, you know. And I'd say, "No, no, no, you know, I don't think I can do that tonight, you know. We've hired some people to, to get that done. I'll be able to stay for dinner." So I kind of, you know, let them know in a nice way that, you know, I was running the business. And so, it really was my first very high profile job here in Chicago [Illinois], and really was. I did have a mentor, the public information officer for the governor [Jim Edgar], really took me under his wing, Mike Lawrence, and showed me how television works, how media buying works, how, you know, how important it is to understand, you know, the sources of media, whether it be television or radio, to get your story out, how to be confident in an interview. He taught me all of, all of that, as I ran that agency. And, you know, it was a great run for us, and really a tremendous opportunity at thirty years old to have that kind of responsibility running, you know, almost a $2 billion business with three hundred employees, and probably a $70 million budget, you know, and being able to--really, some of my closest business associates and friends, we really made our careers to some extent in that, in that, in that job because we were able to partner and work, work so well together, and, and be outstanding in our particular fields, you know. It's carried us a long, a long way to our next jobs after the lottery. So, we're very proud of the work we did in that time frame there at a time when the business was very mature. Sales were kind of lagging. Horse racing was, you know, governor really liked horse racing. Boats were coming online, and to be able to hold our own, and increase the business was really something that my team is really proud of. The kind of numbers, if you look at our success during that time, you'll see a huge increase in the sale of instant lottery tickets, which actually paved the way for my dear friend, Carolyn [Carolyn Adams], who just passed, passed away, to do some of the things she did with the, the instant tickets. Story_ID: 532016 Speaker 1: We really-- Speaker 2: What were some of the promotions from the instant tickets? I noticed there were a lot of--I mean, it seemed as though you've got to have a new gimmick every s- every couple of months for the-- Speaker 1: Well, exactly. That's what, what was exhausting about the work, and that's what I was able to see early on. In my first year [as director of the Illinois State Lottery], the lotto game really performed extremely well. And that is a game, whereby the higher that lotto prize is, the more people you're going to see coming forward to play that game. And so that's how you make your money, although it's something you can't control. You can't control, you know, if you're going to get a winner or not. So, I got lucky year one. Year two, I didn't have as many high jackpot, so I saw that product, you know, the sales in that product just dipping. But I realized, and in these instant tickets, well, I could create the excitement around those instant tickets. And so, we began to experiment with things, like a ticket associated with a cruise. A two dollar ticket, one of our most successful tickets was win $100,000 a year for life, you know. And so, people would be like, oh, my god, I want that, I want that. Or, you know, we had a Caesars Palace [Las Vegas, Nevada] ticket which, you know, you won tru- trips to Caesars Palace. And the millionaires' reunion was a toga party with Cleopatra and Caesar coming in from Las Vegas [Nevada]. You know, we'd have these elaborate promotions. And we'd be on the news with--you know, it was all marketing. And it was all about excitement, and what kind of excitement a person could have, or dream about for two dollars, or one dollar. We'd have the Mother's Day ticket, the baseball ticket, the football ticket, you know. And you'd able to, like hand in your non-winning tickets--'cause we never called them losers--non-winning tickets to enter into, you know, selection for a cruise, or we had [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent, who does the oldies music here, in his Cadillac talking about winning a Cadillac. So we did that. We did a promotion where you could win a house. We did and, you know, win a house, build your own house with a builder. You know, we--you name it, we did it. And it really was--I would say, now, it's the cornerstone for the lottery business because now every state is creating that kind of ex- excitement around the instant ticket, not increasing the prize pool that you could run, but doing a promotional partnership whereby that other company, let's take Caesars Palace, they are more than happy to get in the hands of your players, and more than happy to, you know, offer some free trips to Caesars Palace because you're bringing them business. And it doesn't cost them, you know, they got, they built the building already. Why not fill it up with people that like lotteries? So, it worked like that, and we probably did--I'm going to say over three hundred games during the time I was there so. I could probably fill a wall with all the tickets we did. Story_ID: 532017 Speaker 1: So, you were there [Illinois State Lottery] from 1991 to--? Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997]. Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], okay. Is there any--do you have a favorite promotion of all these different promotions? Speaker 2: I think so. We created this character called Bunny Bucks, and Bunny Bucks was the precursor really to some of the animation you see now. You know, Bunny Bucks was this man in this, you know, kind of tuxedo with the, you know, the chain and the watch, you know, and, you know, the cane. And he was married to, you know, this like kind of, you remember Jessica Rabbit type, you know, kind of a precursor to Jessica Rabbit. And so, we had these great ads that we created that were animated with Bunny Bucks talking about, you know, play Bunny Bucks, you know, you can, you know, be a mil- you know, millionaire. You can win a million dollars. And so, I think that, in many respects, we were ahead of our time with the animation and, you know, just the commercials that we did. And we did one, you know, for Halloween that was the Monster Cash. Instead of 'Monster Mash,' Monster Cash, and so, but the song was, "Do the Monster Mash, the Monster Mash," you know, "it's a graveyard smash." That was, is one of Victoria [Rogers' daughter, Victoria Rogers] and my favorite songs, so we used to sing that when she was a little kid. So I said, "We're going to do a commercial with 'Monster Mash,' you'll see, you'll see." Speaker 1: So your song was Monster Cash? Speaker 2: Monster Cash, right. So, so those were two of my favorites. And 'The Beverly Hillbillies,' we did a commercial and a 'Beverly Hillbillies' ticket that I dedicated to my mother's father [Benjamin Smith, Sr.] who loved that show, the whole rural, and, you know, 'The Beverly Hillbillies.' So those are my three favorites I would say. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 532018 Speaker 1: In terms of the lottery and the black community, I know black people always say that they never win. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, but (laughter) do you have any? Speaker 2: I got that all the time, you know, people would say--well, I had a couple of things. You know, people would say, you know, this is a terrible thing because, you know, black people spend more money, you know, on the lottery. And that's not true, you know, black people do not spend more. It's impossible because they're the minority. They may, on some games, tend to gravitate, like the daily games in African American community. They like the daily--we like the daily games because it is an old form of policy. Many of the policy games played today, the, the drawings are based on the daily game. So, we proportionally will, will spend a little more, and play a little bit more--a lot more--of those games as a, as a racial group. But overall, we don't beat out all the other categories of, of people playing the game. So, a couple of things that were important me. One, I would say, you know, I, I would like to see the, the--I know that the lottery [Illinois State Lottery] is in very good hands with me. I'm going to tell you that your odds are very long on this. You should only bet a dollar. I don't want your food, or your milk money, you know. So, just, if you're going to play, just bet a dollar. There's no need to bet any more. Your odds aren't going to be any better, honey. So, you know, if you got one dollar to spend, that's all you really should, should spend because I begin to think about this a little bit. You know, I said, who am I to tell people whether or not they're making, on their jobs, you know, twenty dollars a day, or two hundred dollars a day, how to spend their money, you know. I should be upfront and tell them the chances of them winning is nil, but for many people that I met, they just enjoyed that possibility. And as long as they didn't go overboard, and certainly some people do go overboard, and, you know, it was okay. It wasn't for me to judge and, you know, black people would say, "God, we never win, Desiree [HistoryMaker Desiree Rogers], what's wrong--?" Da, da, da, da, da. I'd say, "Come on down! We'll show you how this is done. There's no like magic to this. We can't cheat on this." I said, "If we do cheat, we got two sets of auditors, two sets, you know, checking everything. You guys, come on down." And, and you know, I actually had a couple of groups come down, and see how the whole drawing is done. It's three hours of practice before the drawing, every night with two different sets of auditors from different, different auditing firms, one of which the auditing firm is African American, if that made any difference, you know, whatsoever. But I have to say that my single largest winner of the lotto jackpot just happened to be an African American family. So, and I'm still friendly with them today. So we can't really say that African Americans never win 'cause they are living proof that they do win, and they can win, and they did win big. Story_ID: 532019 Speaker 1: There's one aspect of lottery--maybe you can clear this up for people, you know--that is disturbing, and that is that the money that's collected for the lottery [Illinois State Lottery]--. In fact, a popular talk show in Chicago [Illinois] explained that though the money is going for educational purposes, it's just replacing money that's--was extracted from the budget, and just replaces that same money, and there's--nothing really changes. There's no increase in the school budgets in the state. Speaker 2: Right. Well, there's a couple of things. I think, we can look at it from a coupler--a couple of different perspectives. First of all, I was not here when the legislation was passed, but I do know that, basically, the voters understood that it was going to be additional money for education. That's what the lottery would mean, that it would be supplemental. In some years, it's supplemental. In some years, it is not supplemental. It is at the discretion of the executive, the executive being the governor. And so, if, for whatever reason, the governor decides that the $600 million that the lottery raises for that year, he's only going to spend 600--he's going to use a portion of that, and not the full 600 million, then he has ability to do that. And so, the money from the lottery, let's call it 600 million, that's going to go to schools, but he may decide, well, since they're getting that 600 million, I'm going to take out 200 million because I need that for the pris- prison system, or I need that for seniors. So, it's not--it gives him the flexibility to be able to pull that amount of money out of the overall education budget. I'm not saying he does that, but he does have that flexibility, so it is not a guarantee today, that all of the money that the lottery makes every year goes to education. And I think that's the rub, that's what people are not happy about because they felt, thought, were told, understood, whatever word you'd like to use, that it was always going to be supplemental. Speaker 1: Yeah. And so, they would comfort themselves when they spend too much on a lottery, said, well, at least it's going to make the schools better. Speaker 2: Right. Well, that's kind of a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And people trying to, they look at the schools and say, well, hey, the schools don't seem to be getting any richer-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what is going on? Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, we know that, right now, that we're still arguing about how much money is needed for education. So, I mean, I think for me, personally, I think that's a constant battle. And certainly we need to invest in young children, and we need to ensure that they're getting the best education that they can get. At the same time, we need to make certain that we're responsible for the dollars that we do have, and that we're running the system as efficiently and, you know, more, like maybe a well-run business than, you know, maybe we are, or aren't, you know. And so, at the same time, we give more money, I'd like to make certain that we're putting controls in place to make certain that the investment, our hard-earned investment, whether it's, you know, the taxes we pay, or the money that businesses are paying, or that money from the lottery is well-spent and not wasted. That's what I'm inter- I want both things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: But your job is to bring the revenue in and you-- Speaker 2: My money was to bring--my--money. I got no money, but, believe me, I'd be like, "Can I have some of your check?" By the end, I was like, "Oh, can I just win 1 million?" You know, but at any rate, my job was to bring the money in, and to be responsible in the marketing of that, of that lottery, and not to target. And so, I was very, very protective of players. By that, I would never be irresponsible enough to say, "Oh, you're going to win, c'mon and try it." Not ever. I always wanted to be certain that people understood what the odds were, understood that the chances of them winning was probably small, and, at the same time, we could do no targeting. And so, some of the work I see today seems to me to be a little bit more targeted to an audience. Our work is very untargeted, you know, it's not targeted to a black group or non-black. It was a very general market. Story_ID: 532020 Speaker 1: Now, one of the lottery promotions that was really funny was the, were the big lottery balls that were running around. Were you responsible for those? Speaker 2: The lottery balls actually existed before I got there, and they never lent out a lottery ball. You couldn't touch it 'cause I was--I want to be dressed as a lottery ball. I'd see them at the Bud Billiken Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic], or see them around town. We'd have the lo- . "Desiree [HistoryMaker Desiree Rogers], you cannot have a lottery ball." And after a year after I left the lottery [Illinois State Lottery], actually they lent me a lottery ball. So, I'm probably the only person that ever got my hands on a lottery ball that was not working for the lottery. So, I dressed up as a lottery ball one year. Speaker 1: So, do you still possess this-- Speaker 2: No, I had to give it back. They, they sent someone with it, and sent someone to pick it up. But, you know, I think it was a great promotion to have the lottery, lottery balls out there; great marketing ploy. Story_ID: 532021 Speaker 1: The skills you learned at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] when you got your M.- [M.B.A.] did they really apply to your position at the lottery [Illinois State Lottery] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what? I think so, because I think Harvard really trains you to be a generalist. And it really trains you to run a business. And so, it gives you all of the components to running a business, whether that be marketing, operational skills, you know, what's important about sales, your financial skills, the importance of legal. You know, it, it really sets up for you all of the disciplines that it, it takes to run a business, along with development of your strategy, and your vision and just, you know, how to motivate people, how your organization should be set up. And so that was my backdrop. I was able to, you know, take what I had learned at Harvard, experiment a bit on leadership in my, my job at AT&T [AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.] after Harvard, couple that with a sales experience I had at Xerox [Xerox Corporation], think about kind of, you know, my original, my first supervisory position, position, and what that meant to have kind of fire in your belly, and afraid of, you know, your first job, and how to motivate people, and how to get them behind something, and so lessons learned there. And my work that I did for Larry Levy with the retailers, and understand kind of as a retailer, what would I be thinking about because now I'm on the other side, trying to get my product in, so I understand things like shelf space. I understand things like ease of ordering, having the inventory, being able, you know, to answer questions about the product, you know, when the customer comes, you know, comes up to the register. And so, you know, for me, that--all of those things got put together in something called the lottery from a business standpoint, and the new piece was that whole governmental piece, and how to manage through, you know, state government and the legislature, and, you know, and ultimately were my, my bosses. And so, that was the new piece for me, as well as the public relations piece and the, you know, the appearances. And so, I, that's what I really had to focus on initially is to get comfortable, you know, talking in front of a camera and, and get comfortable, you know, talking, you're doing interviews, and, you know, crafting the public relations aspect, you know, of that business. The other pieces I had had a little bit of time with. I'd be able to sit with them a, a spell and really dissect them, and improve them and, you know, just work towards what would ultimately be my challenges at the lottery and, and make it work. And so, you know, I was lucky. Story_ID: 532022 Speaker 1: On the curious side, with so much money in the lottery [Illinois State Lottery] and so much, so much at stake, are there any good stories of people who tried to win without winning (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, there are stories of people that, you know, have put, you know, water in the balls of the lottery so that the ones that have the water are going to fall down, and the other ones rise to the top. Speaker 1: Now, this is inside (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, the numbers, yeah, their numbers would come, you know, to the top, and they were, you know, arrested and taken away for that. It really is, it's very mechanical, so just--it's just air blowing balls around. It's very hard to like win that unless you're going to win it, you know what I mean? It's lucky. It's all luck. That's what a lottery is--no skill. You got a ticket. You got just as good chance as the next guy. That's, that's what makes a lottery. Speaker 1: Any strange claims? Speaker 2: You know what? We had one situation where there was, like an electrical storm. And the same ticket printed out several times at a register. And the customer said, "I only ordered one ticket." And the woman said, "Well, but three printed out." And they said, "Well, I only want one." She said "Okay." And so, you know, some retailers, what they do is they--'cause they are liable for, once they print, they got to pay the state a dollar. And so, she just sold those, you know, next three tickets or, you know, in this case, didn't sell those next three, three tickets. (Air quotes) She said that she bought those next three tickets. Those were the winning tickets. And so, then you had, you know, a division by three instead of, you know, the one. And so, there was a big argument by the winner saying, you know, "Those were my numbers. You know, I don't want to share the jackpot, how--." You know, da da da da da. And then, you know, the store said they owned them. The clerk of the store said, "No, I bought them. I put money in the cash register for those two tickets. I, I'm the winner." So you had a three way battle: the store, the w- the woman that picked the numbers, and then, the clerk that sold the ticket. So, that was one of my biggest ones. Speaker 1: How was that resolved, like Solomon that discovered (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it went in, in favor of the winner, I believe. I believe it went in favor of the winner, and the, and the retailer got something as well. The clerk was out 'cause I think the clerk put the money in the register after the drawing, you know, something like that. Speaker 1: After he found out it won? Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. Story_ID: 532023 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer again is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you state your full name for us? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Desiree Rogers. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: It's February 20th, I think, 19--I have 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. We're, we're continuing an interview that we started last April, right? And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 532024 Speaker 1: And we were talking about the Illinois lottery [Illinois State Lottery]. And I think we pretty much finished the discussion on some level, but I have just a couple more questions about it. Now, what years did you work for the Illinois lottery? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990] to 1997, early '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And when you reflect on those years, what--how did Illinois, or did you all ever like measure where Illinois was in terms of the lottery versus other states? Was there a way to tell how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there are several ways to look at it. I think one of the things, when I look back and reflect on those years, is the ability to really generate income that was, didn't go up and down by year. Hopefully you want it to go up. And so, we created products that would allow us to have a more steady stream of revenue, not so dependent upon what the size of the jackpot was. And we also launched the first, what was the big state Powerball type game. And so, when I look back at those years, and what we were able to accomplish, that would be the biggest things, is this multistate game, and also this huge increase in popularity of the instant games. And hopefully we helped people have a little bit fun, a lot of fun along the way. Story_ID: 532025 Speaker 1: What did you learn about state government and contracts and such working with the lottery commission [Illinois State Lottery]? Speaker 2: Well, during that time, I think, you know, naively, I went in thirty years old, really, not thinking too much about, you know, what this might mean in the way of how I would have to work with the legislature, or the governor, or, you know, just what it meant to the state. The funds here go to education. And so, we really didn't have a real good sense of what that was going to be. And so, it became a, a relationship that I still have today with many of the legislators, you know, that they are really responsible for the budgets. And they really were the ones to, to ask me hard questions about how I was going to spend the money, and the budgeted money that came from the state for lottery activities because remember, they're balancing a lot of things. They're balancing budgets for anything from the prisons to the school system. And so, and you're going to have to put everything in perspective. Speaker 1: Okay. As I recall during those days Jim Edgar was elected--Republican governor, was elected with the support of the black community on the heels of a contract dispute. Black contractors were disputing with the Democrats at, you know, disagreeing with what the Democrats had traditionally done to black contractors. And there was a big dispute now I can't remember the man who ran against Edgar [Neil Hartigan] now, but I know black contractors came out uncharacteristically in support of a Republican governor. Speaker 2: Right. I think what you had in Governor Edgar was really someone that was a moderate Republican, someone that understood the importance of diversity. He really is a policy guy, and so he really liked government. And so, I would think of him more as a policy advocate, and someone that really enjoyed managing government, as opposed to someone that was purely political. And I know, and, and still spend time with a number of minority women that were in the cabinet during the time that I was there. And I think that he had one of the largest numbers, if not the largest number of minority and women cabinet members of any governor at that point. Story_ID: 532026 Speaker 1: The other thing is that the position that you held [director of the Illinois State Lottery] was a highly visible one, and a lot of social responsibilities that I think that, that your volunteer life also takes on this--a lot of social activity and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --even your marriage. You're married to a man [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] whose mother is I guess, one of the premiere socialites in the, in the city, [HistoryMaker] Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious at that. Do you have any reflections on the social and the business and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I, I think, you know, it's important, you know, people like to categorize people, and put them in, you know, in certain boxes, and then, you know, pretend that they know what that box equals. A socialite equals this. A civic activist equals this. A businessperson equals this. I think I like to think of myself as all of those things. And so, for me, working the lottery where, you know, I could try to help to ensure that the funding was correct, that the money went back to, to the schools, that we worked hard in that respect, but also that we really were truthful and honest with players, you know. You don't need to bet five dollars. If you want to bet one dollar, and you probably, your chances are just as good. And so, you know, if that is fun to you, if you enjoy that, I really learned at--very early on in this position that I should not be the one to judge why they're playing. I would be the one to say, you shouldn't play that because you're going to lose because, frankly, some people did win. And, frankly, some people, you know, enjoyed just playing. You know, I might be buying a candy bar and some chips, and they're buying a lottery ticket. And as long as it was done in moderation, I really, you know, felt that I learned something about, you know, all people are different. People enjoy different things. You know, I wanted to make certain that I was responsible in how I ran the business, but also I spent a lot of time out in the community talking to people, talking to, you know, the governor [Jim Edgar] maybe about, you know, the importance of the funding that we did do. And in maybe in, in some instances, we should make that additional funding and not, you know, make it actually supplemental funding, that that was important in bringing some of the ideas that we saw some of the other states doing, you know, allocating money to computers, things like that. And so, I think that, you know, you are seeing, you know, the impact today of, you know, people want to get to know people that are running government, running businesses. You know, they want, they don't want them up on a pedestal, you know, they want to feel like I know you, I understand you. I think all of these things are important to, to being social, and we all know how important relationships are, and how important it is, you know, at the right time and place to be able to pick up the phone and talk to someone that may be able to be helpful--not just to you, but maybe to someone else that you know. And so, I think social networks, the ability to meet people, talk to people, have them know you, be vulnerable with them is, is very important to success. Story_ID: 532027 Speaker 1: You were with the lottery commission [Illinois State Lottery] until 1997? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what, what happened in '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: In '97 [1997], I really, after doing this multistate game, and really being on the forefront of changing really the way the instant tickets were marketed, that I was ready for a new challenge. And so, I started to think about what that next challenge might be. And what might be, you know, an extension of the knowledge that I'd learned to date, i.e., you know, running a business inside of government, you know, how might that translate to something else? I touched a lot of people that was, you know, important work and that, you know, maybe moving from fun to something that maybe was a little bit more basic. And so, I, you know, by chance, I guess, was--sat next to a gentleman that was working for Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation] at the time, which was a natural gas utility company here in Chicago [Illinois]. And so, we, we talked, and it wound up at overtime, I opted to go to work at Peoples Energy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're ready. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what was your position when you started with Peoples Energy (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Peoples? I joined the company as vice president of public affairs. And so, my job was to help them develop a relationship with city government, not state government, but city government, and to really try to start to think about raising their profile, and thinking about the external au- audiences that were becoming important in the utility business. Because in '97 [1997], for the most part, in the gas business, and also electric, prices were pretty steady. And it was just not really a high, what we would call a high impact industry. Nobody thought about their utilities at that time. You turn on the lights, you turn on your stove, you took a hot shower. That was--you paid your bill; that was the end of it. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 532028 Speaker 1: Just for the--I know there are going to be some high school students watching this, and even some grown people might need to know, or want to know: where does our gas come from? Speaker 2: Well, you know, gas comes from under the ground actually in different parts of the country. I mean, we are lucky in the U.S.A. to have many key reservoirs of natural gas: Louisiana; Gulf of Mexico; Oklahoma; Texas. We also, you know, buy some of our gas from Canada. The companies that usually Americans are aware of are companies like BP Amoco [BP Amoco Corporation; BP Corporation North America Inc.] where you guy your gasoline for your car. Many of those same companies also supply natural gas to this country and other nations. And most of the companies that people are familiar with in the states that are sending their bill to their homes are the distribution companies. And those are the companies that are actually buying gas from Amoco--or BP Amoco, or Conoco [Continental Oil Company; ConocoPhillips], or BP [British Petroleum; BP P.L.C.]. Those are the companies that the distributors actually buy gas from. So the company I work for [Peoples Energy Corporation] actually buys its gas, but we're responsible for maintaining the infrastructure, the pipes in the ground, and the pipes to your home or business that actually deliver that gas, so that's the difference. We build for both, but we're responsible for maintaining the distribution system under the ground in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and outlying areas. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the gas I might use in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] actually, might actually come from the Gulf or some place? Speaker 2: Probably does. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably does. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And so, there's a magic network underneath the ground that transports that gas all the way from Louisiana through all of the various states into what's called the citygate here in Chicago. We accept it on your behalf, and then we transport it to your home or business. Story_ID: 532029 Speaker 1: I've heard--other business people I've interviewed, you know, women and men have discussed their desire to have a line job as opposed to a human relations job, or you know. Did you have that kind of dilemma when you started or did you-- Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I, I went into the, the business, and I said that, you know, ultimately, I'd run a business, so I had a line job. The lottery [Illinois State Lottery] really was a line, a line job. And that I would accept this position [with Peoples Energy Corporation] as an entry into the business and opportunity to really learn the business. And so, you know, I came into this industry cold, and I had to spend some time really learning what the business was about, very complicated business. But at the same time, during the time that I came in, the area that I was representing was very, very important. And they were in the middle of a transformation of the company. And also, the industry was in the middle of a transportation all the way to where we are today where people now, you know, know about energy. We're talking about energy. We're talking about climate change. We're talking about, you know, the costs, how do we manage and conserve, and, and keep the costs down. We're talking about weatherization, you know, all of these things. They, we were at the cusp of that. And so the skill set that I had, you know, marketing, external relationships, being more customer-focused were all things that ultimately made sense for the business I was in, and ultimately, was rewarded with my first line position in the utility of managing all of customer service. Story_ID: 532030 Speaker 1: Can you just kind of walk us through your career there at Peoples Gas-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and I mean, Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation] and-- Speaker 2: Sure. I came in as I mentioned in the, in the public affairs area. And, at that point, my job really was to assess that area, and make some decisions about what it needed to look like moving forward. It had not been an area that had been looked at, you know, closely in, in the past. And, as I mentioned, the industry was changing. And people were starting to pay more attention to energy because people were now being allowed on a more mass scale to purchase their gas from someone else. And so, people had an opportunity to say, well, we don't like the prices here. We're going to look at some other gas companies and buy our gas from those companies. At the same time, I'm still the delivery company. So, we worked on improving our external relationships with city government, with our regulatory bodies. We looked at improving our customer communications. We were able to change all of that. We branded the company from Peoples Gas [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company] to Peoples Energy because we also had--we're building an electric power plant. And so, we wanted to be known as an overall Midwest energy company, just, you know, not just natural gas. And I worked on the branding, you know, everything from new logos on the trucks to, you know, a different--not really language--but a voice for the company. How are we going to speak to customers? How were we going to answer the phones? How were we going to write press releases? What did our annual report look like? So, all of those functions were under my leadership. The corporate contributions area, how would we move from giving small amounts of money to, you know, two hundred organizations, to giving more substantial money to fewer organizations, but really making an impact, and really standing behind what we thought was important to our company, which was investment in education, and neighborhood development right to, you know, right to work jobs for people, making neighborhoods strong because, again, the neighborhoods are strong. There'll be housing. There'll be a need for our product, you know. And so, all of this made sense, as we redirected our corporate contributions and volunteerism area. Then, I moved from that job into chief marketing officer where we looked at our sales organization. We looked at, you know, how we were calling on customers, what customers were we calling on? Were there other products that we could offer, energy audits, management of your, your gas supply electronically, conservation tips, working with you on infrastructure investment in your plant, so that you could decrease your energy cost. All of those types of things were a part of that job. And then, ultimately, moving into the customer area, the call center, billing, revenue assurance, making certain that we, we helped our low income customers to know all of the sources that were available, so that they--we could work to decrease the cycle of disconnection and reconnection after grants were put in place. Putting credit checks in place. I mean, just everything that takes to kind of manage the, the flow of money into an organization. That was part of my job as well. So, I continued to add responsibility (background noise) as I worked through the business. In two thousand and I think it was four [2004], I was named president of the company [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company, Chicago, Illinois] where I joined the structures that I had, or the pieces of business I had, with the operational piece of the business, which really were the two unions and the, then the ladies and men that are working to maintain the distribution system day in and day out. And so, that really is my, my current position, so it's full circle building blocks to presidency of these two natural gas utilities. Story_ID: 532031 Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the, your, I guess teachers or mentors along the way at Peoples Gas [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: There have been a couple of them. Dick Terry [Richard Terry], who was the chairman when I first arrived, helped me to understand the historic part of the business. And by that I mean how the business operated maybe before I got there, how the pipelines operated, you know, how a distribution company operated. He had been in the business for many, many years, probably more than thirty years. And so, he had a great history of, not only our business, but was also the, the chairman of the American Gas Association. And so he had a great bit of knowledge about the industry, and was extremely helpful in teaching me how the, the industry ran. In addition, Tom Patrick [Thomas Patrick], who worked under Dick Terry, and ultimately became the next chairman of the company, also taught me a tremendous amount of the (background noise) of the business. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: The other person that taught me a great deal was Tom Patrick. Tom Patrick became the chairman after Dick Terry. And so, Tom was instrumental in helping me to understand the regulatory business, or business port- portion of our industry. He grew up, was a lawyer, grew up in the regulatory arena, so helped me to understand ratemaking a little bit better, what it meant to, to really offer customers the ability to choose, and everything associated with, with, with that, and, you know, just was very, very supportive, and really moving me through the business and, you know, promoting me into higher and higher levels of responsibility. And so I worked very closely with him, not only in running these two business- businesses, but, ultimately, helping him with, you know, some of the big decisions associated with Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation], the holding company, you know, HR [human resources] policies, legal policies, accounting and finance, you know, really an ability to see the whole business at a higher level by sitting, you know, with him, and, and working through all of the issues that we had to, to work through. And through the early, you know, years of, of, you know, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, we had a lot of issues, we had a lot of issues as prices were escalating. Politicians were really taking on the utilities' inability to really ask for rate increase while prices were going up. We had, you know, emergencies where we might have some, you know, explosion or something like that, and working through the issues associated with that, making certain our customers were safe, but also our people in working with our unions, to ensure that people were safe and, you know, in all of this, in these kinds of things. I learned a lot from him and his patience and willingness to hear every viewpoint and, you know, then make his decisions. Story_ID: 532032 Speaker 1: Were there any other black people working for Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation]--I mean, I know there had to be some. Speaker 2: Oh, there--we have lots of minorities (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, on the executive level, I guess? Speaker 2: No, no. The gentleman that hired me was the most senior African American at the company prior to my arrival. And so, he, about a month after I joined the company, said, "You know, I'm so happy you're here, but I'm going to be retiring." (Laughter) And so, he retired shortly after, after I left. And up until that point, he had been the most senior African American at Pe- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who-- Speaker 2: --Peoples Energy--Mike Reeves [Michael S. Reeves]. Speaker 1: Mike Reeves, okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, Mike Reeves, I have to thank him for bringing me into the business. And at this point, I'm still, you know, the highest African American in, in the company. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how many women are the president of energy companies that you know of? Speaker 2: You know, not many, but there are a few. There's a woman [Debra L. Reed] that, out in San Diego [California] that's running an energy company. And there are a couple of other women, you know, around that have, have done it and, you know, maybe no longer do it, so there's a few of us. There's a healthy mix, I would say, of women in the business. I'm always pleased to see the number of women and minorities on the boards of these energy companies. And so, that's, that is also something that I think is wonderful, and maybe not something you see at some, in some other industries. Story_ID: 532033 Speaker 1: How did Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], or did Katrina affect the supply of natural gas? Speaker 2: Well, it, it impacted the, the price. And so, you know, when you have a storm like Katrina, what happens in that gulf area, they shut down the wells there. And so, you have a decrease of supply, which increases the price. Here in Chicago [Illinois], we're awfully lucky to be, to have six pipelines coming in, so if we weren't buying from Louisiana, we could buy from Canada, but it certainly reduced, significantly reduced the supply of natural gas. And we saw prices really escalate during that period of time. Story_ID: 532034 Speaker 1: Is Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation] looking at alternative sources of energy? You know, we've, we've heard about global warming and environment and what--. Is Peoples Energy investigating some other, you know, wind power or solar? Speaker 2: Well, there are a couple of things. Peoples Energy was acquired by Integrys [Integrys Energy Group, Inc.]. Integrys is now a, you know, a company that combines electric and natural gas across four different regions: Illinois; Wisconsin; Minnesota; and Michigan. We are investing in wind power and--you know which is a wonderful thing for the future. But we also know that it will take many, many years in order to have substantial availability of energy from these alternative sources. And that really, what we need to be focused on here in the short term is conservation and reduction of use. And so, we have done, and are doing a lot to try to work with the cities that were in to reduce usage. And you might ask, well, well, how does that happen? That happens by upgrading your appliances. That happens by insulation. That happens by simple things like turning down your thermostat. That happens with simple things like putting plastic on your windows during the winter months, or replacing those, those windows if you do have the funds for that. So, there are many, many ways to work with Americans to reduce usage. And in order to really make a substantial difference, that is really what we're going to have to do. So, at the same time, we're investing in these alternative energy sources for the future, we really have to step back, each and every one of us, and think about, you know, what can I do today that will conserve some energy? Turning off your computer, turning off the lights, taking a shorter shower, you know, washing larger bundles of clothing at once, you know, putting your dishwasher on with, when it's full, you know. There are so many things that you can do. Don't use the dishwasher. If you don't have one, don't get one. I mean, there are so many things that can be done. And actually, we're working on what's called the Smart House [sic. Smart Home] right now with the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], so that everybody, young children, adults, seniors, can come in a house that really is all about conserving energy and see how it's working. Story_ID: 532035 Speaker 1: It's always seemed counterintuitive to me that utility companies would want to save energy. It seemed like they would want you to use as much as possible so they can charge you more money. Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting that you mention that because, historically, that is how it worked, you know. And so, but remember, we're the distribution company [Peoples Gas Light and Coke Company, Chicago, Illinois], so we don't charge any markup on the gas commodity itself. It's simply a pass through. And so, if you save money on, you know, using less natural gas, that is, would not, you know, that would not hurt us because we are not actually making any money off the natural gas. But in the past, some of our distribution costs have been associated with how much you use. And so, one of the things that we were just recently able to change is the fixed fee. And so, we have decoupled, in essence, which means we have separated out your usage from the fees associated with our delivery services. And so, an easy way to think about those fancy words is think of your cable company. You pay a flat rate, whether you turn your television on once, or you watch cable, you know, day in and day out, 24/7. You pay a flat fee. Now, there are other fees associated with packages that you might buy, but your service, your cost of that cable coming into your house is the same month in and month out. And that is what natural gas and utilities are moving towards because regardless of, if you use, you know, just a drop of a gas, or if you have your house heated up to 90 degrees, we still have to be ready and available for you. We still have to have those pipes coming in. We still have to staff for emergency calls. We've got to get the bills out. We've got to have trucks out there, calling on customers to turn on and turn off gas. We've get to make certain that we are doing the maintenance, so all of those costs are fixed. And so, we're moving to more of a fixed charge in this more rece- most recent change of our rates, and so, you're right. We want to be aligned with customers. We want to, you know, be aligned, saying how can we conserve because that really is the name of the game. Story_ID: 532036 Speaker 1: What do you see as the future of women in I guess in the energy field? Speaker 2: I think it's wide open. I think that today the energy business is a combination of engineers, lawyers, and what I'm going to call, you know, business people. And sometimes, people have all of those skills, but I think all three are extremely important. We need to be there and available for our customers. We need to listen to our customers' needs. We need to ensure that we run the business in such a way that we can, you know, make certain our customers sat- are satisfied, but also pushed towards, you know, what I call competitive excellence. It's very important that, you know, the money and the investment that we do have is being done in a sound way, and is not wasteful, and it is a way that will help us to ensure that the infrastructure and the systems that we, we set up are state of the art. We've all seen what happens when you don't invest in your infrastructure, and I think it is extremely important that we focus on that. And customers understand that. They understand that, you know, you're paying a little bit more, but you're going to have a state of the art infrastructure. We want to make certain that everything is safe, reliable, up to date, and is efficient. And, and people understand that, and we want to also make certain that, you know, we've got the best employees that we can have. We're working with, you know, something that can be dangerous, you know. And so, there's lots of care that has to be exercised as we bring natural gas to your home and business, and so we want to stay on top of, of safety as well. And I think, you know, in some sense, sense, women are predisposed to really understand early on the importance of these relationships, the importance of really trying to focus on more than one thing. You know, that's not being disparaging, but we've done it all our lives, and so we understand the push and pull of really having, you know, a variety of audiences, whether it be the regulators, the customers, the engineers that, you know, maybe are saying, well, why do we have to do this, or why do we have to do that, and really trying to bring all those groups together to ensure, you know, what I call a well-rounded, well-run, you know, excellent company. And as I mentioned earlier, I'm proud to say that on many of these utility companies, you've got great, great women on those, on those boards that are asking the right questions, and being a part of this, really this new energy company or industry that's important. Story_ID: 532037 Speaker 1: What does the energy industry look like in the future? Speaker 2: You know, I think it will be an industry that is very invested in alternatives. I mean, so you'll see an increase in R and D [research and development], or you'll see companies spring up that that's all they do. And so, the utilities buy that knowledge from them, or in some collaborative way, work with them. I think you'll see people having a lot more choice and feeling comfortable with that. And so, you'll have an industry that's more mature where people are used to selecting their energy company of choice. The distribution companies may be pure distribution companies. They don't do anything with a commodity itself at all. They are there to maintain the system, and that's all they do. They don't buy energy from anybody. Their whole function is really to distribute that, that energy. And I think you'll see that customers are going to be a lot more savvy as they think about how they live because they're not going to want to pay, you know, these higher, higher prices. They are, they're going to say, well, I'm going to buy this appliance versus that, so you'll see labels on appliances, you know. "I use the least amount of energy, you know, select this refrigerator." So, you'll see customers a lot more involved. You'll see many more options for them to choose from. You'll have people asking, you know, as they think about the sale of a house, you know, what are the energy bills associated with this? What kind of insulation is, is in here? And let me see those energy bills for this house over the last, the last year and, you know, what have you put in place to, to make it efficient? So, I think you'll see a lot more involvement by the customer, and also government. You know, you'll see government stepping in and saying, we can't possibly have, you know, large numbers of Americans that can't afford energy. You know, that's just, it just does not work. And so, you'll see that, and you'll see industries springing up in the green arena. You know, industry springing up that do green installation; that figure out, you know, you know, this is a grouping of appliances you need, or this is the kind of wood you should have, or this kind of furniture that, you know, you should have. All of these industries will start to spring up and so there'll be much more alignment, I think, with conservation, the importance of the environment, and what impact, and how you can change that. Right now, it's just kind of very--some people know something about it. They know the buzz words, but I wonder how much people are really doing when you think about it. Speaker 1: Now, there is a not-for-profit in Chicago [Illinois], and I'm getting old, and I can't think of the name of it, but it's been around since the '80s [1980s]. Jacky Grimshaw [HistoryMaker Jacquelyne Grimshaw] works for them now. I know that, and they do, they help low income people refit their homes with new windows, and they get grants. And, and you know what I'm talking about, I think, it's the-- Speaker 2: Is it Neighborhood Group? Speaker 1: Center for Neighborhood Technology [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Neighborhood--the technology, yes. Speaker 1: That's right, Center for Neighborhood Technology. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Does Peoples Energy [Peoples Energy Corporation] have a working relationship with-- Speaker 2: We do. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And one of the things you see in this new rate package that just got selected was there is an energy efficiency program built into the new increase in rates. And so, $7.5 million are going to be invested in energy efficiency programs working with community organizations, the attorney general, the City of Chicago, and the, the state, to figure out, you know, how this money should be offered back to consumers, so that they can conserve energy. And so, that's the circle. In order for, you know, utilities to be full speed ahead on energy efficiency and conservation, you have to make certain that those fixed costs are covered. You don't want, you know, people to be conserving and be efficient with our energy, and companies to say, well, you know, we just can't, you know, invest in our infrastructure anymore. So, we're not going to, you know, buy the latest and greatest. We'll just deal with what we have and, you know, maintain that, and hope that, that, you know, is good enough. And so, you need both at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I think you'll see more and more of this. Story_ID: 532038 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your volunteer activities. Now, you serve on a lot of boards, and you have, as stated earlier, you have a high social profile now, going back to the days when you were Miss Zulu, and (laughter). And your father [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] passed away in 2000? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that it? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, '99 [1999] actually. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yes. And he was an activist lawyer in, in New Orleans [Louisiana], and we talked about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Educator, educator. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, educator. All right. Speaker 2: Educator. Well, I think, again, I think it's so important to be involved in your community. And so, you know, I have been involved in a number of organizations, and still am fairly involved in, in several organizations around town. A couple, just to mention, are I'm working with a group that's in partnership with Chicago public housing [Chicago Housing Authority]. And this is extremely important to me, as we tear down many of the old, you know, public housing, and have people moving into more mixed income housing and, you know, why is that important? Well, this whole idea of developing neighborhoods is important, but when you think about utilities, you think, you know, here is, you know, groups of people that have never really had to pay energy bills. And now they're moving into housing where, you know, they need to learn how to budget, how to manage their bills now because those bills are going to be going directly to them. So, anything we can do to help that process, to help people be more financially literate, and understand really what it takes to run a household is important, and something that I think we should be involved in. The other thing is the Museum of Science and Industry, long icon of Chicago [Illinois], you know, very important that our youth be trained in the maths and sciences. I mean, it's just key to have that knowledge. Why? Because I think technology really is the future, you know, the ability to invent something that's going to make all of our lives easier, you know, whether it's in energy, or medicine, or something else. These skills, science and math, are going to be kind of the, the bedrock of moving beyond those basic skills to s- to greatness in the areas that I think are going to be so important, and are even today, so important to, to the world. As I said, whether it is, you know, something to do with the environment, energy, you know, health, these are basic needs that, that all people, all people have. And so, I'm very involved with that group and, you know, as I had mentioned, you know, we're working on an energy efficient house [Smart Home] for everyone to see and to be able to walk through. It's not an exhibit, it's an actual house. And so, I think that, that's also, you know, a very important work that I'm also doing. I'm also on a hospital board. Again, you know, the sciences, health, you know, how do we get people to take care of themselves a little bit better? What can we do for people that can't afford their, their health care? You know, how can you, you, at least know, you know, the right questions to ask? You know, get to the best, you know, the, the best men- medical health that you could, you know, you can possibly afford. And, you know, what's the future of healthcare? You know, how can we, we start to think about, you know, changing the scenarios that we have in place? Every shou- everyone should be able to get healthcare. People should not, you know, have to be sick, and feel like they can't see someone, then they can't see a doctor, and can't see a doctor right away frankly. You know, so, those are the areas that are extremely interesting to me. And they all circle around just kind of every day. What can you do, and what we done to make every day living more enjoyable, more convenient, more efficient, have to worry less with these basics, so that--why? You can have more time for those things that really are enjoyable. So, if my energies are all set, my utilities are all set, my basic housing needs are met, my health needs are met, that free- and I got a job, that frees me up to really, you know, enjoy my life. And I think that it's so important for people to, you know, at all income levels, and all interests to, you know, to, you know, have carved out one piece of your day to do something enjoyable. And I think that comes from my upbringing, and being from a town [New Orleans, Louisiana] that is really full of life, and full of fun, and full of rejoicing, and all that is good in life. Story_ID: 532039 Speaker 1: Well, speaking about that, have you been back to New Orleans [Louisiana] since Ka- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, many times, many times, I, most recently in November, I was down in New Orleans. I think there's a lot of activity going on now. You finally see, you know, people working, you know, block to block, reestablishing their homes. We're certainly not all the way there, a lot of work to be done. We have a new governor [Bobby Jindal], so I'm hopeful that that new governor will bring some new life, and new executive level leadership into the state, and generate some excitement around rebuilding, but I liked what I saw in November. Story_ID: 532040 Speaker 1: When you look back on the things you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Let's see. I may have decided earlier on to try some different industries. And so, by that I mean, I may have decided to, to go into, I don't--let's say--I mean, I'm making a magazine industry, an industry that is more geared towards enjoying life, you know, retail, you know, something that, you know, may sound a little bit frivolous but, you know, those industries, I like those industries. They're hard work, but they're interesting to me. There's a constant challenge between, you know, what you're creating, and constant feedback from the consumer as, we like it, we don't like it, you know, you failed, you didn't fail, you're successful, you did, there's a con- there's a steady pace to it, a steady feedback to it that I like. I like knowing, how'd I do? I like that energy, and I like that attraction to life, youth, creating, thinking outside of the box, you know, constant change, you know, those are all things that I like. And there're certain industries that allow for that, television making, you know, just a new show every day. I like the creativity, and the spirit, and the amount of very visible teamwork that you see to come together, get a product done, our project, and finish, and move on to the next one. And so, everyone kind of starts over again to create something. And I like that, and I like that kind of movement. And so, I probably would have decided, you know, maybe in my twenties, to try one of those industries. Story_ID: 532041 Speaker 1: Now I hear you're real good friends with [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So have you, are you close to what Ebony doe- I mean, is that part of the inspiration for what you just said? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we talk a lot about her business and, you know, I think that in that business, that certainly, you know, you can see, you know, you have to create and finish up, and go to the next issue. And so, it, it's fun, it's fun, you know, and it, I get to up clo- you know, see up close, kind of some of the inner workings of, of what goes on in that. You know, I've also been able to, you know, to kind of see that with, you know, a candidate, you know, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], as a candidate and see, you know, really you create, you know, a brand, you know, and the Obama brand. And, you know, you get feedback, you know, he's getting feedback every state he goes to. And so, it's a similar kind of energy that you see as you create something. You know, that happens in a campaign, and you really create these relationships, and these friends, and people working for life because you start to know each other so well 'cause you have to move so quickly. So, you don't have a long, drawn out process of understanding each other because some issue is going to come up fairly quickly where everyone is going to put their true feelings on the table, right or wrong. And so you get to know people, and how they work much quicker than a process that is drawn out the introduction of something over many years. You know, or feedback at the end of the year of how a business did, you know. It, it's a much slower process. I like quick, fast pace, let's get it done, what's the next thing? Story_ID: 532042 Speaker 1: Now you actually know Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The country is engaged now in a selection process for the nominee for the Democratic Party, you know, to run for president, and people are, you know, talking about what his character is and what his personality is. What are your reflections about him? Speaker 2: I think, you know, I've known Senator Obama for many years, or probably twenty years. For me, I mean he is still the same person. He is extremely brilliant. He is authentic. He is funny. He can be serious. He is a gifted orator. I mean, his, you know, his ability to speak, and warm a crowd, I think everybody knows that and has, you know, seen that, whether it be at the convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts] or, you know, the speeches that he's given now. And he's unafraid. I mean, I think that, you know, there's an inter s- inner strength, an inner courage, an inner willingness to expose oneself in order to generate, you know, a feeling that if he can say this, if he can do this, if he can believe that I can, I can, and we don't see that very often. I mean so many times personalities are sugarcoated. They're all what we project they are, you know, what people have made them out to be, what we've made them out to be in our own minds, and you don't see that, and I, I, you know, that human side. He's very human, you know, I think anyone would say that's met him, he's like a regular guy, you know. You wouldn't say, oh, my god, you know, he's a god. You just say, this is a regular guy that I could sit and talk with. And, you know, he's married [to Michelle Obama], and has two kids [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama], and, you know, he's brilliant when he speaks, but you, you know, you kind of get over that quickly. It's not something that, you know, it's put between you, and you're in awe, and you can't say anything to him, you know. It, and it, you know, he's just like me and you. And I think that's the beauty of the whole thing. And, you know, there's no facade there, you know, there's just kind of, you know, when he says, "Folks, I hope that--," blah, blah, blah, you know, there's no, like rehearsed, don't say, folks, you know, they might not like that, you know. And it's just very, very genuine, and very much, you know, who--he is who he is. And I think he's very comfortable with who he is. And I think so many of us are so uncomfortable with who we are that it stymies us, and we're afraid to like, you know, take that next step, and just be who you are. And I think he's really being who he is, and that's, people are like, taking that, and absorbing that, and saying, gosh, you know, I can be like that too. Let me wave this sign: "Yes we can." You know, so it, it's very interesting. And I think it was time for, you know (background noise) it really was time for this. Story_ID: 532043 Speaker 1: Now you grew up in New Orleans [Louisiana] and with a family that was rooted in the community. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You're in Chicago [Illinois] now and involved at the community level at the high level and the low level. I mean, so, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: One of my hopes for the African American community is that we can really start to think that and feel that we deserve everything that this world has to offer. And so, part of growth, I think, comes from within. And so, many young people, young children don't have someone telling them they can be all that they can be. And so, at some point, and some also young adults, and also older people, frankly, you know, that somehow, we're going to have to understand that we may not have the nuclear family again in every community. It'd be great if we did, but we may not, or if we do have the nuclear family, maybe Mom and Dad are both working, and Grandmother doesn't live with us, you know, because our parents have moved to another city where, you know, they could get a better opportunity. And so, somehow, we're going to all have to accept responsibility for pushing ourselves to that next level, and believing that we can get there. And it's not always about money. It's not always about success, but it's about internal happiness and whatever, you know, makes you happy. You can go for that, and so I think that many times, we just feel like, it's a lost cause. I'm never going to make it. It's impossible. I can't, you know, do this. I can't do that. Versus, you know what, I can do that. I can keep going, and keep asking for help until one day, I'm going to get that help. And so, it's about, you know, just willing yourself to that, to where you want to be. And so, that's one thing I would like to see. I'd also, you know, like to see us, you know, work hard for what we get. And I'm not saying that we don't work, but sometimes we think like, oh, I should have gotten this, and I didn't get it, or, you know, I want this quickly, and so, I'm going to skip, you know, skip school this, this way. I don't have to go to school. I can work a different way and, and get things done. Some people might be able to do that, but I also think that, you know, on education, you know, that really is your job when you're a child, you know, to go there, do the best that you can, put your hand up if you need help. There's nothing wrong with getting a little help, you know, there's nothing wrong with, you know, getting what you need in order to make that experience again successful for you, and working hard at it. School is hard. There's no doubt about it. It's not easy, but if you have the proper preparation, and I know people have said all along, well, you got to believe that, and you got to really like, you know, say, I'm going to put, I'm going to do this sacrifice in order to, to have the rewards that I'm hoping for later on in life. And so, you got to be able to try to make that investment. And then, you know, I think, as, as minorities, we need to continue to, to ask for, again, what we want, even in the workplace, not be embarrassed, not be shy, make appointments, if we didn't like the evaluation we got, you know, ask what happened here, you know, how can I do better? And w- those are the people that are getting ahead, keep your eyes open. And people are attractive to you in terms of someone that might be able to help you, you know, try to get, try to meet them, you know, try to, you know, see how you can, you know, get next to them. And it might not be the president of the company--it might be just, you know, the next level above you. It may not be your manager. It might be a manager down the hall. Go talk to them, you know. It really is those persons that are successful have worked extremely hard. It's not just magically appeared. They may not be smarter than you, you know. I think sometimes we always say, oh, well, they're so much smarter than I am. You don't know that. We all have skills. We all have gifts. The real key is finding what your gift is and then, you know, working with that gift to get where you want to be. So, that's when I would, what's that, and sometimes which is very slow. And we just, you know, think, this is just the way things have to be, and we don't see that we, each of us, has that ability to change, to change things, may not in everything you want, but you can change some things if you just, you know, take that, that, you know, initiative, and, and say, I'm going to focus on a few small things and make those happen, and just build from there. And it's amazing for your own self-esteem as well. Get a few successes behind your, your belt, under your belt, there's no stopping you. Story_ID: 532044 Speaker 1: Again, if you look back over your career, and all the things you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think, two things--one certainly from a family perspective, I would say, you know, my daughter. John [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] and I have really tried to work hard to instill in her some of the values that we both think are important in life, and also allow her to be her own person. And so, we are looking forward to, you know, Victoria's [Victoria Rogers] accomplishments and, you know, what she gives back to the world. And we're very excited, you know, about that and about, you know, where she is in her life today. I think the other thing would be just, you know, as I've moved along in my career, the people that I've come across, and the people that I've tried to inspire, to really be, you know, and follow what I've just said, you know, be all that they can be, and really, you know, been kind of a person in their lives that have said to them, you know, you can do this, you know, you can figure this out. You can make this your own. You can, you know, do what needs to get done to get to where you're needing to get, and it's not always about that next promotion. You know, it could be as simple as having your kids go to college. And so, for me, all of those people and all of those, you know, people that I've inspired to do their best work and to, you know, really leave their own legacies is my legacy. Story_ID: 532045 Speaker 1: What does the future look like for you? I mean, what are you, do you, I mean, what are you envisioning doing in the future now? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You've, you've done pretty well. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think-- Speaker 1: And you're still young, so what, what do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, my future is bright. I think probably you'll see me, you know, do something maybe in a different industry. You will see me create something, you know, move to a process that's more creative. Remember, I'm restless, so after I kind of feel like I've got it all squared away and am not--I wouldn't say coasting, but I don't have that creative kind of, you know, oh, my gosh, this is, what are we going to do here? How are we going to address all of these issues and resolve them? Once I feel like most of the real heavy duty issues are resolved, I'm r- I'm ready for that next challenge. It will, you know, probably be something that fits into everyday life, you know, that whole goal of, you know, how can we make everyday life easier? You know how can we, you know, move that whole process of what we have to do to lead our lives easier will probably be a part of that, and some kind of creative way of doing that, and making that happen. And so, I think I have at least one more good run in me from a, you know, a company, you know, maybe a corporate perspective, and then, ultimately, you know, probably something that will be, you know, more non-for-profit, more government, that, that kind of work. So probably have two more good gigs in me. That's what I'm thinking, along with all the other things that I, that I do, but that's kind of what, what I'm thinking at this point. Speaker 1: Yeah, just between you and I, since nobody's watching this right now on television, but, you know, who knows, maybe Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] gets elected, you might be invited to join the cabinet at some level. Speaker 2: You never know, you never know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who knows? Yeah. He'll need a secretary of energy or (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know. Story_ID: 532046 Speaker 1: Now your daughter is a senior in high school now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And, and you all constitute a family of two right now-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at home, so, what, who--well, so is that what--what's your nuclear family now, you and your daughter and--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, and what are your aspirations for her at this point? Speaker 2: Well, number one, I want her to enjoy her life to its fullest, you know. Victoria [Victoria Rogers] has been really involved in the Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign. She makes calls every night. She goes to headquarters to make phone calls, or she'll make them from here. And she went to Iowa to canvas door to door. And so it's very interesting to see her develop, and her interests developed, you know, as she grows into, you know, a young woman. And so both John [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] and I would hope that, you know, she just has a tremendous life. She has certainly had all of the advantages of growing up and been, you know, to many places, meeting different, different people. She's had a great education. She has really excelled in her volunteer work, in her own way. She's very much an artist, you know, and started an art program at a community center here in town. And so, she's got her little legacy of all these students that, you know, have learned art through her. And so she feels that art and expression of art is a way to really make life enjoyable, and to really show who you are, and to, you know, have some joy, some on personal, personal joy, and personal communication, you know, in some difficult circumstances that you might have otherwise. That it's a, you know, time to really kind of relax and, you know, enjoy life. And so she's been very involved with that for almost five years now. And so, you know, who knows? We don't know what she's going, you know, what she's going to do. Right now, we're just trying to select a college (laughter) so that's where we are right now. Story_ID: 532047 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Hm, I think you've been fairly thorough frankly, you know, I, I think, I think you've been fairly thorough. Speaker 1: All right. Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I would like to be remembered as someone that has, you know, had an impact, and what do you mean by imba- impact? I think, someone that has showed that, you know, anything is possible, that, you know, the, the work that I've done in many instances, I've been a first. You know, I would hope that, you know, there are lots of people out there breaking barriers, and being first, so that we don't have to talk this first anymore when it comes to minorities or, in particular, African Americans and women. That, you know, they've all been knocked, knocked down, although they might be, you know, first cure for something, you know, that's fine. And so, you know, I want to be remembered as someone that has been always wanting life to be better, you know, in working hard to, to try to ensure that, that life is better, that life's just a little bit easier, or at a minimum, we can think about it being just a little bit easier if we take one step at a time, that we all could be successful in our own way, and that every contribution that every person has to offer is important. I don't care if you are the cleaning person for a building, or the CEO of that company, you still have something to offer. And you, everyone, all, each and every one of us needs to speak up and, you know, be proud of what we have to say, and proud of what we have to offer, and not be afraid to offer that. We're all human beings, and we, we've all got some special talent, so if I can excite people to the point where they feel that they know they have a special talent, and they are willing to explore that special talent and feel good about themselves, I've done a whole lot. Speaker 1: All right. Well, thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thank you..