 Story_ID: 308372 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Carolyn Scott. Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Constance Lamay Rice that's C-O-N-S-T-A-N-C-E, L-A-M-A-Y and Rice is R-I-C-E [HistoryMaker Constance Rice]. Speaker 1: All right and what is your--is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Is there a story behind my name? The only story I know is between my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.]. They were trying to debate what to name me and my mother wanted to name me April, my father wanted to name me Condoleezza which is a family name and for about a month I think I had Condoleezza Rice as a name and then my mother decided that we couldn't have two Condoleezza's in one generation so they changed it to Connie (laughter). Speaker 1: Condoleezza Rice who is the secretary of state now as we film this is your cousin right? Speaker 2: She's my second cousin. Our fathers were cousins. Our grandfathers were brothers on the Rice side. Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born April 5, 1956 in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Is this a quiz? (Laughter) It's October 5, 2005. Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Los Angeles, California. Speaker 1: Sorry they require me to ask these questions but we're in your offices right in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Okay, yes, we're in my office. Story_ID: 308373 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that are also in the script. And they only require short answers. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I have a favorite cuisine; I don't know that I have a favorite food. I love Szechuan Chinese food and I love Indian food--East Indian food. I couldn't choose amongst those dishes. My third favorite cuisine is soul food (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: That's a tough one, I love coral pink but I also love lavender so I guess those would be my two favorite colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't take vacations (laughter) so I wouldn't know. Workaholics don't have vacation destinations but my home is a vacation destination, go see my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying? What would people accuse me of having a favorite phrase. Life is short. I keep telling people when I don't want to do something or I'm impatient that's my sin is impatience and I will whip out a hundred times a week life is too short for this nonsense (laughter). That's probably what people would say is my favorite saying. Story_ID: 308374 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Phillip Rice, Sr.] side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Anna Louise Barnes and of course her married name is Rice 'cause in those days women took their husband's names which I don't recommend today. She comes from a family that hails from Virginia and that's important for a number of reasons. When my mother and my grandmother [Grace Wigenton Barnes] and I went back together to Amissville, Virginia which is outside of Warrenton [Virginia] which is maybe forty minutes from Dulles Airport [Washington Dulles International Airport, Dulles, Virginia] and we went back to the plantation where--there are two plantations in Rappahannock County [Virginia] and what's the other county I don't remember the other one but it starts with a C. Speaker 1: It's Culpeper. Speaker 2: Culpeper County [Virginia], yes it's Culpeper and the story there because the story on both sides of my family has to do with the fact that we are the great-grandchildren of slave owners and slaves and Native Americans from Virginia. And what happened in Virginia is that because our family came here a long, long time ago, our African ancestors came a long time ago they weren't recently enslaved. Because we had that interaction with the slave masters we were already biracial by the time of my great-grandparents. And what that meant was is when you had a biracial slave child in these smaller Virginia farms because you go to Virginia and you see the slave shack where my great-grandfather was sent and where he grew up, it's still there. Now poor white people live in it. Those slave shacks were built with brick and mortar. They had fireplaces, they were really--they had wooden floors, almost luxurious compared to the awful shacks that you found in the big Mississippi and Louisiana farms and so when we went back there we were stunned that the slave shack that my great-grandfather, my mother's grandfather was still there and you could see the electricity lines being run. The most important thing about it is that slave shack was a hundred yards away from the big house, the plantation house and they were small farms. The reason that those shacks were built so well was because Virginia farming and Virginia plantations kept white indentured servants for so long that they house slaves and indentured servants in those shacks and because they housed white people in those shacks they were built much better. So when my grandmother and my mother and I went back and started putting together the lore of her side of the family it turns out that because half slave--half white slaves were freed much earlier, my mother's grandmother and my grandmother's mother were freed much earlier. In fact, my great-grandmother Wigenton [Sarah Brown Wigenton], my grandmother's mother owned a sugar mill and a flour mill and they lived in Amissville because in Amissville there was a no fugitive slave retrieval permitted. The posses that went after escaped slaves could not operate in Amissville. So in Amissville you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that according to local ordinance? Speaker 2: That was according to Virginia law and so the ex-slaves and escaped slaves and freed slaves could live in Amissville with a reduced chance of being rounded up by the posses and put back into slavery. So when we went back to Virginia and saw the farm that my grandmother grew up on and that my great-grandmother had owned with her husband and then my father's--my mother's father, my grandfather Jess Barnes also was half white and so when you have these families that had this history of being the house slaves and freed early that was a very important factor and my family's ability to advance way ahead of a lot of other ex-slave families. It puts you in a funny position that you still have today which is that we're in effect the Sally Hemings in the African American community and it automatically sets up a color caste and class, educational gap and so forth. Story_ID: 308375 Speaker 1: On my mother's [Anna Barnes Rice] side--my mother's side of the family just as smart as the Rice side but perhaps not as highly educated. It's a family where you had thirteen--no ten children within the marriage who were educated all at the high school level most at the college level and my grandfather [Jess Barnes] who never read--my Grandfather Barnes he didn't write or read any language. He would sign his Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania] paychecks with an X but because he was working at Bethlehem Steel Mill with a union and union protections he could earn enough money to support his ten children and to put them in public schools that gave a really good education; the equivalent of a good Catholic school education in 2004 and because of that all of his children not only read or wrote, most went to college. My Aunt Agnes [Agnes Barnes] got her Ph.D., my mother has a Ph.D.--a master's [degree] rather and so they got advanced education. The men in the family also got advanced degrees--college degrees and some ended up going to college and being truck drivers others ran computer companies. But that upward mobility was so critical. But the history of going back to Virginia was a real eye opener because you could really feel the connection to the days of slavery and what it was and what were the stepping stones up and out of that for that side of my family. Speaker 2: Did your mother talk about growing up? Did she grow up in Amissville [Virginia]? Speaker 1: No my mother grew up in Reading, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: So is that where your grandfather worked for Bethlehem Steel? Speaker 1: Bethlehem Steel that's how--they went up to Reading to get away from the oppressiveness of the South. They were a little too independent for the comfort and the morays of the South; African Americans who wouldn't obey, African Americans like my grandfather who challenged white men. My grandfather Barnes his grandmother was a full blooded Cherokee [Native American] woman and she raised--because his mother who was we believed raped by the owner of the house where she worked, my grandfather was the product of that rape as far as he was concerned and when the lore of the family is that when white men--this was the story my grandfather told me who knows whether it's true--but this is what he wanted me to understand. My grandfather was a hellion. He was just--he was a hunter, he had rifles and guns and he hunted for his food and he was a real survivor very, very smart man who could wheel and deal and knew how to make money. His only vice was gambling but he was a--he played hard and he worked hard and you'd have recognized him as a character in a movie. Very hard scrabble, salt of the earth and he knew how to make his way in a hostile world. But he was also extremely stubborn, and we come by it honestly (laughter), obstinancy we come by it honestly. And my Grandfather Barnes-- Story_ID: 308376 Speaker 1: So I was describing my [maternal] Grandfather Barnes [Jess Barnes]. So the story that he wanted me to understand is that he left the South because some white men attacked his grandmother and he went after them with a gun and after he went after them with a gun he could not stay in North Carolina and he left for World War I [WWI] at age fourteen. He enrolled as a soldier in the trenches of England, learned the hard way you don't sign up for war. He came back and swore he'd never go back to the South and that he would never eat mutton again because it poisoned him when he was in the trenches. They treated the black soldiers horribly, they didn't treat any of the soldiers well but they treated the black soldiers horribly. Speaker 2: So he served in--probably served in France I would think? Speaker 1: Well he talked about England so he may have been on the ground in England. Speaker 2: They didn't have a ground war in England during World War I. Speaker 1: Well he talked about that British mutton maybe they served it to him then (unclear). To the day he died he wouldn't eat lamb again. But my grandfather used to keep a gun over the door and if anybody white approached he'd take it down and greet--so you--so those were some of the lessons that he passed on. My grandmother came from Amissville, Virginia and she escaped the farm because her older sister my Great Aunt Louise [ph.] brought her up. Great Aunt Louise had gone to Reading [Pennsylvania] first and could not as a single girl leave your household unless you had protection of an older married sister and that's how my grandmother, as she put it my grandmother Barnes--Grace Barnes [Grace Wigenton Barnes] put it I escaped the farm. Her life, while it was hard in Reading, was infinitely easier than the incredibly hard life of getting at four o'clock in the morning, using the outhouse and having to get well water. That farm life while being free was a privilege, that farm life was hard and you could see it in my Great Aunt Alice [ph.] who by the end of her life, she stayed on that farm and worked until she died and that was a really hard life, very hard life. Speaker 2: So your grandfather was actually from North Carolina? Speaker 1: From North Carolina, we don't know a lot about his family except for the story of how he didn't claim his father, he claimed his grandmother who was full blooded Cherokee [Native American] and his mother who was half African and half Cherokee. Story_ID: 308377 Speaker 1: What is your mother's [Anna Barnes Rice] date of birth? Speaker 2: January 24--she's seventy-five so you have to figure the year out (laughter). Speaker 1: She was born in Reading or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reading, Pennsylvania Speaker 1: Did she talk about growing up in Reading and what it was like? Speaker 2: Yeah Reading was an interesting place. First of all it was integrated. They always had Polish and Italian neighbors and it was funny the African American families we--it was a textile working man's town and you had the textile mill, the Berkshire Knitting Mills [Reading, Pennsylvania] and Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania]. So it was a blue collar union town and while there was obviously racial prejudice, it didn't play out in the same way that you faced in the South or in some other cities where there were large numbers of African Americans and so blacks were a bigger threat and you didn't have as much oppression of African Americans. Those row houses that you see in Baltimore [Maryland], African Americans owned their own houses and they weren't ghettoized as much in Reading. So it was a different dynamic and you went to integrated schools. My mother went to a school where African Americans students were maybe 10 percent and while, while prejudice against African American students was a factor, you had more whites who were willing to help African American students than whites who were trying to keep African American students down. So her teachers would encourage my mother and her sisters, there were five girls first so the girls came first. So my mother and my aunts were encouraged to succeed and they were recognized as bright and so white teachers who liked my aunts and my mother would say no you need to take the honors course, you're too smart and you need to go to college. So they got encouragement that many black students to this day don't get. Speaker 1: Where did she go to college? Speaker 2: All of my--my mother and all of her sisters went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where she met my father [Phillip Rice, Sr.] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay she became a chemist right, a biology teacher? Speaker 2: She was a biology teacher, my mother is a biology teacher, and she's seventy-five years old and still teaching. So she never stopped being a teacher. She wanted to be a doctor, my mother wanted to be a doctor but she was told by Howard that she'd be taking a black man's place and so she was encouraged not to apply to medical school. Story_ID: 308378 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes my father is--his full name is Phillip Leon Rice, Sr. and he's the son of William Stanley Rice and Erma Phillips Rice and he grew up 'til the age of fourteen in Birmingham, Alabama. I was just talking to him last night in fact and we were talking about the lynching project and he said well I can't go see it because I can remember the stories of the lynchings and I can remember being afraid and we had to be very careful in Birmingham because African Americans who were literate and could read and who was seen as professionals we were targets and we had to watch each other very carefully. So he was just explaining it was too painful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You all were discussing the exhibit? Speaker 2: The exhibit that showcased (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Without Sanctuary[: Lynching Photography in America]'? Speaker 2: Yes 'Without Sanctuary' exhibit that I went to go see and I was--we were talking about Tom DeLay and how to me when I look at men like Tom DeLay they remind me of that picture which was the most striking picture of the 'Without Sanctuary' lynching exhibit. The most striking picture to me was not the man hanging--not the black man hanging but the hundreds of whites with picnic baskets and you could see them toasting each other with kegs of beer I assume, I mean with mugs of beer. In the audience with a picnic lunch who came to enjoy the lynching and I was saying that Tom DeLay's affect reminds me of what I think of when I look at that picture of those whites. So we were discussing it and he was saying that he had missed the exhibit but he had struggled because he just didn't want those feelings, he had lived it. He had lived in the shadow of lynching in Birmingham and he didn't want to pull those feelings up again. Speaker 1: What is your father's date of birth? Speaker 2: My dad's birthday is July 3rd and he's also seventy-five years old so you can figure out the date, 1940 something or 1930 something. So he grew up in a family that had antecedents from the plantations from the Alfred Plantation [ph.], the Rainey Plantation, the Phillips Plantation and the Rice Plantation [ph.] in Alabama. Speaker 1: In 1929 I think '29 [1929] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty-nine [1929] was when he was born yeah because in the '40s [1940s] he was, I guess in high school. But my dad comes from a very severe family that's hyper achievement oriented. His father spoke Greek and Hebrew. He went to seminary and had a college degree and on the Rice side my great-grandparents were freed from slavery when they were twelve, nine, fourteen and fifteen and I can't remember who was what. But you think about the fact that it was--I'm only four generations from slavery on either side and the reason that is I'm the descendant of the youngest of very large families. So that's why you don't have that great, great level, it's great, it's only a hundred years ago and that's just not a very long time and if you think about the enormous advancement because on that side we are also descendants of slave owner and slave and Native American. Story_ID: 308379 Speaker 1: So if you think about my family we are 19th century America, blended. We are the mixture, the most multiracial mixture at any point from 19th century America and we claim all of those blood lines. So it's an interesting lens to look back through when you think about the dynamics that produced these mulatto mixes. So once again we were the great-grandchildren of slaves and slave owner and occupied an unusual position within the slavery regime because my white law partner, Molly Munger insists that I claim my white ancestors and so she did a history project and discovered letters amongst some of the women who owned my ancestors and they're discussing Julia Head [Julia Head Rice] who married one of my ancestors [Rice's paternal great-grandfather, John Wesley Rice] on the Rice side. And Julia Head was a common ancestor of Condoleezza Rice and myself and she was also half white and the family did not ship her out, they kept her as almost a relative and from North Carolina migration out to Birmingham [Alabama] kept Julia. The letters are concerning the fact that Julia, a mulatto slave who was their half-sister just like Sally Hemings was unhappy serving Charlotta [ph.]. So they were having a family conference letter about where to place Julia in another household within the extended family so that Julia would be happier (laughter). So one of my friends said, "Y'all were uppity and a problem even when you were slaves you didn't know how to behave." So that was an interesting correspondence to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This ancestor is Julia Head was actually, I guess as many who read about Thomas Jefferson, his son actually served him in the house. Speaker 1: Yes that's Sally Hemings. Sally Hemings was the half-sister of Thomas Jefferson's wife and also his lover very strange incestuous relationships. Speaker 2: But then his son becomes actually a servant in his house when he gets (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly that's right. Speaker 2: You would think with the sibling rivalry that we have now and we don't have slavery what that might have been like. Speaker 1: That must have been extremely poisonous. A very strange and toxic dynamic to have your half slave siblings whom you couldn't claim as family members but yet they were there and for some reason this particular set of families did not ship out their half white, half slave children they kept them. Now on the other side of the family, my mother's [Anna Barnes Rice] side of the family her grandfather [George Wigenton] was shipped to the next county. So he was born in Culpeper County [Virginia] but he was sent to Rappahannock County [Virginia] to live in the slave shack that I described because he was an affront to the white landlady--to white lady of the house and her husband was sleeping with her slaves and impregnating them and she did not want to see the children who looked like him who were half black. So in that household you didn't keep them but in the Rice household apparently you did, very, very strange. Speaker 2: What a poisonous kind of situation. Speaker 1: Slavery was such a warping and just distorting and destructive force more so for whites than for Africans, I think much more so for whites. Speaker 2: Why would you say that? Speaker 1: Because you had to corrupt yourself and destroy your moral constructs to a point where you savaged yourself to accommodate the institution and you had to become savage in your soul to perpetrate it and yet you had to deny that savagery. I think that the poisonous distortions and contortions and emotional and moral gymnastics that you had to go through, that callisthenic exercise destroyed your entire sense of yourself and yet you couldn't admit it. So it's always been far more interesting to me. Slavery was a destructive process for whites. It was an empowering and strengthening process for Africans, we survived it and we survived it knowing that we were right and that justice--how did Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] say that the arch of the universe bends towards justice. We were in the right end of that arch and they were on the wrong end and they still can't face it to this day. So when you embody both of those dynamics there's a lens on this issue that's I think unique. I can translate it to whites who are my ancestors and I can translate the blind spots that it created for Africans and our survival mechanisms because they've both have been passed down through the family. Story_ID: 302156 Speaker 1: You think about the fear, slavery for whites was about fear. Fear of Nat Turner, fear that their slaves would kill them, which was interesting about the contrast between the Virginia family small farm model where the treatment of slaves was much more humane and you even housed slaves with white indentured servants. You communicated with your slaves because they live less than fifty yards away from you. So it was a much more intimate more humane model of slavery and when you go down to the big farms later on--huge plantations where you had Haitian models of slavery and you just worked people to death. You didn't care if they lived and in those plantations the most distinguishing factor is that the slave masters' house is nowhere near the slaves, it's five and six miles. Go to the big plantations in Mississippi you will see that the big house is four or five miles away because it was such an aggressive, brutal, savage system and the treatment was so inhumane that the fear of the white slave owners was much, much greater. So I'm just a student, I'm not an expert in slavery but from what I can glean it was much more damaging to whites than it was to Africans. Story_ID: 302157 Speaker 1: Did your father [Phillip Rice, Sr.], did--he grew up in Birmingham [Alabama] is that right? Speaker 2: He grew up in Birmingham, my dad grew up in Birmingham until he was fourteen and then they moved to Cleveland [Ohio]. In Birmingham once again you had--he lived the life of more advantaged, educated light skinned half white blacks who lived--who were the blue crust elite. Families like mine because we were half white and because we had an advantage and because in a system of white supremacy those who are half white have more value and because we're talented and we're gifted that doesn't negate that but you have understand that your talents operate in a context and the context for families who by in large almost without exception families who are mulatto who are half white had an enormous advantage on the slaves who had no contact with the dominant white culture. In a system that values Europeaness as the supreme standard or white supremacist system, folks like my family are going to be on top and that's exactly what it was. In Birmingham, my [paternal] grandparents [Erma Phillips Rice and William Rice] were teachers, they were land owners, they were business owners, they owned a printing press--they ran a printing press and published a newspaper and other publications. So you had--you could see the built in advantages even at that stage. But it's a very severe family, the Rices are Episcopalian in effect, Calvinist almost, extreme work ethic. I think the third word out of my mouth after mom and dad was college. I had no idea what it was but I was going. In my father's day, I remember my Uncle Bill [William Rice] and my Uncle Robert [Robert Rice] and my father and his two brothers spinning stories about how their father who as I said before was highly educated, fluent in Greek and Hebrew because he went to seminary and could read the bible in the original Hebrew and on and on and on and they opened up a school to teach other blacks how to read. But they were already even at my [paternal] great-grandfather [John Wesley Rice] level literate (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they associated with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at that time? Speaker 2: I don't think Howard but with the seminaries and with the African American run institutions in Alabama but I can't remember the names of them, I should but I'm fifty and I'm starting to lose my short term memory (laughter). But I can remember my uncles and my father in the basement talking about, "Yeah that was hard, we had to read a book a day and I mean you had to report on it at dinner" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a 19th century--that's what the Fortens did. You know, Charlotte Forten [Charlotte Forten Grimke] and James Forten? Speaker 2: Read a book a day. That's right and at dinnertime you had better be able to report on that book to your father or you didn't eat. So they enforced with a very severe code of academic achievement and you had to achieve and if there is a DNA coding for the Rices and for the Barnes it is you achieve at all costs, and excellence. You had to be better than everybody else around you in order to preserve where we stood and that was a very clear message. You had to be better than whites at what whites did. You had to be smarter, you had to be able to achieve on their terms not African American terms but you had to be able to achieve in white society. So that you could never be placed further back and you couldn't lose your birth. It was so easy to lose your land even if the land was given to you they cheated you out of it by refusing to take your tax payments and then declaring you a tax cheat and they would confiscate your land. There were so many ways to undo whatever gains you had made as the sons and daughters of the slave owners. Story_ID: 302158 Speaker 1: I'll never forget my dad [Phillip Rice, Sr.] and my brother--it's so funny, the sense of entitlement and the sense of personal integrity was so clearly passed down to us and you didn't see it in other African American families who felt more like chattel because they couldn't quite get above the water. Our necks were above the water whereas a lot of other families weren't. But in that black community where our families were at the top of the heap you had a lot of power, you had a lot of clout; you also had a lot of responsibility to pass on your advantages. I think that the [paternal] family created that credo in Birmingham [Alabama] and were known for that. But I can remember when my dad and my brother Phillip [Phillip Rice, Jr.] who is a doctor at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] who is now faculty but he's an ER [emergency room] doctor and my dad and my brother went down to Birmingham to try and get some of the documents and to see what they could get on the records of slavery to do their roots--their little roots journey. I couldn't go 'cause I was in trial but my brother, I remember my brother kind of chuckling because my father promptly went to Montgomery [Alabama] and marched right up the steps to the state house where the census documents are taken. My brother said, "Where are you going," and my father said, "We have to get records on our ancestors and we're going to the census," and my brother said, "Dad we weren't people. We're in the property division. They didn't count us in the census they counted us in the property." My dad who is this very proud colonel--this [U.S.] military colonel-[U.S.] Air Force colonel just stood dumbstruck because that's not how he could ever conceive of us. Story_ID: 302159 Speaker 1: He ended up going to Howard, right? Howard University [Washington, D.C.] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes my father [Phillip Rice, Sr.] went to Howard and he also went to--he was a ROTC Air Force [Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps] and my father completed Howard and did Russian studies, fluent in Russian. He has a language ability that's just amazing. He has conversational Japanese, fluency in Russian and fluency in English. The Rices and the Barnes we speak the King's English to the queen's taste. We have to speak English better than the queen does (laughter). We're all--we all highly prize with linguistic ability. So he majored in Russian studies in the '50s [1950s] if you can believe it and if I had to guess he was a spy, he was a pilot. I know he was a pilot, he was an excellent pilot, in fact NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] wanted him. His specialty was helicopters he could even design helicopters and he did military air command, tactical air command, strategic air command, he did the diplomatic corps. He was the first African American liaison to the British embassy and the American embassy in London [England] where I lived for three years. That's where we got our educational head start 'cause we went to private British schools and because of that life we really learned to roll with the punches, we moved every year almost, we moved twenty-one times in twenty-two years, sometimes more than once a year. We did that because my dad was so talented that to keep his promotions going and not to threaten people he would come, solve a problem, give the white officers the credit and then move on and the quid pro quo was a promotion. My father is a very, very talented man, just righteous, just very--always does the right thing, lives by a code of honesty, integrity to his detriment because he doesn't play politics and everything has to be on merit and he's just a wonderful man. He's learned to relax a little bit since he's gotten older but my dad is--he was just an over-achieving, incredibly--just so full of integrity and honesty and goodness and compassion. Those are things that he passed on to his children and he just expects you to achieve. The love was unconditional from both my parents and that's the secret is that with this extraordinary pressure to achieve it isn't conditional. The love it's not just love. It's utter exuberance and they cherish us. Their whole lives were about making us--catapulting us to levels they couldn't even imagine and that's exactly what my parents did. Story_ID: 302160 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] met that they've passed down to you? Speaker 2: My mother and my father were at--both at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and this is my mother's version. My mother picked him out (laughter), she says she picked him out and she says that she sort of seduced him into taking her to this big dance and she found out--she did all kinds of research on him and then started telling him that she could see, she had these special magical qualities and he actually believed her (laughter) because she knew too much about him but she had done the research. So she said yes I tricked him into thinking that I could see into him. So they went to this dance and started dating and of course the girls at that time you couldn't have men in your dorm and so she would sneak out to meet him. They started dating he was a senior she was a junior. When he left she left to marry him and then finished her degree at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York]. So they sort of fell in love sight unseen and my mother says she engineered it, and my father said he engineered it. I don't know, I'm just glad they got together. Story_ID: 302161 Speaker 1: When you think about their [Rice's parents, Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] personalities and their traits, who do you think you--or what traits do you take after? Speaker 2: Well when I think about my parents I got my mother's--I don't look like either of them, I don't look anything like either of them. I'm a strange combination of both physically but I got my mother's baseline of emotional contentment. She's a very happy, sunny, optimistic, she's the kind of mother who would come into your room and start singing nursery rhymes and rise and shine. She'd make up these silly songs and everything was happy and everyday was a new adventure and being a teacher, you know, she had all of those qualities too. I have her basic emotional base line of contentment and self-satisfaction. But I think I'm more of my father's daughter and I didn't know it until I was much older. My mother loves company, she loves being around tons of people and she needs to be on the phone at all times talking. She just talks nonstop, I do have that trait. But the things I shared with my father that I got from my father. My father is a loner and I'm a loner. My father is--he only wants a certain amount of social contact, I need to limit my social contact. I don't have the common touch, I do not have the sort of political common touch that a Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] or a Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] has and my mother has. So I ended up with the sort of intensity and loner qualities of my dad but it's a combination of my mother's high interhuman IQ. She reads people really well and she can look at you and figure out exactly what you need and what you're missing and she can tell whether you're self-sufficient or whether you're going to be needy and therefore you need to be watched. She has that very high interhuman IQ and that I got from her. Story_ID: 302162 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I--maybe my earliest childhood memory is when my brother was born. My brother Phillip [Phillip Rice, Jr.] was eighteen months--he was born eighteen months after I was. I can remember at eighteen months thinking why did they do this (laughter)? Who is this creature disrupting my world and we have been at it for fifty years ever since. Two loving scorpions in a bottle but I can remember thinking I have to get rid of him. So began the sibling rivalry, that's my earliest childhood memory and then perhaps the most concrete memory is we were living in Japan at Misawa Air Force Base [Aomori Prefecture, Japan], I was five or just barely five and my baby brother Norman [Norman Rice] had just been born and my middle brother Phillip was four, three and a half going on four and Japan of course has huge earthquakes and there was this huge earthquake and my mother [Anna Barnes Rice] had to carry Norman the baby and Phillip was a toddler so she had to hold on to his hand. I can remember my mother bending down and telling me Connie [HistoryMaker Constance Rice] you have to hold on to my nightgown, do not let go of my nightgown. She says to this day she can remember just praying fervently that I would obey her (laughter) for a change. We had to go outside and I can remember--you had to go outside so that things wouldn't fall on you and I can remember the street beginning to crack open as we stood outside when the ground, the ground shook. Story_ID: 302163 Speaker 1: Now so you grew up in Japan and you spent part of the time in Great Britain and where else? (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we--we lived in about eleven different states, Pennsylvania, Arizona, we lived in Texas three different times, and we lived in California. I mean we just lived--we lived in Illinois, we lived in Ohio, we've lived in so many places. We lived London [England] for three years which was the longest place I lived anywhere and that was age nine, ten and eleven and we came back to the United States when I was twelve. So we were very young when we lived in Japan, we lived in Utah, Washington, D.C. It was just constant moving and that's actually what shaped us more than anything and I didn't realize it until I was much older that constant moving created more of a core persona than almost anything else and I didn't realize it until I was in college and listening to a NPR [National Public Radio] interview of a nomadic tribesman in northern Africa. I think it was one of the nomadic tribes of the Sudan one of the last to exist and they were interviewing this tribal leader and he was explaining his outlook on life and he was explaining how by going from place to place you must find the good in a place and you must take it and you must ride it and you must make the most of it and then you must be able to interact with the people and then I sat straight up in the bed. As I listened to this tribesman I realized that's what I am, I'm a nomad because you have no identification with place and your ability to connect with other people is shallow by nature because you must move on. You must be able to quickly connect, connect at a deep enough level to insure your safety in the new place and to insure your effectiveness and your functionality in the new place and then you have to move on. So the connections can only be so deep and it creates an affect it's a nomadic affect that fundamentally shapes your notions of place and human connection that to this day has shaped my ability and the way I connect. So the moving had a traumatic--it also makes you extremely resilient and very self-sufficient because you must be self-sufficient and you can go into a place and you can case a place like that you have to or you won't survive. So it ended up giving me skills and an ability to handle change. Change was all we knew so the fast rate of change today isn't as unsettling and confusing to my brothers and me because it's all we knew. We didn't realize it there were people who lived in the same house for ten years or the same community. It's such a strange contrast to, for example listening to the interviews of the poor folk who got completely washed out in the Lower Ninth [Ward] in New Orleans [Louisiana] in Hurricane Katrina because their sense of place is so deep that they have to go back. They actually can't exist anywhere else and you contrast that to the nomad frame of reference and it's striking. Speaker 1: Did you ever think that you wanted to be in one place for a long period of time or did you feel that you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no the moving didn't strike us as a deficit, we didn't think of it as a problem it was all we knew as long as my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] were there. One of my fondest memories is the three of us in the back seat, me on the left behind my dad who was always driving and Phillip [Phillip Rice, Jr.] on the right and Norman [Norman Rice] in the middle and my parents up front and we crisscrossed this country a dozen times, a dozen times in five years and I can remember thinking, as long as those two are in the driver's seat and the three of us are in the back the world's okay, everything is okay. Story_ID: 302164 Speaker 1: Tell us now, did you mainly stay on military bases? On the bases? Speaker 2: Yes, but it's probably--yes, about 75 percent of the time on military bases. When we lived in Ohio, we lived in Shaker Heights [Ohio] and we lived in Cleveland [Ohio]. No, we lived in--yes, well, actually we lived in Shaker Heights but it was right on the border of Cleveland. My [paternal] grandparents [Erma Phillips Rice and William Rice] were in Cleveland; my father [Phillip Rice, Sr.] left Birmingham [Alabama] and moved up to Cleveland and he ran Rice's Restaurant. So we ended up being more like Asian immigrants. We opened up a restaurant and everybody in the family worked at the restaurant, we pooled your money and you built your capital from there and then you bought houses and you became landlords and so that's how the Rices made their way. We ended up living in Cleveland for junior year and I went to Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] which was harder than Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] which is why I went to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard colleges (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shaker Heights High School was harder than Harvard? Speaker 2: Oh yeah Shaker Heights and doing five AP courses at Shaker Heights High School ended up being more work than completing courses at Harvard. There was great preparation and it's the way schools ought to be run for all of our kids. What was sad about that experience was I was in a high school of three thousand children and fifteen hundred were African American and fifteen hundred were white and Jewish and I was the only African American child in the complete AP track--advanced placement track. Black kids were all in either non college tracks or non-honors tracks and the main reason was black kids didn't want to do the work and they wouldn't put themselves in harder classes and that made my brother and me angry. We understood then that the culture of under achievement and low expectations wasn't only imposed by outsiders, we as a people allow it and it's unforgiveable. Speaker 1: You said unforgiveable, I mean, can you expand on that a little bit? Speaker 2: Well it's unforgiveable because there is no excuse for it, there's no excuse. African Americans in my world stand for the highest achievements, in fact we were always told you have to go beyond if you're expected to read three books the Rices and the Barnes read four. If white children are expected to excel at a certain level and get certain scores on the SAT test we had to get fifty points higher. So we were always--blackness to me means achievement and to see that standard inverted so that you're accused of being white because you do well in school infuriates and absolutely outrages me. Story_ID: 302165 Speaker 1: This is all we need to know and all we need to understand as African Americans. That in the McClymonds High School in Oakland [California] which is a very poor school you have Hmong and Vietnamese children coming from war torn countries who are going to Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] from that high school but African American kids aren't even going to community college now that's on us. If those southeast Asian poor immigrants who can barely speak English are working so hard with what's before them making a whole lot out of nothing the way Africans know how to do out of slavery that's our history making something out of nothing (laughter). That's the African legacy, that's our genius and our other genius is showing this country the meaning of its soul and the meaning of its credos. But one of geniuses has always been to catapult ourselves on the basis of absolutely nothing to heights of achievement no one can understand. People can't even understand how we survived slavery never mind produced the people that we've produced. All the musicians and the Paul Robesons and the W.E.B. Du Bois and the Fannie Lou Hamers look at the giants the Barbara Jordans I mean just on and on and on. My parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] the giants that we have produced based on nothing and battling deprivation and to arrive in the 20th century and to have our children talking about you excelling in high school as white, oh no, no, no. In fact I've said life is too short and that is unacceptable. That's what I mean by I'm outraged. Speaker 2: This clearly--it seems to me this is clearly a cultural difference even amongst black people in terms of how we approach education and what do you think--do you have any thoughts about what the roots of that culture difference is? Speaker 1: Well some of it is based in the privileged dichotomy. For some African American families reading didn't happen until the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. Literacy wasn't permitted, wasn't accessible, wasn't obtainable until then. You look at my family's background we were literate during slave times and we were exposed to reading and exposed to a sense of entitlement and privilege as a result of how our white and African family--ancestors interacted and treated one another. So there are some basic differences there but that doesn't explain once you had access to that education. My grandfather [Jess Barnes] on my mother's side for example as I said before, he didn't read or write but he did is he went to the teacher and he said this is how he enforced his achievement 'cause he didn't know how to read or write. But as an illiterate, intelligent African American man what he did was he marched up to the school and he said--he gave the teacher some cardboard blocks. He cut out some pieces of cardboard and he gave it to the teacher and he said, "Write the symbol down of the grade that's a good grade." So the teacher wrote an A and he took that home and he put it on his dresser and he'd take your report card and if he didn't see that symbol you got beat (laughter). You got a beating if he didn't see A's and he couldn't read but he could recognize that symbol. So when the teachers found out that my aunts and uncles and my mother if they didn't bring home an A they got beat the teacher came by the house and gave him another cardboard block with a B on it and she said Mr. Barnes this also is a good grade so when you see this grade tell your children they are doing well they can do better but don't beat them (laughter). If my Grandfather Barnes was one of the smartest men--one of the smartest people I've ever known. He didn't read or write but he was really smart. He knew the value of that education, he knew it was the key to his children's freedom and he insisted that they get it. What are the parents doing today? They don't face any of those obstacles and we can't be bothered? Our children are watching eight hours of television that's what I mean by outraged, I'm not having it. Now I as a civil rights lawyer fight the systemic and institutionalized barriers to that academic achievement and the negative messaging that is sent through the low expectations and the racial attitudes. Believe me I'm not denying those because every school we went to we had to fight to get into the honors courses because they didn't believe black children could achieve at an honors level. There wasn't a school I went to where my mother and fathe didn't have to go in there and say excuse me you've placed our children who have straight A's in every school they've ever been in, you've just placed them in the non-college track, excuse me they're going in this track. We had to fight that battle in every place we went. Story_ID: 305321 Speaker 1: Say what you were just saying about the underclass and the middle class in terms of education (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know when I say that it's unforgiveable I'm talking about the choices of folks who've been given a menu of choices and then choose not to achieve, which is what I saw in Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] that was just a choice. When we told folk, "Look you need to be in this track. These are the courses that can get you into the higher level colleges," and people would say, "We don't want to work that hard," and then we challenge them even more and they still turn it down. There was no excuse as far as I was concerned. What I see today is also in the black middle class a laziness and I don't forget that they know we know too much. When I'm working with clients in the housing projects and I'm in the underclass areas of white America and black America and Latino America or I'm on the Native American reservations where the deprivation and the poverty are high. When I'm in Appalachia, when I'm in housing projects where you have underclass African Americans and you look at the environmental killers in their environments everything from the nutrition to the lead poisoning to the violence. These are kids who have post-traumatic stress syndrome and absolutely interferes with their ability to understand their choices and then you look at the schools and the quality of their schools and some of these schools couldn't teach the sculptured poodles in Beverly Hills [California] how to bark. Even if you did want those schools offered, you would barely be literate. So their choices are different and the culture that I see developing in underclass communities is devastating but it is a culture that copes with an environment that is so deprived. It's almost gotten to a 'Clockwork Orange' counterculture that you have a cult of violence and children don't see anything else around them. So achievement is neither possible, in fact achievement is now being defined in terms of a prison culture. Achievement is getting into a gang, achievement means getting power so that you don't become a victim of the rape you saw in the hallway. I'm talking about in the hot spots; I'm not talking about all of poor black America. I'm talking about an underclass black America where poverty is dysfunctional. Poverty is not always dysfunctional. My grandparents [Grace Wigenton Barnes and Jess Barnes] on my mother's side were poor they grew their own vegetables, they killed their own chickens, sometimes you had to make shoes out of cardboard but in that poverty they were rich in values and outlook and they raised ten of their own children, three of other folks' kids to go to college and to achieve and to get a work ethic. So I'm talking about dysfunctional poverty that is a legacy of the worst of what happened to African Americans and if there is a direct line from slavery to this set of circumstances. But there is also a whole lot of power in the individual to be able to diagnose and get out of it. We've done it for generations and the vast majority of African Americans that's what our stories say, that's what so amazing about us and that's also, I think, the key to why we can overcome the remaining institutional racism. Because African Americans we have always coped with whatever has been dished out that also means there is no incentive for the majority of society to change anything because we always cope. Story_ID: 305322 Speaker 1: We are going to get back to some of that later on, but we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? And you have a variety--so many places to, you know, in which to extract on these things? Speaker 2: Well my earliest sights were a Japanese fishing village and then Hong Kong [China] was the first city I ever saw. I was five years old and I can remember the swirl of the activity, the rickshaws and the smell of the fish because the waterways of the dock were stagnant and I can remember this overwhelming smell of rotting fish and the fish market in Japan. I can remember the Tower of London [London, England] as a little girl, I had these little troll dolls and I always carried my troll dolls and I dropped one of my troll dolls in the Tower of London and I went racing through the cobblestones of the Tower of London and the guard had to get me because my troll doll had fallen someplace (laughter) that I couldn't get it from and I had the guards of, the Buckingham Palace [London, England] guards who also guard the Tower of London retrieving this doll for me. I remember the mountains in Germany in Garmisch [Garmisch-Partenkirchen] Germany when my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] first took us skiing, I was seven years old at that time and I hated skiing, hated the cold but loved the mountains; the Bavarian Mountains [Bavarian Alps] were so beautiful. Sights and smells my grandmother's kitchen--my Grandmother Rice's [Erma Phillips Rice] kitchen and my Grandmother Barnes' [Grace Wigenton Barnes] kitchen and the different ways they fixed fried chicken and they how tried to teach me to cook but I refused to cooperate (laughter) 'cause I was a tomboy and didn't want to learn how to cook and I knew that if I learned how to cook I end up in the kitchen. So I purposely crashed the eggs into the batter and got all the egg shells in the batter so that I would be excused but Kamarie [ph.] and Kareem [ph.] and Condoleezza [Condoleezza Rice] and everybody else would stay at the table but I was excused, I remember those ploys. But when we moved we just saw so many amazing things like the Grand Canyon. So it's big things like the magnificence of the Grand Canyon and the enormous beauty of this country 'cause we crisscrossed this country and would see it in a way that most children never saw it. Story_ID: 305323 Speaker 1: This is true, and it's profound, too, because I remember seeing these things on television or in books, and most kids do--if they see them in books or on television, but you saw them in person. Speaker 2: Yeah and as a little kid. I saw sights around the world as a little kid firsthand and it makes you think of this country in a way and you become aware of the Native American plight and you end up integrating your feelings about this country in a strangely synergistic and holistic way that melds the horrors of the original sins of this country with its magnificence and you can live with the duality of that in a way that I think most Americans can't. Profound love of the beauty of this incredible swath of land and you realize--and I've been around the world and there aren't many places that look and feel like this country just the physical side of it, the mountain ranges and the vast--from the beautiful forests of the Northwest to the magic of the deserts and just everything in between. It's terrain of enormous variety and overwhelming beauty and you can fall in love with that at the same time you can fall in love with the credos. I was at an event with Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] at a confab not long ago and it was the first time I'd ever really interacted with him and he has a view and it's a fascinating debate that's been going on in the African community for over a century and we were debating one of Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] last conversations with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte just before Reverend King was murdered and Harry Belafonte recounts the story as seeing Martin Luther King was sitting in Harry Belafonte's apartment and he was looking very sad and Harry looks at Dr. King and says, "What is it or what's wrong?" And Dr. King said, "Harry I fear that we're integrating into burning house" and Harry says "Well what do we do?" and Dr. King looks at Harry and says, "We must become firemen." With Minister Farrakhan the debate about that exchange was do you become firemen or do you become arsonists and burn it down. The debate was is this--are the systems of this country in the credo of this country and its remaining racism so antithetical to the wellbeing of Africans and African Americans that you have to leave it and start over or is it the Martin Luther King legacy of no we take what's good from it and we force this country to become what it is--is what Baldwin [James Baldwin] said was achieving America, we were in the process of achieving America and making America what she should be, despite the original sins of the genocide and the slavery they gave birth--the placenta in which this country's birth was so fundamentally evil. But I can't think of a country that didn't have a fundamentally evil birth and I can't think of a people who didn't have a holocaust be it the holocaust of the Jews suffered and their thousands of years of persecution or the African diaspora and the catastrophic misery that entails or even the catastrophe of the legacy that my Irish friends who can't get their grandparents to talk about the famines--the great famines and the enormous genocide- genocidal war that the British executed against the Irish and totally destroyed the Irish to the point that they couldn't even feed themselves and did it on purpose. Just as their Irish grandparents can't talk about the famine, we can't get our grandparents--I could not get my grandparents to tell me about slavery and they knew that their parents had been slaves. So the shame of these holocausts is part of the lore and the richness of our legacies that we can't face. What I'm saying is that I embrace that part of the legacy as much as I embrace what's great about the credos and the quality and freedom. Now I as a civil rights lawyer--that's why I went to law school was to make those credos a reality for the world. I embrace the goodness of those even though they came from men who wrote those magnificent words as they were walking past slave shacks and walking past the slaves they owned, I can take it all and reconcile it. Story_ID: 305324 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid? You've, you've talked about yourself growing up on some level, but I take it you were pretty independent. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know when you have parents who pour themselves into you for the first five years of your life by the time you're five you know exactly who you are and there's a picture of me as a little girl, it's my favorite picture because it tells a story of how entitled a little monster I had become even by five (laughter). No insecurities although I was shy I had absolutely no internal insecurities. My brother was getting his picture taken, he was getting his baby pictures taken and I got up from my nap and so I'm in my undershirt and a diaper just a mess. My braids were standing all over my head with this big bow and I came to the top of the landing and saw all the lights and the shades and so forth and so on and there was Phillip [Phillip Rice, Jr.] in the middle of all this activity and I just decided oh no and I threw a huge tantrum and so the photographer said, "Here's how we'll quiet her." He goes up the stairs, brings me down, puts me in the front of the camera and all of a sudden I realized oh they are paying attention to me and I burst into this huge smile and that's my favorite picture because I absolutely refused not to be the center of attention and that tells you how spoiled I was by that point. Even at five I was ruined. So very secure, very self-sufficient, content little girl who knew or had gotten the message that great things were expected and had enormous security of knowing that I was adored and cherished and loved totally unconditionally. When you have that as your emotional core by the time you're four you know who you are. I can remember and a the psychiatrist will tell you they'll ask you a question what age are you when you wake up because the age that you are when you wake up is the age that you first remember being whole and knowing who you are. Therefore when I wake up I'm very young (laughter) 'cause' I can remember knowing exactly who I was and having a very strong sense of self at age four and by five I was getting close to being the impossible person that I've become. But you also have to understand that watching my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.], having my parents so dedicated to us and putting so much into us spending so much time. Every day was arranged around enriching us and pouring themselves into us and reading to us and meeting us and walking us home and asking questions. The whole day was about making us think and making us creative and it didn't matter what we wanted. I wanted to play harps so my mother tried to--ran around trying to find a harp and the closest she could come was an autoharp but I had an autoharp. I want to ride horses she found a ranch for me to ride horses on. There was nothing even though my parents had almost no money because when you're in the [U.S.] Air Force you don't make a lot of money but what we did have was I grew up as a little black girl watching white men jump to attention to salute my black father. Think about the messages I did not get and then you think about the legacy that we had even from slavery where even in slavery we considered ourselves privileged and entitled to a response from even our owners. Think of my great-great Aunt Julia complaining about her conditions and asking to be transferred like she was an employee (laughter). We didn't even get it that we were slaves and when you think about the psychological outlook that passed down and then you think about a little girl growing up on all white Air Force bases because the Air Force was not integrated and then my father was an officer. There were even fewer black officers; you could name the black officers on two hands in the entire country. The Air Force was not integrated and so you think about the sense of--I was the colonel's daughter when he was the base commander I was like the princess of the king. So you add on top of the color caste privilege on top of the educational privilege and you've got a pretty impossible situation (laughter) on your hands. People wonder why--where we get the attitudes and where we get the notion that there's nothing we can't do well we were given a legacy of all of those powers. Story_ID: 305325 Speaker 1: Tell me about school, now you had a variety of school experiences. I guess all of the places you've lived-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there were great schools that we went to and there were very bad schools that weren't even worth attending but it didn't matter because whatever we got at school, we got more at home. In fact, my brothers [Phillip Rice, Jr. and Norman Rice] and I used to be so relieved when the summer was over so we could rest. My parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] would work us so hard in the summer. I don't care whether it was swim team. Every time we moved we would move in the summers but when we moved everything we saw we had to write in a journal and do reports on and so we were const- everything was educational. But the best schools we went to were in London, England and they were the equivalent of private British schools (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the names of the schools? Speaker 2: Well it was the Town and Country School [St. Mary's Town and Country School, London, England] and it was a private British school. I entered it for third grade and we--just to give you an idea we had in third grade we had English and we had French, fourth grade we had English, French and Latin and in fifth grade we had English, French, Latin and German and those were just the languages. So I didn't think it was anything unusual to have four language arts classes. On top of that you had algebra by the time you were in sixth grade. So not only did we have high expectations at home, I was in a school system--a private school system where I was learning what most American children don't ever learn and so you see where we got our head start and having Latin for example gave me an enormous advantage because learning Romance languages become almost second nature when you have Latin as a background. You know the roots of the Romance languages and you know the difference between the Germanic languages. You just--the advantages that you had you can't get that when you are an adult, it's very hard to replicate. So we had--and then you'd go all the way to the other end of Texas where--in San Antonio in Texas where education is not valued or at least it wasn't when I was there. I graduated from high school at Randolph Air Force Base in Universal City, Texas which is just outside of San Antonio and it was so bad that I basically skipped it the whole year because I couldn't learn anything. My physics teacher was the brother in law of the principal who was the local jailer but because he was so blind and the prisoners were taking the keys off his belt and getting out so they made him our physics teacher because he needed a job. I guess that Texas cronyism we see in the White House comes by naturally (laughter). I saw it when I was in high school because my physics teacher was legally blind and the local jailer and the boys in the class was take his physics book and turn it upside down and he would hold it upside down and the whole year he wrote on the blackboard S equals VT and he'd underline it and then he'd sit down and he had nothing to say. So that was my physics teacher and that school should have been unaccredited. So I went from a school that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was the name of the school--the high school you graduated from? Speaker 2: It was Universal City High School [sic. Randolph High School, University City, Texas] or some nondescript name like that, I can't even remember. So what I spent my senior year doing since they didn't have any teachers to teach me was doing a debate contest so that I could win a scholarship for my best friend who had to finance her way through college. The only way we could get her a full scholarship was to win first in state debate in Texas and I looked at Renee [Renee Haines] and I said well then we have to win the state championship and that's what we spent our year doing and we won the state championship in Texas debate. Speaker 1: What city in Texas? Speaker 2: It's right outside of Randolph Air Force Base and it's called Universal City, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay so that's the town, too. Speaker 2: Yeah Universal City. Story_ID: 305326 Speaker 1: Now in your, your school days were there any teachers who were special or mentors in any way? Speaker 2: Yes, I can remember a number of teachers who were special. Perhaps the most influential on me was my ninth grade biology teacher. His name was Mr. Harris [John Harris] and I can't remember his first name but he was a [U.S.] Marine--an ex-Marine, white Marine and he taught biology and he was feared because he was so rigorous and he'd call on you in class. He used the Socratic Method like I later used in law school like the giving you questions and making you stand up in front of the class and espouse on the lessons that you were supposed to have learned and to answer questions and just kind of test you in a Socratic Method. So everybody hate--didn't want to be in Mr. Harris' biology class they were jumping all over one another to get out of his class 'cause you really had to work hard and I looked forward to it. So the very first day--the second day of class I figured I just knew he was going to call on me and so the night before we were studying photosynthesis and I decided I was going to memorize the entire chemical sequence of the photosynthesis process how plants create food from light. He called on me the next day and I stood up and I--of course my mother [Anna Barnes Rice] was a biology teacher so she helped me and I knew every single chemical phase at a college level and I ran through it and at that point he said, "That is the most extraordinary explanation on the photosynthesis process I have ever heard from a college student or a high school student that was excellent, Ms. Rice [HistoryMaker Constance Rice]." From that point on he would take me in the back of his lab and he would show me pictures of African American women who had achieved and he showed me a picture of Eva Paterson who had gone to that high school it was Mascoutah High School [Mascoutah Community High School, Mascoutah, Illinois] in Illinois right outside of Belleville, Illinois. He would show me pictures of African American women and he didn't know the family I came from and he thought that I needed extra encouragement. It was so sweet of him and I finally told him, I said, "Mr. Harris you don't need to worry about me I know I'm going to college." He said, "I just want you to go to college." And he would give me this extra encouragement and he'd give me extra assignments and he really invested in me. It was just one of the many white teachers who were more than kind. They really wanted to see us succeed and they more than out balanced the negative interactions from the white counselors who often would not let us into honors courses. Speaker 1: Did you have some bad experiences with the counselors? Speaker 2: Always almost every school we went to we had to fight to get into honors courses because the presumption was that number one you're coming from an outside school and your school isn't as good as our school. But number two, you're black and therefore it doesn't matter that you have straight A's because we knew white families who also transferred in had similar or lesser grades than we did and they were automatically put into the honors courses. So we all--my parents always had to battle and a lot of African American parents didn't understand that they really needed to get in the school and understand what was available and where their kids had been placed. Because we're tracked--we're automatically tracked there's an automatic presumption of inability that attaches to us. We saw it in school, after school, after school. But that's okay we transcended that, we out ran it, we out maneuvered it, as usual we just rose above it and we got where we needed to be placed. Speaker 1: That's an interesting--I think it's one of my stock questions now that I ask people about counselors in the white schools. It's always--I haven't heard of good one yet. Speaker 2: Yeah the counselors were a particularly difficult culture no matter where we went. But my other teacher I had Mr. Hansen [ph.] and Ms. Segal [ph.]. Ms. Segal was a French Jewish woman who--she was my French teacher and at one point I was fluent in French because I had had it since I was in third grade and she never met an African American child who could speak French and her class was AP French and we would actually read French novels. I would talk to her and she shared stories with me in French about how she survived the Holocaust and she taught me about the Holocaust which I think is probably the most important thing. My mother also was very steeped in the Holocaust. The only book my mother ever gave me was the story of Anne Frank ['The Diary of a Young Girl,' Anne Frank]. I read voraciously, I read all of Dr. Dolittle, all of the Agatha Christie, all of the Sherlock Holmes mysteries, I loved murder mysteries. As a little girl you couldn't get me out of my bedroom because I was always reading. I was a little geek; I was a little wonk even then (laughter), a little geek, a little girl geek. Story_ID: 305327 Speaker 1: --I read that you all could one--watch one television show a week-- Speaker 2: One television, well, we weren't allowed television. Television was a twelve inch screen, black and white, it was locked in a room and we could--the only news--the only program we were allowed to watch regularly was news which is why to this day I'm a news junkie. We were only allowed to watch one primetime program after sixth grade we were allowed to watch one primetime program a week you think about that. But with Ms. Segal [ph.] my eleventh grade French teacher it brought me back to the fact that my mother [Anna Barnes Rice] who grew up around progressive Jews who advanced her when she was in Reading [Pennsylvania]. It was her Jewish teachers who pulled her aside and said you have to go to college, you are too bright, and invested in her. It was the Jews in Reading who helped African Americans and so I've always thought of the Jewish community through my mother's eyes as sort of secret angels. Once again one of the--I'll never forget the only book my mother asked me to read was 'The Diary of Anne Frank' ['The Diary of a Young Girl,' Anne Frank] and she said, "You need understand what happened to the Jews" and so for her through her eyes and connecting with Ms. Segal it was a very special bond with that teacher because she shared with me in French her--how she survived--how her family survived the Holocaust and how many people she lost. From that point on I made it a point to understand the Shoah--understand the Holocaust. I'm probably the only--when I was clerking in Detroit [Michigan] for Judge Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] and it was a wonderful experience because that federal court building had Judge Julian Cook [Julian Abele Cook, Jr.], Judge Anna Diggs Taylor, Judge Damon Keith in the Circuit Court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit]. You had more federal black judges and magistrates and administrative judges than anywhere in the country. It was a wonderful place to start as a young black lawyer because you had all these wonderful mentors who were federal judges and bankruptcy judges. I can remember the documentary of 'Shoah' came and it was an eight hour documentary that took you into Treblinka and to Auschwitz on the trains on the very tracks in which millions of Jews were rolled to their deaths. I studied the Holocaust as the first genocidal effort that had the power of the industrial complex behind it that's what made it unique. I studied it and--do I need to?--I made all of the black law clerks and the black judges sit through that eight hours and they said it's Connie's [HistoryMaker Constance Rice] idea of a good time on a weekend is going to see an eight hour documentary about the Holocaust but I made them go, I made them go because that's part of the legacy from my mother and Ms. Segal. Story_ID: 302573 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please identify yourself and state your full name for us? Speaker 2: I'm Connie Rice [HistoryMaker Constance Rice] full name is Constance Lamay Rice and I'm a civil rights attorney out in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: I have no idea. What is it April 28 is today the 28th? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: I know the year 2011 (laughter). Speaker 1: Right and where are we right now? Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles--downtown Los Angeles. Speaker 1: In the offices of where? Speaker 2: In the offices of The Advancement Project LA on Wilshire Boulevard near Union [Avenue]. Story_ID: 302574 Speaker 1: We'll pick up where we left off last time. This is--we had you graduating from high school from Universal City High School [sic. Randolph High School, Universal City, Texas] in Texas, right? Speaker 2: Yeah you remember the name of the high school. I don't (laughter). It was the third high school for me. It was an interesting last year. I went from Shaker Heights High [Shaker Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio] where I was taking all AP classes and probably worked harder academically than I did even in college later on but then went to Texas right outside of Randolph Air Force Base and it was my dad's [Phillip Rice, Sr.] last assignment for where I was in the family. I was getting ready to go to college and he had promised--he asked me if it was okay if I take this next promotion, he had gotten promoted to colonel and you could imagine there were probably very few--the [U.S.] Air Force just didn't have a lot of officers of color. So he was one of the few African American colonels and there was no way I was going to tell him don't take that promotion so I could graduate from Shaker. So we went to Texas and it was a tiny little school. It was backward and very provincial, not academically competitive and it turns out that was a whole year of thespian drama and debate and I won state debate with Renee Haines a woman who we had to win that scholarship for her because she wasn't going to be able to go to college any other way. So I learned how to debate and I learned how to win poetry contests and stuff I never even knew I knew how to do and from there applied to college and didn't really understand the game of getting into college which is interesting even though college was probably the fourth word I learned at age four or age three and two. I didn't really understand the game and my parents did and so my brother and I--both of my brothers [Phillip Rice, Jr. and Norman Rice] and I ended up doing very well on the standardized tests and I didn't really know what that meant and I knew I was going to go to a good college and so you had to get into the application process and all the rest of that stuff. But the counselors didn't really see us my brother or me as Ivy League material. My parents certainly did and I had nothing less on my radar screen. I wanted to go to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] 'cause I wanted to major in communication since I thought I was going to take Walter Cronkite's job and so I wanted to go--Northwestern in Chicago [sic. Evanston, Illinois] had the best communication school but long story short my dad had another idea, he wanted me to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I had never even thought of Harvard and he brought the application back but at the time women entered Harvard University through Radcliffe College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and men entered through Harvard and so he brought this application back in January, it was the last application I filled out and he said here you need to fill this out, I want you to apply here. Since he's paying the bills I filled it out (laughter) and didn't even notice that in a tiny, tiny print at the bottom it says Radcliffe College is a college in Harvard University, I didn't even know I was applying to Harvard and got in since that's where my parents wanted me to go that's where I went. I had to have been one of the few kids in the entire country applying to Harvard and not knowing she got in, where she was applying or that I got into Harvard. I thought it really was a separate institution but it wasn't and I kind of comforted myself and said at least it's a women's college. At least it's a women's college. That appealed to me because in all-female environments you get to take over more leadership positions, and that's always been the case. Story_ID: 302575 Speaker 1: Got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and like most freshmen had no idea what it was going to take to get through there. I did understand that it was a power factor. That Harvard is a gate-keeping institution. It creates leadership that is put into positions of power all over the world. It gives you a fantastic education but a lot of schools can do that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now just to be--to clarify this 1974 we're talking about. Speaker 1: This is 1974 and clearly Harvard-Radcliffe that was its [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] name then--Harvard-Radcliffe was one of the top universities in the country. Not a lot of students of color from the United States. A lot of folks from around the world, Sonny Bhutto [Sanam Bhutto] was in my dorm. We had a lot of princesses and princes and children of royalty from around the world. Children of prime ministers from around the world so it was definitely, you could see--once you got there you realized not only are you there in one of the riches places--learning environments but you're also in a school that is honed for power and it's honed for understanding controls be it controls of national money sources or controls of the corporate sector, controls of the global economic sectors, controls of the [U.S.] military. It is a good place to learn about power and to learn about systems. Speaker 2: Now did you know that then I mean did you--was there a process of discovering this? Speaker 1: Well you know I had always had a bent for-I ran for president of my class a couple of times and I'd always had a feeling I was either going to go to communications in journalism or into some kind of--it was going to be some kind of--not civil rights necessarily but I've always felt an attraction to solving problems for a lot of people and so it's a service mentality and some people are motivated by I want to have my name in lights or fame or some people their lives are wrapped around romance and they know they want to raise children other folks they have a vision of status, it's more about status even if they don't have the greatest amount of money it's about status. Well status didn't mean a whole lot, fame seemed frivolous to me romance was optional and I wasn't really that interested in marriage. It's funny as a little girl I was one of the only little girls, my mother [Anna Barnes Rice] will tell you this, who never fantasized about a wedding. Every little girls plays at having a wedding and I wasn't interested in wedding Barbie, I was interested in Barbie the doctor or the Barbie the lawyer, I didn't want wedding Barbie you know (laughter). So for whatever reason I was never oriented toward that kind of life and it was never part of my vision. My vision was always a feeling of I'm going to get out there and pick up the baton from the folks who come before me and run with it and it didn't have to be a civil rights baton, it could have been a journalism baton but it was going to--I knew it was going to touch the orbits of power because power determines what you can and can't do. Power determined slavery, power determined emancipation you had to fight the Civil War, Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] had to make these decisions about what he was going to--he said he wanted to keep the Union but the Union was split asunder over slavery and so when you study how freedom movements happen and the things that matter to producing the opportunity that my family had, I was attracted to this--one of the engines of that history and you can study it through the lens of power and that's what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 302576 Speaker 1: And my real epiphany came when I was at--in eleventh grade at Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio], I may have said this a little bit earlier but it was in watching Watergate hearings I begged my mother [Anna Barnes Rice] not to make us do swim team and my mother always had our summers so packed school was a break. Come September was out break because my mother had us writing essays and doing swim team and life guarding and everything else. So our summers were also packed and I begged my mother to exempt me from her usual whirlwind of activity and let me watch the Watergate hearings. It was gavel to gavel coverage and I said I'll do the ironing mom just let stand in front of the television and watch the Watergate hearings. I would get up in the morning, read the paper and go through and see if I can anticipate the questions that were going to be asked by the judiciary committee and I watched Senator Sam Ervin and there was this incredible woman who stood up in this incredible voice--this basso alto that she had, "Mr. Speaker may the gentlewoman from Texas address the committee," and I was like who is that and every day I watched for her. It was Barbara Jordan and she took over those hearing and I mean I was mesmerized and from that moment I said I'm watching praetorian guard of freedom this is what it takes to preserved democracy, to advance freedom she's doing it and I'm going to do what she does. I didn't necessarily see myself as a congresswoman 'cause I didn't think I want to run for office and I knew enough about myself, I'm not going to raise money and do all that nonsense. But I wanted her platform to be able to change the course of history the way she did. She bent the wind in those hearings, she took them over, she was a galvanizer of the vote, she gave these incredible speeches about what the founding fathers envision and what our sacred text of our founding documents mean and how this particular president [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had abrogated his covenant with the people and that was Barbara Jordan. So I had in my mind if Barbara Jordan, Queen Elizabeth I--QE1 used to be my girl when I was like nine and ten years old and I studied her as a female monarch who when women were property of men she ruled the world through a tiny little island. She took that little island in England and colonized the whole world. There wouldn't have been a USA without QE1. Yes I understand she probably would have owned slaves and so forth but as a model of female power a lot of lessons there and I probably talked about that in the earlier interview. Story_ID: 302577 Speaker 1: So by the time I got to Harvard [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and by the time I got done with my senior year in high school [Randolph High School, Universal City, Texas], I knew that I wanted to be able to have enough skill and enough weapons to be able to fight battles on behalf of people who can't and I wanted to be able to bend institutional power, bend economic power to the needs of folks who don't have those levers. They don't belong to the right clubs, they're not a part of the money class, they don't have political power and so when you study the civil rights revolution and you understand how you took the power of an entire people, an entire oppressed people and did jujitsu on it through Mahatma Gandhi's civil disobedience and the skills--the way he turned India sort of galvanized the power of a suppressed colony and took back the colonial power by taking the high road and when you don't have weapons you have the weapons of your moral stance. You have the weapons of simply standing there with candles with a thousand people. Will you have Tiananmen Square [Beijing, China] or will you have Tahrir Square [Cairo, Egypt] and learn how to make it turn out the way you saw in Egypt just recently? What's amazing about the civil rights revolution and when you studied it, it shouldn't have happened the way it did. There were many, many met dynamics happening there including the international framework of power. I think the reason that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Thurgood Marshall and Fannie Lou Hamer and all of the pioneers of that revolution was sort of generals and commandos of that army--civil rights army the reason that it didn't end up in a crushing--the reason Bull Connor lost is because the international community, our face in the international community in the middle of a Cold War required the United States to change. So it was lucky timing but it was also very, very smart strategy. There was cohesion, there was a common purpose and people were willing to die to achieve it things we don't have now which is why we're losing ground at the same time we're advancing. Story_ID: 302578 Speaker 1: So you were ready then for Harvard [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well I don't know that I was ready. Speaker 1: In terms of--did you have an idea that Harvard was the like--well you probably did have an idea that Harvard was a seat of educational power in that sense (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah and beyond that it's a global engine for power, I mean it creates a lot of the leaders. You look at the educational backgrounds of half the leaders and it produces the oligarch cal- power in the United States. We have a democratic framework but the power is actually generated through oligarchy. We have political families be it the Kennedys, the Clintons, the Bushes. It's passed on and Harvard and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] seemed to be the two institutions. You might have a Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] in there and a Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] every now and then but look at our leaders even with Democratic machines and Republican machines even with political parties, even with one person one vote. Yes we have our demo- we have a constitutional democracy that's republic but the actual dissemination of power, the actual agenda that gets written is not done by the people, it's done by very tiny, tiny centers of power. That concentrated and that power is disseminated to through politically connected families and then behind that is the money. It's a democracy but it's seriously bent by its capitalist system which is fine but you need to understand that those are the engines that drive what happens in this country. Speaker 1: I was listening to the list of some of your fellow students Benazir Bhutto (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sonny Bhutto [Sanam Bhutto] was in my dorm (unclear)-- Speaker 1: She's called Sonny? Speaker 2: I knew her as Sonny, I didn't know her real name until she became--until her father [Zulfikar Ali Bhutto] was executed and she's back in Pakistan she was a junior when I was a freshman. Speaker 1: Yeah the point you're making is a world center of power where people all over the world are coming there. Speaker 2: Absolutely and when I was an admissions officer you could see there was a special docket--you know there were dockets the New York docket, California docket with different subcommittees and there is of course an international docket. And in that international docket, it was all the sons and daughters of the power elite. Story_ID: 302579 Speaker 1: As a freshman [at Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] well what were--well who were some of the--your teachers? Do you have any-- Speaker 2: Yeah well you know it was the first time I had ever been without the real constraints of my family. So like any eighteen year old I was discovering--I got off to a slow start and I didn't really know how to--what kind of strategy I needed to be able to make it through. When you get to a place like Harvard you realize if you're a hundred watt bulb in a sea of halogen torches when you're on a campus with that many very, very smart people I'm intelligent enough but I am not off the scales and so you're in on a campus with more sons and daughters of Nobel laureates than any other campus in the world and you realize that your classmates have an equivalent of a Ph.D. or a master's [degree] already in many areas. I came in with enough skill and I was talented enough to be able to figure out a strategy but I was never going to be an academic star but that wasn't my goal. My goal wasn't to be the smartest person in a Harvard room my goal was to get a good enough education to be able to understand the systems of power and to be able to branch out and discover some areas that I never even thought of that's what a liberal arts education is to me. You never explore you're there to go into areas that you never thought of you don't know what you don't know and as an eighteen-year-old you don't even understand how little even beyond that you don't know. So in some ways college is wasted on eighteen year olds. If I could go to college now I'd have done an amazing job but given that that's our system when I ended up going there with an agenda was look you get this degree, you figure out whether what you think you want to do is what you want to do. Get enough of a background so that you can look at any system, figure out how that system works and figure out what it takes to change it. And I wanted that kind of depth of analytical ability. Take a huge area and organize it so that you can achieve something through that knowledge. So it's not-I knew myself well enough to know I'm not an intellectual in some ways I'm a pseudo-intellectual which means I use knowledge for tactical benefit in a strategy. It doesn't mean I'm unintelligent, it means I'm not going immerse myself and get lost in literature or a book or in an area, I will master an area for utilitarian purpose. There are very few areas that naturally win my curiosity and that I just want to read everything and write a thousand papers that's true intellectual curiosity. I don't have as much of that as I saw in my other people who want to be scholars and professors. So I was never going to be a scholar and you need to know what kind of intelligence you have and you need to not be afraid of what don't you have and I knew that enough when I was eighteen. I said look you know you're not going to be a Harvard professor that's not what you're here for. I never wanted a Ph.D. in anything, I wanted a kind of acumen and trained mind to be able to organize any amount of information that I needed to be able to fight a battle. And so that kind of knowledge you can get at any good college and any good liberal arts background will give you different systems of thinking. You have economics, you know economics is a kind of pseudo-science in and of itself. Economics gives you a certain way of ordering knowledge and asking questions. I was really there to learn how you know which questions to ask because if you don't know how to ask the right questions and you don't understand what you don't know you will make very bad mistakes. So what you learn through mathematics, what you learn through literature each area of academic exploration gives you a new analytical frame. It gives you a new way of ordering knowledge so that you can ask the right questions and that's really what I was there for. When I left Harvard I wanted to know that I could look at any situation and size it up very quickly and figure out who really runs things, how things are orchestrated to produce what that system produces. So if I can look at a city council and figure out okay here's their formal system, here's what their rules say but how do they really operate and any good liberal arts education ought to give you those tools and ought to give you a sense of how little you know. When you leave college it ought to be like getting a black belt in taekwondo which I also got while I was there. The black belt simply means that you're considered to be a serious student; you are now ready to learn. Story_ID: 302580 Speaker 1: What was your major when you started [at Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I majored in government (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it stay the same? Speaker 2: I majored in government. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had some incredible instructors. I didn't understand how--I didn't understand that I was being taught by superstars--academic superstars. I really didn't know what it meant to be taught by Harvey Mansfield in government or Stephen Jay Gould in anthropology and natural selection or a Theda Scocpol in psychology and sociology or a--I learned from Samuelson--economics from Samuelson [Paul Samuelson] and John Kenneth Galbraith was one of my lecturers. And I--the best course however that I took meaning the course that opened my mind up the most and that gave me a cosmic view sort of galactic cosmic view was astronomy. I have the mathematical aptitude of a earthworm so I can only take astronomy 101 but because I had never been exposed to the big bang theory and so forth I had no concept of how to think about the fact that we are made from stardust and when you understand the fusion factors that the stars are in and that the only reason we exist, the only reason we exist in terms of the physical world is because a star exploded and we are the remnants of a star and how life evolved from there it was just fascinating. Story_ID: 302581 Speaker 1: The other thing in college [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was that I learned taekwondo and that martial art I learned from Suk Young Chung (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you spell his name? Speaker 1: Suk Young Chung is S-U-K, Suk, Young several ways to spell that but he spelled it Y-O-U-N-G and Chung C-H-U-N-G. So Mr. Chung sponsored a course through Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then I left and actually joined his dojo which was in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and he had a dojo in Somerville [Massachusetts] but that was my alternate existence. I had the academic world of Harvard and then I would be learning taekwondo and sparring and doing the forms and entering taekwondo contests and competition. So my classmates in taekwondo were these great folks from Cambridge and the Boston [Massachusetts] area and they were truck drivers and they were carpet cleaners and they were chefs. So I had my working class compadres who were masters at taekwondo and then I had my world at Harvard. Speaker 2: How did you become interested in taekwondo? Speaker 1: I realized that I anger men quite a bit with my smart mouth and I mouthed off to this one man and he hit me and I said I should have hit him back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really well it just seems--was this a student? Speaker 1: Yeah he was a student, an insecure guy. Speaker 2: He was a what? Speaker 1: Yeah he was a junior and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he just hit you? Speaker 1: Yeah and so--I'd come from a family of men who--that just isn't a possibility and growing up on [U.S.] Air Force bases which are very protected environments and so I didn't really understand the insecure egos that a lot of men can have. So I decided okay next time I get hit I'm going to hit back and he's going to suffer worse than he gives. So I said if I had a gun I'm not going to shoot it because I really don't trust guns and if you have a gun it probably will end up being used against you. Knives I won't do because--so I said okay I can use my fists (laughter). So I decided to go learn--I had no idea that I was actually built really well for this sport. This is the sport I was built to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a very graceful and a lot of movements almost like dancing. Story_ID: 302582 Speaker 1: Well the kata--the preset sequence of moves that are done in a pattern can look like a dance, but taekwondo is a very linear martial art. It's not like tai chi, which is much softer and circular. It's not like jujitsu, it is very linear and its direct force. Direct force and deflection of direct force and so it really is one of a harder martial arts. It's like well there are several Japanese but this is Korean, this is the Korean version of hakka, karate would be the counterpart in Japan. But long story short I ended up being really good at it for some strange reason. There weren't very many women. Mr. Chung [Suk Young Chung] actually didn't want to teach women 'cause he's directly from Seoul, Korea [Seoul, South Korea] and in Korea women are not allowed at his level they're not allowed. So I just, of course all those barriers like I always ignore those barriers and just went right in there and because I was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] student he allowed me to go into his dojo and he opened it up to women and he had younger classes for children. But long story short I ended up having very fast hands, very low center of gravity, very long torso and low center and very strong legs. So I ended up being--I could be very, very fast in terms of how I combined the moves and I loved fighting, I loved sparring and so I learned how to do full contact and Mr. Chung couldn't figure out why I was effective in my fighting. He said yes you're hands are fast and the eureka moment came when he finally realized the reason that I was such a deceptive fighter and constantly faked out my opponents was because I land my blows as if I were six feet tall. My internal height--I see myself as being over six feet. Everybody has an internal height. There are some people who are six feet five and think they're 5'5". I'm 5'5" and think I'm 6'5" and so in my mind, in my little diluted mind I think I'm six feet tall and so I deliver my blows as if I'm six feet tall and they land in places that my opponents can't believe that they land. Anyway taekwondo was an epiphany for me, it really opened up my world because it gave me--physically it gave me control over my physical space. I lost all fear after taekwondo, I didn't have a lot of it to begin with (laughter) but after taekwondo you figure--you lose all fear once you realize that when you get to the black belt level the physical ends up merging with the mental and you transcend to a level of being that is quite masterful. You really do feel like you control all your environments and so you're not just presiding and prevailing in the intellectual realm, you now have the physical realm and you put those two together and you lose all fear. Speaker 2: Do you still practice taekwondo? Speaker 1: I'm fifty-five, I think if I did a side kick I'd land in traction. I can still land a pretty good blow, you never lose the basics. It's like riding a bike. But could I go through five inches of wood like I had to do for my black belt contest, no. Could I fight five men in simultaneous combat, no those days are over. In fact, when I graduated--I graduated from college [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], four years these days the kids take six and seven years and we couldn't have afforded that, I had to finish in four years. So I graduated in June 1978 and I told my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] it's now or never for taekwondo, and by then I was twenty-two, you're an old woman in taekwondo in martial arts (laughter). It's a young person's sport it's like gymnastics, twenty-two is old. Story_ID: 302583 Speaker 1: And so I decided I wanted to get my black belt and I took a job as an admissions officer at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so I became a Harvard admissions officer, and that was a wonderful, fun job, terrific people. You had to read the folders and make recommendations and you rate everybody and I still kind of have that rating in my head when I rate people. You do an instantaneous three two three two, one two three two (laughter). Speaker 2: Was that under Archie Epps [HistoryMaker Archie C. Epps, III]? Speaker 1: Yes Dean Epps was still there but it was Dean Jewett who had--Fred Jewett [L. Fred Jewett] who was head of Harvard admissions and Bill Fitzsimmons [William R. Fitzsimmons] who's now head of it was the second in command and so Mr. Jewett and Bill Fitzsimmons hired me to take over the--that was the year Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] came out and of course it said that race can be one of many factors as evaluation of life experience(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Allan Bakke--just kind of tell us who Allan Bakke was. Speaker 1: Well Bakke was a student who challenged the use of race in admissions. He said I didn't get in to my graduate school because I didn't get--because African American students were admitted over me and it's illegal to--it's unconstitutional to consider someone's racial background as part of their human experience and the court said no. It can be used as one factor to look at the whole human being and you can look at racial experience as well as gender experience, disability experience. You have to look at that human being's experience to say what has this person learned from the obstacles they've had to overcome and race is one of the obstacles and it's part of the human experience. So the Bakke case the United States Supreme Court said, "No it's not unconstitutional to use race as one of many factors in determining what qualities a human being brings to an institution," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was nineteen--this ruling was nineteen what? Speaker 1: This was the 1978 ruling and so it was Harvard institution that had been sued and so it was Harvard's admissions process was noted. I'm sorry no it was not a Harvard institution. Justice Powell [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.] who was the justice who pulled together--he was the fifth vote for the five-four decision, Justice Powell noted the Harvard admission system as the model. It could be one of many factors and I was going to be the new admissions officer who was in charge of recruiting minority students, recruiting low income students. When I got there I said well it's not just low income--it's not just minorities, it's not just African Americans and Latino students. I said we want low income Asian students, we want low income white students, we want students who come from non-traditional backgrounds meaning non-traditional for college. Story_ID: 305328 Speaker 1: Are there any other people at Harvard [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] we need to talk about? Did you take any courses in the African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies]? Speaker 2: Yes I took--one of the areas that were absolutely fascinating is I took several courses from Orlando Patterson and from Martin Kilson [Martin L. Kilson, Jr.]. Orlando Patterson is an expert in slavery and the African diaspora and so I learned the different types of slavery and I learned how most of our predecessors--our ancestors from the African strain of our background came first from the Caribbean. So most slave ships came to the Caribbean and went to South and Central America. Very few actually landed with slave holds that landed in Maryland and Virginia and so forth. So that was one of the surprising things and then of course the different systems of slavery and what that meant for where we came from. My family not only did it have the advantages of being the Sally Hemings in the slave world the bastard children of the owners--slave owners but also a number of Native American relatives in there so for people who had that kind of background and did not have to toil number one in the big farms in Mississippi the huge plantations which were Haitian style. They had the Haitian style of slavery which meant that they didn't care whether you lived or died. You can tell how brutal the farm was by how far away the master lived and most of the farms in Mississippi and Louisiana for example, the master's mansion is not like 'Gone With the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] with your plantation right there with Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara] waving happily at her happy slaves. Those slave mansions had to be--slave owner mansions had to be five, six, seven miles away because the farms were so brutal and you had to have black overseers because people were so--people enslaved on those plantations were so brutalized that it didn't even make economic sense to have them breed--to have them reproduce. So the Haitian model which was the most brutal model they simply worked you to death. It was actually worse than how animals were treated. The Virginia model of slavery which is what my family went through mainly especially for half-white slaves they were housed with a lot of indentured servants. Virginia had a huge number of white indentured servants and so the slave shack where my [maternal] great-grandfather [George Wigenton] lived and I think I said this before is actually in Amissville [Virginia]. So we had a completely different experience. Speaker 1: I think you said it was luxurious by comparison (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it had wood floors, it had a fireplace; that's where whites lived and so it couldn't be like the normal slave shack. So anyway from Orlando Patterson I learned the different systems of slavery. How the African--the different tribal systems for catching slaves because slavery was a joint enterprise. It was a capitalist enterprise between Africans and Africa and the different countries in Africa and from Arabs--Arab slavers. It was a confab between the colonial slavers and the African and Arab slavers and it was a corporate process of moving your goods which were human beings. I took a course in the Middle Passage, the horrible journey from the coast of Africa and the holding camps, Goree Island [Dakar, Senegal] and so forth. The door of no return which of course is a circular door not a circular but a semi-circle door. When President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--President Elect Obama was standing on the [U.S.] Capitol balcony right before the inauguration and he went through a semi-circle door (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The arch. Speaker 2: The arch of the balcony and I saw the door of no return close. So those two doors are kind of brackets for that phase. When President Obama went through that balcony door--the Capitol balcony door the door of no return shut and that I think was a real end to--that's when the story of American slavery--the actual enslavement period I think ended. We're all living in the legacy of that, we're fighting the civil war which you can see in our current politics and this is 2011 and you see people asking for the president's birth certificate. So the first African American president is reviving all the states' rights and we don't want the federal government anymore and that's exactly what the Civil War was about so we're still fighting that civil war. We're not out of it yet, but I think that that chapter is now closed. Story_ID: 305329 Speaker 1: Was Ewart Guinier still the--? Speaker 2: Yes, he was there. He left my sophomore year; he was still at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. His daughter Lani [HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] is one of my mentors. I met her later when I was working at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Yes, Ewart Guinier was there, Cornel West was there he was one of my section--he led one of my sections in a government course. There were--I can't even remember some of the other economics professors, but yes so there were--I learned from an incredible array of stellar folks, Nobel Prize laureate level and they delivered the lectures. The sections where we actually parsed the material and discussed, debated the material and went through the essays and submitted our papers were in your sections and those were led by graduate students which is probably better because I'm sure that these Nobel laureates don't want to sit down with an eighteen year old and discuss what (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay it's different than the way a lot of schools do it. It wouldn't be that way--you know we had one professor (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No this is more remote. The classes aren't huge; it's not like a state school. My biggest class was Ec 10 [Economics 10] it had a thousand people in it and there was only one multiple choice test that I took the entire four years and that was Ec 10 and everything else was essays and you had to write--there was one semester where I wrote two hundred pages of papers and in those days the big thing--you didn't have computers in those days the big innovation was having that Smith Corona-when Smith Corona came out with that eraser tape where you could just slam the eraser tape in and not have to retype the whole page. We thought we were--we thought this was as good as it gets (laughter). Didn't even have--the word computer didn't even exists when we were there. So this was over thirty years ago and it's going on thirty-five years and oh boy how things change--how things change and so rapidly. So college I learned enough of what I needed to know and I came out of there feeling like while I had wasted time trying to transfer out and go to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] my first year 'cause I still wanted my communications major. I finally realized I was in one of the best places to get one of the best educations anywhere available on the planet and that I needed to buckle down and really take advantage of it. So I ended up graduating well enough. I didn't graduate summa or cum laude with honors but I got enough of what I needed and I felt really prepared more because I'd been exposed to the social networks of power. I saw all the finals clubs, I saw how families of money kind of congregated together and I understood the legacy families. I had no idea about all these families that you send the great-grandson, the great-great-grandson and so forth and so they're considered Harvard's elite they are the real oligarchy of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Just watching those folks interact and listening to the conversations and you dabble in a lot of things that you wouldn't have been able to be exposed to at a school that didn't have that level of it plus all the international friends from Holland [the Netherlands] and Singapore and Nigeria. I had Ghanaian friends, I had--so you really--and these are the folks that are at the tops of their countries, they are national leaders Beijing [China], Japan you name it, every single country you can think of. So you end up thinking of yourself belonging in those circles and that's really the gift of going to school in a place like that. You come out with a mantle of it's an entitlement, it's annoying, it's elitist and I fully claim it. It is totally elitist and what it means for me elitism means you have to expect the best and deliver the best and you don't accept anything else but the best and that goes with my family history as well. So elite to me--I also understand that it can be snobbish, it can be exclusive, it can be exclusionary, and it can be annoying. But I also understand that it's a socialization system to produce a certain quality of thinking and a certain quality of action and that I embrace and I don't apologize for it. I'll my--I'll take the beatings, I always have and I have throughout my life and it doesn't bother me a bit. So I appreciate having gone to Harvard-Radcliffe [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but I also understood that I was an outsider, and yet everybody there feels like they're an outsider. Story_ID: 305330 Speaker 1: Now were you a member of any organizations and clubs at Harvard [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, no. My main social activity or non-academic activity was taekwondo. I've never done groups even as a kid in junior high school and high school. My classmates kind of had to exempt me; they kind of had to give me a waiver because I never joined cliques. I would never join a sorority. I don't do groups (laughter), I'm very much a lone wolf and so you need to understand that about me. There's nothing wrong with that. The normal folks congregate they create groups, they do things together. I will stay on the outskirts of those groups and go in between them and I listen to them, I learn from them, I like to watch them but I don't want to be a member. Speaker 1: So you didn't join any political organizations, Greek organizations or any of that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No Harvard doesn't have any fraternities or sororities, it had these finals clubs and I could no more imagine being invited to join those than the man in the moon and had I been invited would not have joined. I don't like joining groups, I didn't even like being part of the bar and I'm a lawyer, that's required so I do that (laughter). But congregations and clubs and sororities and fraternities I understand them as ways to organize human beings and social networks and that kind of thing but it's not something that I think of myself being a part of, I just don't. Story_ID: 305331 Speaker 1: So at the admissions office--you come into the admissions office on the heels of the Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] decision, and you're in charge of minority recruitment at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard's case had been--Harvard's procedures had been used as a model in the Bakke case. Speaker 2: Exactly Harvard's admissions--Harvard's minority admissions program had been cited by the United States Supreme Court as the way to do affirmative action and I learned that it really was a good system. Your goal as an admissions officer is to look for leaders number one; Harvard wants leaders you have to be smart. but they want leadership, what do they want, they want to place their people in all the top positions of power and so they're looking for leadership and if you're not a leader they want you to be an academic scholar that's off the scales. If you're not that they want you to be an artist that's off the chain. You've got to be the best at what you do. What your skill is, what gift you have, whatever gift you have Harvard wants the best of that gift. So you're looking for people in my mind as an admissions officer I was looking for applicants who had done the most with what they'd been given. Because if you've done more with little or you've done an awful lot with a great abundance of opportunity you want both of those people because they've done the most with what they've been given. So when you're looking for people who make a whole lot of something out of nothing that's what you're looking for because those folks will come to Harvard and really use the place, really take what it has and transform it into something that benefits everybody and that's what you want. You don't want somebody who stays in their room with their double 800 SATs on the wall (laughter) as their biggest achievement. No you want creativity, you want genius of every kind even athletic genius and you need to understand the different kinds of intellectual aptitude. My aptitude is very narrow, I'm very good linguistically, I'm a conceptual intellectual. I can weave together concepts and create a framework and then I can make it operate in the real world that's a skill. It's not a genius. I saw people who had everything from amazing technical and scientific genius who spoke mathematics, advanced mathematics and could actually translate the world into algorithms and mathematical formulas and could imagine like a Stephen Hawking kind of vision that can see the universe and see the cosmos in his mind an Einsteinium kind of brilliance. All the way to an athletic genius, Jim Brown is an athletic genius. When you see athletes who have that kind of a--that's an equally important kind of genius and when you see that point zero zero one percent of humanity that is at that level you go after them. There is a genius for organizing people. There is a genius--there are so many different kinds of genius. There is poetic genius, different kinds of linguistic genius and so you're looking for every kind--the whole human spectrum of achievement, and you want people who show the potential. Story_ID: 305332 Speaker 1: I'll never forget, and you also have to understand what you don't know. There was one applicant, it was when the boat people had come over, and in Arlington [Virginia], right outside of Washington [D.C.], there were these refugee camps people probably don't remember them. But you had the refugee camps of the South Vietnamese, their refugees, and this student who didn't speak any English sent in his application and his essay was a geometric proof and I looked at it and I had struggled with geometry because I have no spatial intelligence, I flunked spatial intelligence so geometry for me I had to work so hard to get a B plus and an A minus in geometry just at the high school level. I really had to work hard for that grade because I have no aptitude for it and I can't think spatially. So here was an essay in my folder, I'm an admissions officer and it's just one geometric proof with a diagram and I said you know what I think this is an original proof. I knew enough to know that that wasn't something I had studied in high school and this kid if he was giving it to us as his essay this was his entire--he was saying this is my genius. So I go over to the math department, I find the math department because of course I wouldn't have known where it was. I find the math department and I go over there and I find the head of the math department at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I said, "I think this is an original proof--geometric proof," and he looked at it and he said, "Ms. Rice [HistoryMaker Constance Rice] you're absolutely right. We have to go find this kid." So we flew down together and found this child and we found a way to get him into Harvard and you have to surround him with English translators and everything else. So it was that kind of enterprise where a kid has to reduce him or herself into a folder and you pray--they're praying that you can read in between the lines of their essays and look at the books that they've read and figure out what do they bring. Are they exceptional enough, are they extraordinary enough, are they going to fill a niche that we need for this school. I had a ball in that job. I got to travel, I'd go to high schools, I'd talk to kids, I'd talk to parents and then I lost three Christmases because you have to read the folders over Christmas holiday and you just sit at home or sit in the office and you read piles and piles of folders evaluating and then you sit in committee and you argue, it's an advocacy system. You argue for all of the people you present. So it was kind of like your first clients although I think I had my first clients when I was a little girl. But anyway that's what that was like. Admissions officers are wonderful folks and it's a great life. It was hard for me to take a look at my life. I knew I was going to take three years off; I wanted three years off to just take a break from studying and having to be in the grind of achieving a degree--an academic degree. Story_ID: 305333 Speaker 1: Did you have in your mind that you were going to go to law school? Speaker 2: I knew I was going to have to go to law school. I--my grades weren't good enough to go to graduate school. I knew by then that journalism wasn't direct impact enough for me. Remember I wanted to be either a journalist or a broadcast journalist and even though I loved Woodward [Bob Woodward] and Bernstein [Carl Bernstein] for what they had done and I studied how they had done the Watergate analysis and I loved that movie 'All the President's Men.' I had studied that and I realized that even high-impact journalism, you can be a war correspondent, you could do what Woodward and Bernstein did in investigative journalism but even then it's basically the world of ideas. Journalism is the world of ideas and communicating those ideas. Those ideas have real impact on the world but it's indirect impact. So I needed the skills of a journalist and the communication ability of a journalist and the writing ability of a journalist but I needed direct impact. I needed to be able to more get my hands on the levers of power and move them and that you can't do as a journalist. So I knew that I was going to have to go to law school. I knew from the time I graduated from college [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I'd have to go to law school but I wanted a break and this is my break I became an admissions officer, I got my black belt from Mr. Chung [Suk Young Chung] and after three years of that it was hard. It was a wonderful life, I had a great time, I got to do taekwondo three and four hours a day, I got to travel all over the country and visit all the places I'd lived before and interact with all these eager students and their parents. You saw how--you got to read about all these fascinating kids' lives and their parents' lives and then you got to advocate--I mean it was a great job. Anybody normal would have been happy with that life, but I had a bigger destiny. Story_ID: 305334 Speaker 1: What schools did you apply to? Speaker 2: Law schools? I applied to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], I can't remember all of them--all the major ones. But I knew that I was going to be either a nonprofit lawyer--I was not going to be a corporate lawyer and so if you're going to do nonprofit law or civil rights law you have to figure out how to finance it. So law school I had to think primary 'cause I was not going to ask--my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] paid for college, I was going to pay for law school and if you come out with a huge load debt--load of debt you don't have the option of working for the poor because the poor can't pay you. I wanted credentials from a top school, you always go for the best credentials and I needed to do very well, but I needed to come out with a low level of money to pay. So I needed to go where I got the best scholarship and I competed for the Root-Tilden-Snow Scholarship [Root-Tilden-Kern Public Interest Scholarship] and it paid--when I applied it paid for all of your tuition and three quarters of your living costs which is fantastic. But nine thousand people applied for that scholarship and nine people get awarded it and I won that scholarship. So I got into to NYU and I won the Root-Tilden, and that's how I went to law school. Story_ID: 305335 Speaker 1: Now I've got a question here I should have asked, and I apologize while we were still at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and now we're getting ready to take you to NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and I'm asking a question. Did you--when you said genius at organizing I thought of Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] who actually came back from Tanzania and went to Harvard around '76 [1976] or so. He was pardoned by I think Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], I think he was there when there was some sort of-- Speaker 2: He was there on some kind of special--I think I went to evening lecture that he gave while he was in Harvard but I can't recall. I didn't take any courses from him though but I do recall he was a visiting scholar or something like that I think. Speaker 1: I think he was actually working on a master's degree [sic. Ph.D.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was he a student? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: I just mentioned him because he was such an organizing genius and so much a part of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, no the only other part of it--I read about his genius and he is still a genius (laughter). He was one of the heroes like Jim Lawson [James Lawson] the other genius who taught the armies civil disobedience and unarmed resistance that made the civil rights revolution possible and made Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] crusade possible. So yes a few of them were but I do remember Martin Kilson [Martin L. Kilson, Jr.] he was a very controversial professor who argued--an African American professor, I think the only African American professor. There were professors of African descent at Harvard but not many African American professors. Speaker 1: I think he was in the African studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies]. Speaker 2: Yes he was and he was very controversial because he opposed affirmative action and he had a very controversial--but I went to his office one day and I debated affirmative action with him just 'cause I like to argue and I always go to my opponents so that I can hone my arguments and have a worthy adversary. Your friends aren't going to challenge you (laughter) so I always look for my adversaries. I went in and by the end he didn't change my mind, I didn't change him. I thought affirmative action was sort of a poor substitute for actual equality and in fact I didn't know it at the time 'cause I hadn't studied the cases yet but it was in fact--affirmative action was created by white judges because they did not want to displace whites who had gotten a position illegally and through discrimination with a qualified black who had been skipped over. So they said well circle this next position with a red circle and the next time they will be affirmatively considered for the new position but we will not displace unqualified whites. So we called them the redline cases--redlining--that was the original meaning of redlining in affirmative action and so affirmative action was a half measure rather than actually giving everybody equal opportunity and an equal chance in really good education so the people could compete on an even footing. So anyway I went in to Martin Kilson's office during office hours and I debated with him and I said to him, "Look there are all kinds of systems of preference but the only that gets challenged is the one that's trying to deal with vestiges of slavery and disadvantage," and I said, "That disadvantage was built in and so what we're doing is we're using a faulty and very flawed half measure to even up a rigged playing field." I said, "The kids who are the weakest on this campus are not the students of color or the poor white students who got in because of economic--they didn't get in because of economic they got in because they had overcome their economic and disadvantage and it was a factor in their favor." I said, "The weakest students on this campus are the fourth generation legacy cases, they alumni children whose parents got in because they knew somebody." It was a nepotism system and Harvard didn't start doing merit admissions until the middle of the 20th century. Well a little bit before that--before World War II [WWII]. So there's never been a merit based system. There has been land owning preference, there's been an aristocracy preference--a blueblood preference, there has been a legacy preference there have been all kinds of oligarchically based preferences that still operate and actually still order the world-- Story_ID: 305336 Speaker 1: Some of the people we've interviewed talk about the quota system at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and those places (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, well the quotas were to make sure that the meritorious folks didn't displace the legacy folks, the non-meritorious admits. Speaker 1: Yeah well there have been one black a year or two or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well no the quotas didn't apply to African Americans at Harvard from my understanding of it. The quotas applied to Jews and later to the Chinese because they were coming on so strong in the pools. There weren't enough African Americans to even apply a quota to because our pipelines of highly, highly educated folks were still going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and traditionally African American schools [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] and Harvard learned to tap into those streams of high talent a little bit later. But anyway so yes I did not know Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and I think I was aware that he was on the campus and who he was but there weren't many professors of color outside of the African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] and the Caribbean studies department which is where Orlando Patterson was associated with. Some of them had dual appointments and yes it was debated, affirmative action was debated. You had the bussing that was going on, the Judge Garrity [W. Arthur Garrity Jr.] order. We got chased down by angry white men from South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]--Kathy Miles and I got chased down Garden Street in a car and they had to post guards all the way up to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: What were the circumstances around that? Speaker 2: Well Boston [Massachusetts] had been ordered to desegregate its schools and Judge Garrity ordered that Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and South Boston exchange students. Poor white students and poor black students get bussed to each other's schools which didn't make a whole lot of sense. You really needed to create a new school and bus both communities there and integrate them that way but they weren't willing to spend the money. So he just did an integration order and that integration order made Boston explode into political and racial confrontation. You remember the iconic picture of a black student being stabbed with the American flag (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Ted Landsmark [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] of Boston school of architecture [Boston Architectural College, Boston, Massachusetts] that's where he is now. Speaker 2: It was rough and so this little isolated enclave of South Boston is all those folks have. It's the only identity they have and they felt like they were being invaded and they lashed out with all kinds of venom and violence. These are folks who have crumbs and they said we're not giving up our crumbs and we don't want black people, we don't like black people, we don't even like people who aren't Irish, you know we don't like black people. So it was the opening up of a very isolated xenophobic community and they lashed out and they came out into the campuses, Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], Radcliffe, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and they were looking for black co-eds to brutalize and so Harvard had to post--we had to have armed escorts to be able to walk up to Radcliffe. So it was very interesting that in my whole life the first real racial violence I experienced was in Boston not in the South but in Boston. I understood and once I understood how South Boston had come about and what those folks were feeling threatened over, I knew exactly what that order--and why it created--I had a roommate who was attacked, I had two friends who were attacked in this racial bussing so African American students ended up being collateral damage in a bussing--in a bussing fight. Story_ID: 302593 Speaker 1: New York University Law School [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]. Well tell us, now, was law school what you expected it to be like? Now we--I mean in the early '70s [1970s] they had the movie 'The Paper Chase' (unclear) Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah most people have 'The Paper Chase' or 'One L' ['One L: The Turbulent True Story of a First Year at Harvard Law School,' Scott Turow] in their minds. It's quite a bit like that. Here's the thing about law school I was ready for law school. I didn't know what I was doing as an eighteen year old but I knew I had a very specific plan in mind for law school and I knew why I was there and what I wanted to get out of that education and don't forget after four years of Harvard [Radcliffe College and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I can case any system and figure out how it operates (laughter). This was one of the first times I got to use those skills. It took me about five days to realize that the booklist didn't include the books you really needed (laughter). They tell you to buy the case books for class but you actually need the hornbooks and the treatises that explain the cases. The case books are nothing but cases and so I would be sitting in class and there were people getting answers and I'd look at the book and I said they didn't get that from here. What are they reading? I would watch what they were reading and I realized oh there are hornbooks, there are treatises, there are Law Review articles. There were all these other sources so I added--quickly added things to my booklist and then it took me about three weeks to realize that law school education doesn't make a lot of sense number one and I realized after doing a little bit of research that the law degree was created as a response to the professionalization of the business degree. It used to be you apprenticed to learn how to run a business and you apprenticed to be a lawyer. Remember you just sign up with someone who would teach you how to do the law, it was a trade. So both business and law were trades. When business decided we want to become a profession and therefore be able to charge more money and we have to have a degree so we have a gate keeping system and lawyers said oh they're not going to do that we're doing that too if they're doing it. They took the then-existing LL.M., Master's of Law program and put J.D. on it juris doctorate. But they didn't really change the content of the courses so we have scholar courses for a master's degree for a degree that's supposed to teach you how to be a functional lawyer. It doesn't really meld that probably makes no sense to folks who are listening but once I realized that this was a mismatch and that they had put this degree together in a very rushed way without considering does this really reflect what you need to know to be a lawyer then I understood oh I'm going to really have to teach myself (laughter). I can master these courses and how I learned how to master the courses by going and getting last year's exams and studying how people-what the A answers were. Go to the library and see if they filed last year's exams. They do and they actually have an example of it. So I could study what a good answer looked like and then I realized exams have nothing to do with what you do in the course. So your day to day experience does not prepare you for an exam. So I knew I had to have a separate track for exam preparation versus what I had to do to excel in class when I was called on in class in the Socratic Method because you have to be able to shine in classes well if for nothing else just to represent (laughter), couldn't have the black students not representing. As usual you had the burden of proving that you were as good. The affirmative action stuff still followed you. There was a debate in the first newspaper article that first week it was did black students get in and are they qualified. Every school I've ever gone to they greet you with an article about you're not really supposed to be here. So we expected that my African American colleagues and I expected that and there were only about ten of us out of, maybe eight of us in a section of 120. I mean we--there weren't a lot of us and most of the African American students were of Caribbean descent, they weren't Southern African American like myself. Story_ID: 302594 Speaker 1: Long story short, once I cased what the strategy had to be number one to get high grades, number two to excel in class and number three to get the knowledge that I needed to become a civil rights lawyer or a social change lawyer like Thurgood Marshall. Those are three separate goals and you have to have strategic execution plans for each. You have to have a strategy; you have to kind of reverse engineer it. So if I want B plus, A minus, A's all high grades in a particular course, I had to learn how do I get that done. Well you go find the exams from last year and you find the people who excelled in the class last year and you figure out how they did it. You look at their outlines, you look at the notes they took, you look at their exam answers and so from the very beginning of the course you know what you're going to have to produce for that class in an exam. You also know what you're going to have to do to be able to answer intelligently by keeping up with the cases and reading the hornbooks and the treatises and really--I mean it's a lot of work but I knew that I was going to have to have three separate approaches to achieve those three goals and I achieved all three by figuring out what makes this particular pedagogy, particular curriculum, this particular body of knowledge, what makes it tick, what are they looking for. When I realized that law degrees the law education requires you to flip the educational system that you've been using for sixteen years. See from kindergarten through grade sixteen, college you start with a broad overview and then you narrow it down to a paper or a thesis or to a science project, right. You go from the macro to the micro. In law school you start with the micro, a single case and you have to derive an entire body of law from that single case. You deduce, you derive, you start with a micro and from there you develop the macro. You go from tiny to the big system. You have to discern and extract the principles of law from that single case and from that ruling, the single ruling of that case. So it's the opposite, you're going from the small to the big and for sixteen years you've gone from the big to the small. So you had to quickly flip that frame of analysis and so--you know that's what you learned in college. What does this system require for me to master it? How do I master the system? What does it take and do I have what it takes and if I don't have what it takes, how do I compensate for what I don't have. Story_ID: 302595 Speaker 1: To keep my scholarship--the biggest thing for me in law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] was that to keep my scholarship I had to work twenty, twenty-five hours a week which is a lot of work when you're doing law school. And so my first job was at the attorney general's office, the state department of law for New York and it was in Tower Two, I think it was Tower Two of the World Trade Center [New York, New York], eightieth floor, we all know what happened to that later. But I was doing memos, I was doing research and so I worked for these--this is the attorney general's office for the State of New York and not a civil rights firm. Speaker 2: Who was the attorney general? Speaker 1: I don't even remember, I worked for [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier's husband Bowers [sic. Nolan Bowie] I think his name was or Bowen and would take the E train down--E train down to Wall Street or the southern area of Manhattan [New York, New York], go to the towers and do the research and come back to my dorm and go to library and study. Story_ID: 302596 Speaker 1: My second year [at New York University School of Law, New York, New York] was really when I took off, and I decided that law teaches you how to preserve existing power. Law is a system for allocating rights, for allocating responsibilities, for allocating liability for mistakes, for insuring expectations under contracts; it's a system for passing power through property ownership and for retaining property. It is a system that is developed by the upper echelon to preserve its controls. It is a system of controls for different areas of public and private life; and so, it's an ordering system. When you have an ordering system it's not there to change things, it's there to keep things the same. It's there to maintain what exists and to give enough room to vindicate rights but that's not what the system exists for. So as a civil rights lawyer you're coming into a system and you are there to learn how to give voice to people who have none and the levers of power in these systems that they're excluded from which means you're not there to preserve what exists, you are there to learn how to use these levers to produce what should be. To take what exists and to turn it into what should be, it's jujitsu. You take the negative energy of what exists and you flip it in to positive energy of what should exist. So if a system excludes your people or your clients you have to open that system up. The law gives you a whole toolbox to do that and when I went through every single course, this was a mistake that I think a lot of human rights and civil rights lawyers make, I understood that every course was important because just like the undergraduate courses every single area of law gives you a different tool. One gives you brackets, one gives you a wrench, one gives you a blow torch, one gives you--contracts are like brackets it puts constraints so that you can realize expectations. You see how in the different areas of law different kinds of rights are protected. How are property protected versus human rights? How are commercial rights protected versus entertainment expectation--in the entertainment world what is the intellectual property system of protecting expectations and ownership? How do you own ideas? So every single area gave me a whole new way of cornering my opponents and my adversaries or blocking them in and making sure I opened up passages for my clients. And in fact, I discovered that the protections under human rights law were some of the weakest. We protect contracts--expectations under contracts more carefully than we protect children. So if I'm a juvenile justice lawyer, which I am, I needed to transfer the contractual protections into the juvenile rights area because it's a tougher system. The standard for defeating a contract that you've signed is that you have to show that you've done everything humanly possible to carry out that contract and to meet your obligations under that contract. In civil rights if the state doesn't have enough money to pay for cells that don't violate the Eighth Amendment cruel and unusual punishment prohibition very few federal courts will force the state to cough up the money. So human rights don't have the backing--same kind of backing they've got razor teeth to protect in contract law and I learned those constraints and how you transfer contracts protection into civil rights protection through the consent decree process because a consent decree is a contract. So, the whole body of law and the whole system of protections changes. Story_ID: 302597 Speaker 1: So that's what I learned in law school, but mainly my law school experience, it really took off into the stratosphere after I discovered the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)]. And my second summer--my first summer I worked the Connecticut Women's--a feminist law firm, the Connecticut Women's Educational and Legal Defense Fund [sic. Connecticut Women's Education and Legal Fund]. Speaker 2: This is '82 [1982]? Speaker 1: I can't remember the years; I really don't know the years. So my first summer I went home to Connecticut where my parents [Anna Barnes Rice and Phillip Rice, Sr.] were and I worked at Quelf [ph.] and I split my time between there and another agency, I can't even remember which one. In my second summer, my second year in law school a very good year I really learned how to do well in class. I was known for being a great advocate at that point. I didn't do moot court or law review because I discovered the legal defense fund and my second year I--my second summer I went to LDF. I wanted to go and learn from the lawyers who take what is and make it into what it should be and they are geniuses at making new law. They are masters of taking existing law and making it stretch to cover people that currently aren't included and it was the NAACP Legal Defense Fund of course under Thurgood Marshall and Houston--Charles Hamilton Houston who made that model of law, the real--Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was the general in the streets and Thurgood Marshall was the general in the courtrooms and the two of those crusaders were the main leaders of the civil rights revolution and so I knew I wanted to be a Thurgood Marshall lawyer and if you want to be a Thurgood Marshall lawyer you go to Thurgood Marshall's law firm. Speaker 2: Now did you--was your choice of New York University [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] influenced by the fact that the headquarters of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No it was not. My choice of law school was solely which scholarship I got (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay but here you are near the headquarters of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. Who was there that summer when you were (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh it was an amazing summer we had everybody from Ted Shaw [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw], [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, Clyde Murphy [Clyde E. Murphy] was there, you had Judith Reed, you had Gail I'm blanking on her name 'cause I didn't work for her--Gail Wright I think was her name she was an amazing employment lawyer. You just had an amazing generation. Jack Greenberg headed up the LDF at that point, you had Jack Neibrit--James Nabrit, III--I'm sorry James Nabrit III, you had Jack Greenberg, you had the capital punishment staff was headed by John Charles Boger, Jack Boger who ended up being my boss for most of that time and it was an incredible array. In the Washington, D.C. office you had the amazing Elaine R. Jones [HistoryMaker Elaine Jones] who ran the D.C. office of the LDF and so we just--it was like I found manna from heaven, I found home. Story_ID: 302598 Speaker 1: LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] was home and I ended up--I thought I was going--I had just finished a paper from Professor Paulette Caldwell on compound race and sex discrimination so it was a--I thought I was going to do employment law, I wanted to test out my theory of the discrimination that African American women or other women of color face. They face both sex discrimination and race discrimination plus the compounded fact of those two kinds of discrimination put together. So it's a geometric affect and you've got to know which bias is working and what level before you could actually quantify how much discrimination your client is facing. So I finished that paper and I thought I was going to do employment law but that summer the [U.S.] Supreme Court came down with a minimum of five capital punishment cases that knocked out the death penalty moratorium that the Legal Defense Fund had won with Furman v. Georgia [1972]. Georgia v. Furman--Furman v. Georgia. The Furman case basically said that too many of the state systems for sentencing people to death were unconstitutional and it effected--when that case came out--when LDF won that case it effectively shut down death row USA. The summer I arrived which was the summer of '82 [1982]--no the summer of '83 [1983] that moratorium got undone by several cases that basically said we're done playing chess; you can open up death row again. That meant that LDF's--the Legal Defense Fund's capital punishment docket exploded because all new death dates could be set for all of your clients across the country, it was a real crisis. So three of us my co-conspirators were Julia Boez [ph.] who was the top student and had just finished first year at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] and Iye Yorokuma [ph.] who was a top second year student from Vanderbilt Law School [Nashville, Tennessee]. Iye was a Nigerian princess, Julia was a Jewish American princess and I was a black American princess and only one of us was an actual princess and that was Iye because her family had to pack her off because she just simply didn't know how to behave as Nigerian royalty (laughter). She was way, way too unruly and uncontainable so they packed her off to law school in the United States and the three of dived into number one stopping all the new death dates. All of LDF got new death dates and so we had to file the federal petitions to stop their executions while all the lawyers were out in the different courtrooms all through the South doing habeas petition, the federal petition through which you attack a state sentence of death. We worked around the clock it was total war. We just looked at one another and we said, "Ain't anybody dying this summer, we're not having anybody--nobody is dying." So we worked around the clock and we were on our own because the lawyers had to go and do the hearings. That was an amazing summer, we taught ourselves, we produced, I think between the three of us we did over twenty petitions and did other kinds of stays of execution which are just two or three pages. But we did an amazing number of petitions and by the end of the summer--we did whatever it took. There was one--you would discover these things about these cases the lawyer who was supposed to do the appeal did not file the appeal, the lawyer who was going to file the appeal is in a drunk tank and sentenced to jail so the client had no lawyer and in five days was going to be gassed to death at Parchman's gas chamber and so we had to fly down to Parchman, we had to get the papers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Parchman Farm [Mississippi State Penitentiary] in Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Parchman Farm in Mississippi, we had to go down to Angola, Louisiana, Iya had to fly down to Angola, Louisiana and stop an execution. I mean we were--we behaved like lawyers we had to, we had no choice. It was an amazing summer's experience. At the end of that first six weeks this was all done in six weeks, we would arrive at work at five o'clock in the morning and not leave until two o'clock the next morning. I think the worst stretch we missed sleeping in our own beds for five days in a row. I would just sleep in the office take a quick cat nap and get back up and do the next petition. Story_ID: 302599 Speaker 1: There was even--at one point later on in the summer when Jack [Jack Greenberg] and all the capital punishment lawyers came back and saw what an incredible job we'd done. They basically said, "We wouldn't have made it through the summer without you guys and now you have to help us on the McCleskey case [McCleskey v. Kemp, 1987]." That was the summer that the McCleskey study, the first multivariate regression study of 2,500 homicide eligible cases, capital eligible cases--capital sentencing eligible cases got studied systematically with multivariate regression analysis and what that means is, they were try- these were a group of professors who had done a state of the art study to isolate the racial effects in death sentencing. Does race play a role in issuing a sentence of death and this study showed without any doubt that this state of the art analysis proved that there was a racist ghost in the machinery of Georgia's death sentencing machinery. So they did it by isolating every single factor you could imagine that's attached to a homicide, controlling for those factors and then see even when those factors are controlled for does race still pop out as statistically significant as a factor that determined the choice of the sentence for that inmate. Did that inmate get dealt the death card because of race? Speaker 2: Now who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was Baldus [David C. Baldus] and Woodworth [George Woodworth] and I can't remember first names but it was the Baldus and Woodward study and then you had a group (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Are they attached to a particular university or school? Speaker 1: It's the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] I think and they had linked up with the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] capital punishment lawyers who used the McCleskey case as the vehicle for delivering this study. What the study showed was that if you murder an African American you have 4.3 times the likelihood of receiving a death sentence. So you had a slight race of the defendant effect. In other words if it's a black man accused of murder versus a white man accused of murder there is a slight statistically significant but lower than the effects of the victim. So effects of the defendant ratio effects were statistically significant but slight which meant that even there there was a racial factor. But the factor that was off the scales and it was undeniable was race of the victim. If you kill someone black you are not going to death row, if you kill someone white you're going to death row. That is an impermissible factor of race. So this study had the whole capital punishment world and all the courts in a tizzy because we were aiming a tightened missile at the entire capital sentencing scheme in the State of Georgia. Speaker 2: Now this is something that I heard in the barbershop when I was ten years old. Speaker 1: Oh really? Speaker 2: People would say, "If you kill a nigga you don't do any time you're back on the street. You kill a white man you would be under the jail." They said that and they've been saying that probably since slavery. Speaker 1: Well, we proved it statistically. Story_ID: 302600 Speaker 1: And we tried the case [McCleskey v. Kemp, 1987]. We--there was a defendant, Warren McCleskey, who murdered a police officer in a furniture robbery and police officer was white, it wasn't the most likely case to attach the study to but I can't remember why our bosses chose that case as the vehicle for testing this study. But we tested this study in Judge Forrester's [J. Owen Forrester] courtroom in the Northern District of Fulton County in Fulton County, Northern District of Atlanta [Georgia] and that was the next--we had to prepare that study for the trial. We had to prepare the lawyers for all the hearsay and evidentiary because the prosecutors who were fighting us were saying exclude the study, you shouldn't even have a hearing on it, the study is irrelevant execute this man. So we had a war to fight in the Georgia courts and it was over getting the McCleskey study before a federal judge to have the question of does Georgia deal the death card on the basis of race. Does it hand out capital punishment sentences on the basis of race in an unconstitutional way? The answer was yes and we had the get that study with that proof before a court and that hearing was an historic hearing and Julia Boez [ph.] and Iye [Iye Yorokuma (ph.)] and I had the privilege of preparing that study so that it could be gone through an evidentiary hearing. We were preparing all of the evidentiary objections making sure that we could get the study into evidence because your opposition is fighting to keep the study out of evidence so it can't be considered. Our job was to make sure it got considered and that an opinion came out and evaluated what does this mean for the constitutionality of our client's sentence and what does it mean more importantly for American capital punishment. So as Tony Amsterdam [Anthony G. Amsterdam] one of the smartest and he's a genius in terms of legal constitutional law who is also at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] now was at Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California]. Jim Liebman [James S. Liebman] who was also a constitutional scholar and was one of the lawyers at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] when I was a student there, all of them said that the McCleskey case would end up being one of the cornerstones of dismantling capital punishment. Now at the time of course we knew we weren't going to win this case but it had to be presented in the best way and it had to be done by the best lawyers and LDF did a fantastic job. Jack Boger [John Charles Boger] and Tim Ford [Timothy Ford] were part of that team and Julia and I were the two law students who lived down there with our male bosses in a condo. We were down there for six weeks, we would do the hearing in the day and at night we'd have to right petitions to save our clients because the Georgia prosecutors gave every single one of our clients an expedited death date because we were doing this hearing. So we had to write petitions at night, sleep for a couple of hours, get up and do the hearing, race down to the prison, talk to our clients, get the papers approved, file the papers so we were doing both capital punishment death row defense to keep our clients out of the electric chair in Georgia, as well as doing the McCleskey hearing at the same time. Story_ID: 302601 Speaker 1: Well if nothing else that summer I learned I didn't need the sleep (laughter). Once that got done I couldn't leave LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], we got done with that hearing and Julia [Julia Boez (ph.)] and I were so tired we didn't recognize ourselves when we looked at each other and saw ourselves in the mirror. It had been since June, July, August it was now September we were going on four months of 24/7 days high pressure. The stakes don't get higher than a man's life. When you're a capital punishment lawyer you're not just a lawyer, you're the only thing standing between that man and the electric chair. So the stakes are so high that you really can never let it go and what I learned was that capital punishment lifted the curtain and it showed the ugly under belly of our injustice system and when you realized that prosecutors were willing to fight to defend their win even when they knew they had an innocent man on death row they didn't care because their track record mattered more than a man's life. When you saw that there were no investigations done, when you saw how the semi-retarded getaway driver who had been promised some ice cream if he would just drive the car away when the guys told him to he got the death penalty and didn't even know that there had been a murder committed. The guy who stabbed the shopkeeper walks out of prison three weeks before your client is executed then you realize we don't have a criminal justice system that works. It was so deeply flawed, it was so riddled with bias and corruption and ugly petty politics. Politician racing to preside over the hanging so that they could look tough on crime and get elected to their next position that you saw human beings and this means the victims of homicide as well. But our system of justice was--I just saw how raggedly and corruptly we had reduced our system to something that was not worthy of our defense. So I came back to law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] realizing--law school is giving me a pretty post card. We sit up in here debating due process--we sit up here doing Socratic debates in law school that have nothing to do with the ugly reality I saw on the death circuit that summer and just incredible--Jack Boger [John Charles Boger] would come and tell us there is a judge in Hondo, Texas who two years after Furman v. Georgia [1972] which stopped all imposition of death sentencing, he had been opposing death sentencing for two years post Furman and told Jack Boger, "Well you know we don't have a law library down here and if the book mobile don't bring me the case I don't read it." Or the judge in Mississippi who said, "If I've got to let a nigga off of death row at least he killed a Jew." This was the quality of what we saw in the South, and it was extremely eye opening..