 Story_ID: 60630 Speaker 1: Okay. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Gloria Rookard, Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, Rookard is R-O-O-K-A-R-D. Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 1/3/32 [January 3, 1932], Akron, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a semi-retired nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: This is August 2, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Akron, Ohio at Wooster Branch Library. Story_ID: 60631 Speaker 1: Okay. Now before we get into depth, there are five People-Magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you. And the first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Anything that I don't have to cook (laughter), greens probably, fried chicken- Speaker 1: Some good- Speaker 2: --potato salad (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Number two, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, spring and fall, two, two favorite times. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Probably New York City. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. "Would some power of the gift to give us to see ourselves as others see us." Speaker 1: Okay. Where does that come from? Speaker 2: O. Henry, but he said it in Gaelic, and I'm, I'm just not good at that. Okay. Speaker 1: And I heard it when I was in--about the ninth grade and it's followed me. Story_ID: 60632 Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about your background. And you, you were born in Akron [Ohio]. Speaker 2: And fetched up right here. And I used to tell people I've never even been out of the city limits (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us the, the names of your parents and spell their names for us and with their birthdates and places of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Maurine Shuler. Maurine is M-A-U-R-I-N-E, Shuler is S-H-U-L-E-R. She was born in Sumter, South Carolina on June 20th, I think, 1909. My father's name was Claude Shuler, Sr., Claude, C-L-A-U-D-E, Shuler, S-H-U-L-E-R, and he was a Senior. And he was born in Sumter, South Carolina, June 20th, 1905. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your parents have a story or do, do they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes. They had--my mother and father knew each other vaguely from being in the same town. And I think they went to this--started off in the same school but, of course, my father was five years older than my mother. And they met again on the streets in Washington, D.C. when she went there for a visit, and they rekindled their friendship. He was--he had migrated to Akron, Ohio and sent for her, and they were married in Akron at his sister's house February 29th and I can't remember the year, but they would have been married like about sixty-five years when he died, something like that. My mom is still alive and she's ninety-three. Speaker 1: Oh, good. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Story_ID: 60633 Speaker 1: Did, do your--are there any stories that, that have been passed along by your parents about, you know, or, or by your grand-parents about what life was like in--for the family during reconstruction or slavery or- Speaker 2: Well, my mother is full of stories but she tells them very guardedly. For instance, when the movie 'Roots' came out, we had decided we were going to watch it as a family. She couldn't watch it. Her grandmother was raped supposedly by the man in the big house. And after she had my grandmother, she disappeared. Then there was an aunt that was beaten severely that lived in a (unclear) house after that because she was paralyzed from the waist down. My mom's mother was raised by her grandmother, you know, after all of this happened, so my mother had a rather rocky history. She's a brilliant woman and what she wanted to do, there was no money to do, and bare-, you know, she eventually graduated from high school. My father went to the sixth grade and that was as far as they would allow him to go. He has a couple of very, he had a couple of very interesting stories, too--brilliant man, full of mechanical ability. What happened with him was that one of his friends was hung and castrated, you know, in front of him, so he fled, you know. He was--had worked at an ice cream shop and had learned to do something that the, the owner of the ice cream show wouldn't do it. And they would never promote him in the position to do the job. But they insisted that he hire--that the person that they hired be trained by him to do the job. So it, it was a tragic, but not so tragic. I, you know, I don't even know how to explain it because when we were young and you hear these things, the significance of them was not imbedded in your mind until you begin to get older and find out what all of the woes were that went with it. Story_ID: 60634 Speaker 1: And I guess it came clearly to my mind because when I decided to go to nursing school--number one, there was no money in the family to do it. And I applied at one of the local hospitals here and they refused to accept me because there was a community bathroom. And nice little ladies whose children or daughters were gonna go into that place didn't want me there for that reason. They didn't want me to bathe in the same place that their daughters bathed in. And that came out in the interview. And it was rather strange and I didn't realize the significance of that either until later when I was interviewed at another spot. But they invited me for the interview that they had moved from the hospital down to the local YWCA at the time. And the lady that interviewed me was the director of the nursing program at that particular place. And she started off the interview by telling me that I had done very well on the entrance exam, and that I was a good student and I was highly recommended. But, then she told me the, the story about them doing the interview for these people, taking a poll, and that the mothers had decided that they didn't me there. And I stood there because my mother's lesson to all her girls was now you must be a lady at all costs. And I kept thinking about that as I said to that woman, you know what, all of this C, TB, and syphilis known to this country came over on a boat from England. I don't want to bathe with them either. I thanked her for the interview and turned around and walked out. I got instantly in a panic 'cause I thought, oh, my God, I gotta go home and tell my mother what I said. And, of course, living in the place that we lived, the house was ablaze when I got there with lights. And the neighbors who were all anticipating what was going to happen, took one look at my face, and they said, "What happened?" And I told them, and then when I told them what I said, they cheered. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: So I didn't get into trouble for my mouth that time (laughter), one of the few times, you know, how you do when you're growing up. And 'cause I was a prodigious reader. And they had the library all sectioned off so that you could read from here to here, and when you were in such, or such and grade, and from here to here, as you begin to grow older, but they never let you read past there until you got into high school. But the lady that lived next door to me belonged to the Book of the Month Club. I don't know why I'm telling this, but anyhow (laughter) she would let us read--she would let me read whatever came with the Book of the Month Club, you know. If my mother had known, she probably would have decapitated me and (laughter) the lady next door--her for it, but I read everything I can get my hands on. I used to hide and read. And my oldest sister, who was the neatest person and still is, did the housework and she'd be forever more hunting me. She's some place with a book (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 60635 Speaker 1: Let me just go back maybe to, to your parents. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That, that's great, but can you tell us, are there, there any other stories that your father passed down? Now, now he--all, all the trouble you, you were just describing took place in Sumter, South Carolina? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you know, so I--and he, when he left and he, he probably didn't have a really--did he leave a big family behind or something when they (unclear) (simultaneous) or something? Speaker 2: They were eleven, twelve--I think, there were thirteen or fourteen children. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: His sibs, siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Most of them, I guess, did they stay in Sumter [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: No, as a matter-of-factly, I think only one ended up staying in South Carolina 'cause she died--well, maybe two, because one came North and lived with us for a while, but everybody else left. His, his one brother went to New York--said that he was a tailor. And his famous thing was that he would rather be a lamp post in New York than to be the Mayor (laughter) in South Carolina. And we used, we used to laugh at that. And then he had a sister that moved here. He had another sister that went on to become a Master [degree]'s prepared teacher, and she taught in Long Island [New York] and married there. And her husband also taught in Long Island. She had a--he had another sister that lived and went to New York, and that's where they--she established her family. There was one in Florida, West Palm Beach, Florida, so they scattered, you know. Nobody, as a matter-of-factly, only the one, the one that stayed in South Carolina--her husband owned a restaurant called the Silver Moon Cafe there. And that's the reason, I think, that she probably stayed is because she was married to this man. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Yeah, was, was your mother sort of glad to be (unclear) from Sumter, South Carolina as well or- Speaker 2: Yes, well, there were only three of them. And her brother and her sister, my mother's sister, both lived in Washington, D.C., and that's how she got there. And she got there after they got there because she was still going to school. Her dream was to go to college. She wanted to become, become a teacher. Story_ID: 60636 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now can, can you describe--and we go back to your childhood now. We're talking about the reading and we will, we will still talk about, I guess, some more because that seems to define what you did as a child at some level. But can you describe for us some, some of the sights and sounds or smells in growing in Akron, Ohio? Speaker 2: First off, I don't believe--I think I was a teenager when I realized that my mother finally went to bed at night because she made all of our clothes. And she had a treadle sewing, old treadle sewing machine, and when we'd go to bed at night, she'd be down there treadling on the machine. And when we got up in the morning, she'd be treadling on the machine, but there was always hot breakfast. And in the winter time, it was really wonderful to get up and get washed up and run downstairs to see what was in the pot, you know, so it was grits or oatmeal or something. And the windows were always steamed up, you know, from, from her cooking. And the same thing for lunch when we went home for lunch. It was always something hot there to eat. It was won-, and a wonderful existence. And I guess you really don't appreciate those things until you get older and you have to do it, you know. It's sort of like--mom, why would you--when you're growing up, you say, "Mom, why would you do that," you know. And then, as you got older you thought, that's why she did it (laughter). But I'm doing the same thing, you know. That and the smell of rubber because we lived in East Akron [Ohio], and Goodyear [Tires] was out there. And the soot and the rubber smell every morning, so it kept you dusting and cleaning house, you know. The sounds--my mother, again, had a very unique way of handling my father. We could always tell if there was an argument, had been an argument, or if there was going to be an argument because if she was trying to avert an argument, she'd always say, "Yes, dear, yes, dear." She's avoid-, avoiding the argument. Now if she lost, she was singing, "Jesus, keep me near the cross" (laughter). And we used to speculate, you know, but the unique thing was that we were probably--I think I had--probably was sixteen or seventeen before I really knew that they fussed, fight, and argued, you know. And I, I call fighting, you know, that verbal battle that they did. But she was feisty and my father was stubborn. So it, it, and my mother still is feisty, you know. She has a, a quick wit and she's funny. She's really funny so she makes us laugh a lot, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: That's great, that's great. What, what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a rubber worker. He worked at Firestone [Tires], Plant 2, on the mills. And he was very diligent about it. We were never hungry--didn't know we were poor. And my mother's thing was "You're not poor. You may have lived with poverty but you're not poor." And I used to think about that--now what is she talking about? So finally, when I got older, I said to her, what, what do you mean? We've--I never even had a bicycle. She said to me, "You've lived in poverty but you're never poor because you have a family that surrounds you that loves you." And as long as you're loved, you'll never be poor. Wisdom--and I thought okay. And that sort of cleared up that stereotype that was in my head about being poor. Speaker 1: That, that's something. That's a, a reverberating theme since we've been in Akron [Ohio]. I don't know if I should say this or not, but a lot of--all the interviews I'm talking about--the value of family and how you value that. Story_ID: 60637 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about school- Speaker 2: My early recollection was when we moved into the house that my parents retired out of on 7th Avenue--went to Robinson [Elementary] School to the eighth grade. I was a cheerleader, a relatively good student, didn't get into a lot of trouble, but my mouth got me into some, you know. Not only did I talk too much, I giggled a lot, you know. And, of course, that always gets you into trouble because the teachers used to say, "If you wouldn't giggle, Gloria, they wouldn't cut up." So it was like I got the blame for them cutting up (laughter), but they do funny stuff. And I couldn't do it because I knew that my mother would have decapitated me at the naval (laughter). Speaker 1: So, so you would laugh at the other children's- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --antics and, and encourage them, you know? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. They'd, they'd just continue, you know. And it really came back to haunt me because I have five children. Four are my sons and that's the top four. Those kids got into everything that they possibly could. And I used to have to go to my bedroom and put my head in the pillow to laugh at them because it was stuff that I, I would have loved to have done when I was a kid, so I couldn't kill them, you know (laughter). Yeah. The, the other part of school was East High School [now East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio]--worked in the office there. And that's how I got to nursing school because when I worked in the office, I had to answer the telephones and help with the filing and stuff like that. And the principal called one day and when I was there, and I answered the phone. So when he came in, he said to me, "Who's Miss Shuler?" I said "I am." So he said, "Come into my office." And then he said that he liked my telephone manner and that my diction was good, and I think he was kind of surprised that I was chocolate, you know. So, anyway, he said to me, "What do you want to be?" And I told him, "I'd love to be a nurse, but there was no money in the family to go anywhere." And the other school that I knew about at the time was Freedmen's Hospital in Washington, D.C. [now Howard University Hospital] because I knew that they wouldn't take me in the schools around here--was the way that I was, I thought anyway. Story_ID: 60638 Speaker 1: So anyhow, he was like my mentor because he called [Akron] City Hospital [now Summa Akron City Hospital, Ohio] and got me the application. And that's when I got turned the first time. The second time--what, and after I got turned down, then he called Akron General which is not Akron General [Medical Center, Akron, Ohio]. It was People's [Hospital, Akron, Ohio] at the time and they accepted me, you know [1950-1952]. But to do all of that, the Urban League here had been very proactive, and once I had passed the exam and had the--everything going, you know, that looked like I was going to be accepted. Then they evidently interceded and talked to the director of nursing over at Akron General [Hospital, Ohio]. And she told them that their, their situation was that they had two rooms and a bath in between, so there and there were four students to the two rooms, so two apiece and the bath. And what they were looking for was either three more students of color or seven more so that we would have a support system because her orientation was that students who had a support system did better than students who would be solo. And she didn't want me there as a solo. So what happened, they did more testing, I understand, in Akron [Ohio], and apparently, didn't find anybody else that they considered worthy to go. But what happened then in Aug-, the end of August, school was going to start in September, they found this one other person who became my roommate, Jean Felton. Her--she's Felton now but she was Jean Nichols (ph.) at the time--was living with a, in a foster situation. Brilliant woman, and she and I became roommates, and that how I got--so what she, what the director did there, she found one room that had the two beds but a private bath. And that's where she put us up until the following year when they found two more students. And then the four of us became roommates which was almost a disaster (laughter) 'cause we had such a great time, you know. All became lifelong friends. Speaker 2: Okay. And these were all black students (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-hum. And they never invited us to--belong to the alumni over there until years later. They wouldn't allow us to belong but that was okay, you know, because by that time, I think we were all grounded. And we all had our own self-worth and image, you know, how you do that. And, but it was kind of strange because some of the things that they accused me of was number one, I was supposedly arrogant and insolent, and I didn't even know what the words meant, you know. And there was a couple of the, the white nurses that really rankled at my being there. And it was, it was sort of hellish at one point. But the evaluations that I kept receiving were always outstanding, so they could never find a real reason, you know. And they always mixed the two of us up. They called me Miss Nichols and Jean, Miss Shuler. And it was kind of funny because we were, were direct opposites. Jean's tall and really nice and brilliant and quiet. And I'm short yellow and and mouthy (laughter) and, and it was kind of a real kind of disparity, you know, so- Story_ID: 60639 Speaker 1: Yeah. Who was some of your mentors that even going back to grade school? Who were some of the teachers that, that inspired you or people in the community that, that inspired you? Speaker 2: The lady that lived next door to us, her name was Ruth Johnson, had no children and she just sort of adopted our family. And she had cats and I was a cat lover, so I would take care of her cats and help her in the house. She taught me how to knit. She taught me how to crochet. She taught me how to do that rug thing, thingamajigger. She let me read the books that she got out of the Book Club. She did a lot of talking to me, you know, about life and becoming a young woman and that kind of thing. And she was probably the greatest mentor that I had. So far as teachers, I had- Speaker 1: What, I'm sorry, what did Ms. Johnson do for a living? Speaker 2: She was a hairdresser, uh-hum, you know. She had her own little shop in the back of her house. So she, she was sort of entrepreneur-ish and I thought that was really wonderful (laughter). So far as teachers, I don't remember any of them that were particular mentors, you know. I can't remember in grade school, I can't remember one teacher that took any interest in my being or being there. I got good grades but I don't remember them ever saying or doing anything to push in that direction because I think that my mother and father, particularly my mother, was interested in how you did in school. And she had her own standards, you know, 'cause she'd say to me, "You don't bring me any 'C's'." Well, everybody else can, you know, but I didn't dare say that to her, you know. But she, and then she--one day she said to me, she said, "You know, you have the ability to do better than that. And that's why I hold you to a different standard and I do." And then as she went down the line, she evaluated each one of us, you know, according to the standards that she, as a mother, set up in your mind for you, for her child, you know, her children. Story_ID: 60640 Speaker 1: So you had a lot of brothers and sisters so- Speaker 2: Yes, and I was number two. Speaker 1: Number two? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And how, how many are there altogether? Speaker 2: There were--well, they had, had eleven kids, but nine of us survived to adulthood or thereabouts. Speaker 1: Okay. It's a big family. Speaker 2: It's wonderful though, you know (laughter). And when, when we get together 'cause, and we used to do a lot of getting together. We would--there were so many of us, we used to have to sit on the stairs (laughter) to eat, you know. Or we'd take--have shifts at the dining room table on the holidays. It was wonderful. It still is, you know, it's a wonderful existence. And that's another reason I think I might have just, you know, had the five kids 'cause I didn't want to raise a single child ever, you know. And then I had the three boys. And my husband used to say to me, you know what, I waited and picked the most "fertile Myrtle" (laughter) out of the barrel. And we laugh about it, you know, yeah, so- Speaker 1: So do your children have a lot of cousins, you know from all these- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Your other brothers and sisters didn't have all these children? Speaker 2: No, no, as a matter of fact, I had more children than any of them. My oldest sister has two. My brother who's next to me then has actually three. The sister next to him has none. The brother next to him has none. And I had one brother that had four. The sister next to him had three. And the, the baby brother had two. Speaker 1: Well, they all had (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but- Speaker 1: --with a bunch of family reunion or something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, you know, we don't do much re-uning [sic, reuniting] any more 'cause I think that as the older people died out, the younger people never just picked up the crutch of the go forth with it, you know. So, and we were talking about that not too long ago, you know. It was a shame to let it die and we really should do something about it because we're all getting older, you know. Our, you know, my generation--I think my mother's youngest child now is fifty plus, and the oldest is seventy something, you know, so we're all right, you know, right there together. But we were marveling at the fact that my mother had children over a twenty-year span, you know (laughter). And we used to laugh because her prayer was that she would live to see her oldest child grad-, her baby graduate from grade, from high school. So she's done that plus- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 60641 Speaker 1: Okay. So when you, tell us about the--I guess, the nursing school. I mean and I guess you, you've, you've told us something about it. But, you know, are there any other stories from nursing school you want to tell us? Speaker 2: I don't think we're going to print them (laughter). Speaker 1: No, if there, if there are stories that can be instructive to somebody that coming along, you should- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that just being the role model to do it in, in Akron [Ohio] was good, you know, those of us who finished. They took the four of us and then there was another year, they took two more. And one of them flunked out. The other one is still around. But out of the four of us, three of us survived. The one girl got killed in a plane accident. And she got on a plane she wasn't even supposed to be on, you know, Beverly. And then, Josie, who was one of the younger ones, she has been a world traveler and very proactive. Jean, who was my roommate, was a public health nurse, and very proactive. And then Betty Jo [Davidson], who was also a public nurse, went from one career to the next. She retired from the health department and she's doing real estate, you know. So all of us did well, I think, you know, plus we're all friends, which is rare many times, you know, because our lives and our, our needs and our wants are so diverse. Story_ID: 60642 Speaker 1: Okay. So what were your prospects, I guess, in graduation from nursing school? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a flight nurse and they wouldn't accept a black woman into the flight nurses at the time. And so, I ended up getting married, you know. And it was sort of like, you know, it must have been ordained. That's the only thing I can say (laughter), you know, because I met my husband because his mother was a patient. And she wasn't even my patient at the time but she was very sick, and she was on one of these eight-bed wards back in a corner in the summer time. And she was, she (unclear) by profusely, you know, and the, the girl that was in charge of that ward was a good friend of mine, one of the other ladies. And we would meet because we worked seven to twelve [o'clock], and then three to seven [o'clock] was our shift. And so at the end of the seven o'clock shift at night, we always met on her floor which was the floor that my mother-in-law was on. And she was, she'd always leave her until last and we would go clean her up, you know, and comb her hair and that. And I was black and the other girl was white. So she left it because she didn't know how to comb her hair. And so, that's what we do, and it was just before visiting hours. And she used to look at me and she'd say, you're a cute little nurse. I have a son that would like you. And I thought, oh, God, another one (laughter). Speaker 1: We're going to stop right here and change tape. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it's been a half hour, believe or not, yeah. Speaker 2: Already, huh? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 60643 Speaker 1: Okay. We're ready, we're rolling again. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, oh, let's finish this story about meeting your husband. So you, you were advised that this patient had a son. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said, "Oh, God, another one?" Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, another one. And so, anyway, what happened then, one night he came in just as we were leaving. And she said, come here, little nurse, I want you to meet my son. And I went, reluctantly, and he was graying in the temple. And I thought now, why would she want to introduce me to this old man (laughter)? But he was prematurely gray. His father's hair was dark white so I should have known but I didn't, you know, it never dawned on me. But anyway, then she, she was discharged finally. Well, and she went home and she would call me periodically and say, "Come to supper." "Oh, I'm sorry, I have to be on duty." I wouldn't go on, you know. So finally, she found out who my mother and father were, and her husband knew my father. And she called my mother, and my mother called me and told me that Mrs. Rookard wanted to have me for supper to thank me for the care that I had given her and I was to go. Speaker 1: Really (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, how do you tell your momma no (laughter), you know? So the following Sunday, Mrs. Rookard's son and (laughter) his sister came to pick me up at the nurses' home so we went--I went. And we went over and we ate. Her, his father was a marvelous cook. And then we went to a joint in Cleveland [Ohio], and I had never been to one. I never had a drink, you know--really a Puritan (laughter). Anyway, he, he and his sister drank beer. And I laughed at them because they'd drink about--toddled off to the john, drink another beer and toddled to the john. And we had fun. It was really a good Sunday afternoon, okay. So two weeks later, he called and asked me if I had wanted to go out. And, no. And he said, c'mon. And I said, no, I'm not going out with you. And I didn't, but about maybe a week after that we--where we, where the nursing home was in the down-, center of downtown, we could walk. And then I was walking one evening because I was tired and I was bored. And I had gotten into some kind of push-pull with one of the nurses on one of the floors for something that I really hadn't know, you know. And so I went on, I went for this walk. And I--he was driving and he said, "C'mon, I'll take you to the--back, if you want to go." And I looked at him, I said, "No, I don't think so." And he said, "Oh, c'mon, I know who you are. You know who I am. You know who my parents are. I'm not going to hurt you." And I thought, okay. So we ended up--he ended up taking me to Canton [Ohio] to supper. And we laughed and, and giggled and he was--had a marvelous sense of humor. And so, that's how we started dating, you know. And, finally, he said to me one night, "You know, I'm not going to getting married. I'm not out here to get married." I thought, who said anything about marriage (laughter), you know? He said, "I just want to have a good time." I said, "Why, I do have a good time so forget you," you know, but we continued to date. And just, my senior year, then I was doing an affiliation down at the psychiatric hospital. And he used to bring me and a couple of the nurses back and forth. He'd come down and pick us up on the weekend when we were off and bring us home, and then take us back on Sunday. So the one week, he evidently, he had another day. You know how men are--they never admit these kinds of things, but he didn't show up. So we caught the bus and went on back down there. Monday, he calls. I wouldn't talk to him. Tuesday, he called again. I still wouldn't talk to him. So Wednesday, he got in a jitney and he came down. And the house mother greeted me as I was coming off duty. She said you have a caller. So, oh, excitement, you know. And all the nurses said, "Shuler's got a caller. Let's go see who it is." Shuler's got a caller. It was him. And he said that he missed our fun, and that he thought that I had overreacted to his not showing up, and that he wanted to apologize. Okay, you know, very cavalier about the whole thing, but that one thing led to another. And that's how we ended up getting married. We eloped. Story_ID: 60644 Speaker 1: Oh, you eloped? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Well, well, why did you elope? Speaker 2: First off, we didn't have any money--I didn't have any money to have a wedding. Secondly, my father (laughter) really didn't like him. And he had given me an engagement ring and my father said, if you marry him, you can never come home. That was the ultimatum. Speaker 1: Why didn't, why didn't your father like him? Speaker 2: I don't know. I never got, you know, we never got that far because I said to him, I said, "Well, now, look, you know, that's not fair. Number one, you married who you wanted to marry." Now we're having this conversation on the street--me and my dad, walking. And he said, "Yes, but I'm"--but what, you know? And he said, "What, is that what you plan to do with your life? Is it to become a wife after all of this schooling?" And I thought, well, all of what schooling? What, what are you talking about? And so, then he said to me-"Well, I'm telling you, if you marry me, you can't come home." And I said, "As long as my mother lives and you live, I'm coming home." Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And he said to me, you're so stubborn. And I wanted to say, I'm like my dad (laughter). But he used to say, "It's a (unclear) child that knows his father, that know their father, you know." And my father had a couple of traits, physical traits, that all of us got at least one of them. And so, I pulled my shoe off and show him my foot and I'd say, "There's my father right there. Look at yours." And we always laughed about it, you know. And, and I think that he picked on me about it because he knew that I was, wasn't sensitive enough to get hurt over it. So that, that's how, so my husband and I eloped. We eloped probably in, we eloped in July [1952]. We graduated in, in September. But in the meantime, we, we bought a house that we were going to move into as soon as we grad-, as soon as I graduated. And the real estate lady called the school and wanted to know if there was a Gloria Shuler Rookard there. Well, they went ballistic because we weren't supposed to be married in school. But I was so close to graduation when they found it out. And so she said to me, "Gloria, come here in the dining room one day at noon and she said, are you married?" "Me" (laughter)? She said, "Don't you lie to me." She didn't give me a chance to answer. And I, I didn't say no--I said, me (laughter). So, she said, "Well, you come to my office as soon as you finish eating lunch." And I, I went. And she said to me, she said, "You know, you've breached a rule. And I have a right to kick you out if I want to. She said, but you've been a good student and you're right at graduation, so you can finish." Story_ID: 60645 Speaker 1: And that's incredible now in the year 2002 to think that this is 1949? Speaker 2: '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: '50 [1950], '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: So it was fifty years ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, fifty years ago. Well, even fifty years ago, that, that would be a rule in a school and, and then that'll be that type of control over in the lives of young women in a school. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you, you'd have to understand that early nursing is not like nursing now. Other educational part of it, you worked and you studied and you wrote papers, and you worked and you studied and you wrote papers. And you were instructed in every disease known to man and they expected you to know that. You were instructed in every drug that was probably on the market at the time and its adverse effects, and what would happen to it if they had anesthesia, or what would happen to it if they had a different disease process. And you were expected to know it. And then the boards that you had to take to become registered were atrocious, you know, it was like eight hours of intense scrutiny. So they expected a lot of you and you had to know it. You know, there was no if's, and's, and but's, so I think that the control came for two reasons. Number one, that we had what--our first year, we had controlled study hours. We had, we studied from six thirty [6:30] to nine [9:00] every day. And you went home one day on the weekend, period, or that was your day off 'cause the students from out of town didn't get home, you know, like that because there were some too far to travel. So I guess nobody bunkered the standard either because here we are, you know, and this what we want to do. Speaker 1: Did, did men similarly have, similarly have the same restrictions or (unclear) (simultaneous) in school? Speaker 2: There were no men. Speaker 1: Well, like saying in medical school, did, did medical schools require men to remain single and- Speaker 2: No, no, I don't think so. Speaker 1: See, that's, that's what I was talking, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, that's a comparison. Speaker 1: That's a comparison. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Something that's being imposed on women basically then--would not be now, you know- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --simply because they won't--it might be, you know, if it's good for one, it should be good for everybody. I mean that's what- Speaker 2: And you know, I think nursing was the only profession that required that, too, at the time. Teachers didn't because we matriculated through the University of Akron [Ohio] for all of our sciences, you know. And the joke was, you know what school she's in because she's never any place other than the library (laughter), you know. Ask, ask a nursing student. She--follow her to the library, you know. It was, it was a joke, but that's where, that's what you did, you know. Speaker 1: So this was very intense train, training. Speaker 2: Very, very. And, you know, it serves well because I have been shocked at what I haven't forgotten. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: You know, and how many things that even the young people, you know, nowadays rely on you to know. I eventually went on to become a pediatric nurse practitioner, and that's how I did the Head Start children, you know. But all the stuff that happens to little kids, you know, the minute they say well, they've, they've got a rash, let me look at it. You can almost look at it and say, well, this belongs to this, and this is what is going on with this child. And if the fever and, the, you know, just put it all together for it. And nine chances out of ten, when they go to the physician and he diagnoses it, you're right, you know, so that gives you a certain different kind of confidence, too, and the ability that you have and the training that you do. Speaker 1: Nurses today, do they have the same intense type of training, in, in your opinion, you know? Speaker 2: Yes and no. They're, they--all, all of them, almost of all of it is done on a college campus now. There are very few three-year programs, diploma programs as they call them, for nurses which is really too bad because there's something about that clinical side of it that they get after they get out, that we got while we were in, you know. So what they made us do was to go back and get the liberal arts part of it, you know, the literature and all that round--they say that round you out to make you a complete person. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: I, I don't know about that. Story_ID: 60646 Speaker 1: Okay. So you all were totally im-, immersed in your occupation and- Speaker 2: Right, right, uh-hum. Speaker 1: --as you were schooled, you know. Speaker 2: Right. And they called us vocational people rather than professional people. Speaker 1: That's very- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But in those days, you know, I guess occupations then were, I guess, the--were the most popular, I guess, for women or the school teacher or nurse- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then what, what else they got there. I think there are three but school teacher and nurse- Speaker 2: Social worker. Speaker 1: Social worker, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, those were the three. And my father's dream for me was to have gone to Sumter, South Carolina and went to the schools that his sisters went to, and become a teacher and a spinster (laughter). That's the thing is to (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. That--what, what schools, are they black--see some of the black schools in Sumter? Speaker 2: I can't remember. I know in Orangeburg [South Carolina], you know, there's South Carolina State [University]. And his one sister, Natalie, went there, but she ended up teaching there and so did her husband, you know. She grew up in Augusta, Georgia. She's still alive. She's, she'll never tell you she's over a hundred years old. She'll never tell you that but she's got to be. If you sit down and you fig-, figure where she was in line, and how old this one is, and how this one is, and how old she's got to be, so she's got to be at least a hundred years old. But age is a number and we don't talk about that (laughter). Speaker 1: It's which- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's something. Story_ID: 60647 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your, I guess, career in nursing- Speaker 2: It's been phenomenal so far as I'm concerned. I don't think that it owes me a thing. I have had a wonderful life because of it. I started off in Akron General [Medical Center, Ohio] in the hospital. And every two years, I'd change and go to a different department, mainly because of the interests I had for what went on--ended up in labor and delivery, quit for six years after I had the children, and went back. And being the egomaniac that I really (laughter) turned out to be, I called, went in--I said to the director of nursing, "Hey, Pat, do you have a job? I want a job," and she said, "Yeah, come on over." And I said, "when?" She said, "Right now, I can put you to work this after"--and I didn't even have a uniform and, you know, give me time. So anyhow, I went and I got the uniform and everything and went to work the same day. She put me in the intensive care unit (laughter). Speaker 1: Now that is, it's really intense, I gather. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because, see, I had been in charge of the recovery room prior to leaving. So anyhow, she said, "Here, here, this ought to challenge you." Well, not only did it challenge me, it almost drove me crazy because here, all this new technology had come into being--the monitors, the heart monitors, and, you know, the automatic drip machines for the IV. So all that stuff, and I didn't know how to work any of it. And I couldn't run fast enough to keep up with it so I lasted in there six months. Story_ID: 60648 Speaker 1: And then I went back to labor and delivery. And then I got a phone call from one of, a Mennonite minister down in Hartville [Ohio]. And he said that he was looking for a nurse, and that one of his parishioners had said for him to call me and see if I was interested. And I got to thinking about it and I thought, well, I've never done public health. Maybe, you know, so I, I went down to the director of nursing service, and I told her what the job offer was. And she said, "Oh, you can do anything you want to do. Why don't you try it," which was a surprise to me because most of the time, you know, they were trying to hold on to the nurses. So anyway, I went and it was migrant nursing, and it was in the farming section and I enjoyed it. Now I had to learn a lot because the people that came, came from Dowgate, Florida, Appalachia, Virginia, and on around. And they followed what they call the migrant stream at the time. So they would come here for the black musk oil farm, you know, the lettuce and celery, and that kind of thing. And then they'd move on to the tomatoes that was up around [Lake] Erie and on up around the lake. And then they'd follow where the pine trees were and what they were harvesting there, and going down into Texas, and then back to Florida--very interesting. But their ability, your ability to communicate with them, and for them to communicate with you was that you ate. They came out of the field for the big meal at noon. And so anybody that you wanted to see, or you had to catch up with for any particular reason, that's when you did it. And I ate at everybody's house, wonderful, Southern cooking--gained twenty pounds that summer (laughter), you know. But it was a very good experience but, oh, my goodness. It was an exposure to humanness that I had never ever seen or even heard about before. One year you'd see Sally, and she'd be with Joe. The next year you'd see Marianne, and she was with Joe. And then maybe the same year, if, if Marian and Joe fell out, then maybe Marianne would come back over--oh, it was, it was phenomenal, just pheno-, and nobody fought. Speaker 2: On the same group and what, what nationality were, were most of them? Speaker 1: Black and, and white, you know. We had very few Hispanics, very few. As a matter of fact, I don't think it was about two families. And they were--the reason I think that, that they traveled with them is because they lived in Belle Glade [Florida], too, you know, and migrated there, but it--ohh, it was, it was phenomenal. Story_ID: 60649 Speaker 1: We had--well, there's story after story after story, you know. The one thing that intrigued me most was the, the venereal disease problem. I thought I knew textbook-wise what we were dealing with, right? But I mean it had never been demonstrated to me, just, you know, just how loose people could be with their morals, you know. And because they--their, their system and their standards were totally different than we had been taught. So anyway, this one Monday morning, I walked in and then outside of the door, there were eight guys waiting on me. And I thought, well now, what do I owe the privilege of having all you young guys out here standing up waiting on the nurse? Well, "Can we come in?" "Yeah, you can come on in, come on in." "We ran train on Mary Jane and the third man in got burnt." Speaker 2: The third man? Speaker 1: (Laughter) First off, (gesture) right over my head it went. I had no idea what they were talking about. So I said, "You have to explain this to me." "(Laughter) That's a dumb nurse." (Laughter) So, the, this one guy said, "Don't laugh at her. Let's tell her what's, what's going on," and he did, you know. And I thought, oh, my word, ooh, you know. Never heard of it, I had never heard the expression before in my entire life. I was dumbfounded. So anyway, I didn't have any penicillin to give them, so I called the health department in Canton [Ohio], which was the closest major town, and told the public health director there that, you know, we had a problem. And I wanted to send these guys in for treatment, or whatever he did--they deemed was necessary. He told me, "Don't send them there." Okay. "Now let me ask you a question: do you want these eight guys all though Starke County [Ohio] spreading their third man in," (laughter) "to the rest of the population?" And he said, "Ms. Shuler," no, "Mrs. Rookard," he said, "don't send them here." Okay. So I got on the phone and I called Columbus [Ohio], and I told them what the dilemma was. Well, they got on the phone and they called him and told him that they were to be treated. So they got into the vehicle and they all went down and were treated, you know. That was one fight. Another fight that I had was this one girl who was-- Speaker 2: Oh, did they find Mary Jane, too (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well, they, they never told me who Mary Jane was. And I really didn't want to know, but, you know, public health wise, I needed to know. They said they'd take care of it because evidently Mary Jane was a teenager and she was with her parents, and they didn't want her parents to know what Mary Jane's weekend activity was. So evidently they took care of it 'cause I asked her one day and she, she looked at me (makes sound) like that, and kept right on walking. See, so, okay. Story_ID: 60650 Speaker 1: The other fight was this girl that had an abortion. She did it herself, became septic, and she died. She was--she had morbid obesity 'cause she was very heavy, but had been the entire period that I knew her. And the undertaker there did, embalmed her, but he didn't do a good job. And when we went to see her, there was a peculiar odor and so I had to tell him about that. First, he looked at me and he said, "You ain't nothing but a troublemaker." And I said, "Wait a minute, wait a minute, okay, I'm telling you this so that you will know that whoever did the job didn't do a good job." "Oh, oh, oh, oh, okay, then I appreciate it." Well, I, I had gone in the day, early in the daytime so that night, I went back and they had taken care of it, you know, 'cause I hadn't intended to go back. Speaker 2: That's a public health risk. Speaker 1: Absolutely. The other fight that I had was that the local paper out of Akron [Ohio] came down because the, one of the editors, the storywriters, lived behind me in the neighborhood. And I told him--he told them what I was doing, you know. So he came down and he wrote this expose, is what it turned out to be, quoted me all out of context. Sunday's paper had this huge spread in it quoting Gloria Rookard, the nurse. Monday morning, when I went to the post office to pick up the mail, they all knew my name. They had never bothered to speak to me or anything. "Oh, hi, Mrs. Rookard," hmm-hmm-hmm. About noon that day, I got a phone call, an anonymous phone call, that told me not to ever get caught down there at night anymore, and to watch out for my family. Well, and now, you know I, I was petrified. So, I ran a clinic on Monday evenings. A group of one physician out of Akron General [Hospital, Ohio] and the interns and externs or residents would come down. And we'd run--do physicals on all the people, PAP smears, and everything that they needed to have done, have the kids inoculated, and all of that. And I told him what had been said to me. And he, 'cause they used to get through and leave, and leave me to, you know, I would clean up and then I would leave. And he said, no, well, he sends the residents on. He said, "You'll never be down here another night by yourself." So he would stay with me then until I got everything cleaned up and, and ready to go. So I, I eked out of that mess. And then after I thought about it, I decided, well, my tenure there was through. I had done everything I could do. But we had, had one lady who had had a PAP smear and it came back flagrantly cancerous. So we went hunting her, trying to find her, and the addresses that they would give you would be the fourth trailer on the third street in Belle Glade, Florida. Well, when, when this--we sent it through the public health system and we couldn't find her. When they finally found her, she was in Texas. She died from the cancer and they were shipping her back to Belle Glade, Florida. And this all happened within--from the end of the growing season to the season of the next year. So the public health system then set up a whole bunch of rules and that, so that we could--when we interviewed, we could get more specific information on how to find these people, where they went, and that kind of thing. So that worked, and I felt really good about that because I felt then that some of the problems that we were having and had had, we would, we'd be okay with it. Story_ID: 60651 Speaker 1: The only other real fight that we had was about the children. And that was that they would take the kids out of the migrant farming community that they had there and put them into the public school system. Then they were supposed to be integrated, you know, but they only stayed part of the season, so what would happen is that they set them aside so that they wouldn't disrupt the classroom. And you'd have to know a little bit about the residents of Hartville [Ohio]. It's a farming community and it was really white, so these black children, you know, being there, became problematic for them. But they eventually got that squared away, too, because I think the government poured some money into it for, for them to take these kids because, see they would come in April and they'd leave like in November, the first of November, the end of October, something like that. So the summer part, there was no school anyway, so it was April and May, and half of June that they were there. And then it was like September and maybe half of November--I mean half of October, maybe all of October, and they'd be gone. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: So it would be disruptive, you know. I could understand that but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, how, how many little kids, those kids ever graduate from school or how did they- Speaker 1: During the time that I was there, I think I saw four young people that graduated. And all four of them went on to college, and I used to hear from them, you know, eventually. There were two, two men and two girls, you know, so- Story_ID: 60652 Speaker 1: That's something, okay. So when you decided to leave that particular job, I guess, there. Now where are we now? What's the- Speaker 2: Well, I went to Stark County [Ohio] Planned Parenthood and helped set up the Planned Parenthood Clinics that they had throughout Starke County, Alliance, Canton, and Bassland (ph.). And I, I helped run those, you know, and get them staffed, and the medications and everything that they needed. And during that period, it was when birth control was first just being really, really touted and talked about. And then, it was an interesting experience 'cause number one, I had five kids. And, of course, you know, by the time the people that came to the clinic found out you had five kids--what (laughter), you know. Yeah, before the pill, B, BP, you know, what can I tell you? But anyway then I left that position for two reasons. The first was that the, they, they started doing abortions. And I, I definitely don't believe in abortion. And I, I have a right, you know, like everybody else to be prolife if you want to, you know. And then, the other reason was this good friend of mine, who had also been one of our bath mates [at People's Hospital nursing school], had a public health job. She had written a grant for the Head Start population, a medical grant, and she needed a nurse to help with the physicals and that. And she, you know, she--well, she said, "Shuler, come on, come on, come on," so I, I went. And I really enjoyed it because then the Federal government and Betty Jo [Davidson] sent me to school down in Cincinnati [Ohio] and I became public health nurse, pediatric nurse practitioner, and I felt pretty special (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: We're going to pause right here. We're going to change tape. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I don't know if you, if you had to leave and I'm like-- Story_ID: 60653 Speaker 1: It was fun, yeah. The, the person who employed me, she worked for the public health department here [Akron, Ohio]. Her name is Betty Jo Davidson. She asked me to come to be the nurse on the project. And so, she then was instrumental in getting me into the program. And at the time, they didn't want nurses usurping the physician's role and that's the way they saw us, you know. But in the meantime, we did a lot of travel over the country helping other people set up theirs. Betty Jo [Davidson] would go and I'd go. And sometimes she'd just send me, you know, to go and help other people get their feet on the ground with it. And then, as we wound and the American Nurses Association picked up the fact that they were training nurses or teaching nurses how to do something that was more specific, and they wanted us under their wing. But then they didn't want us under their wing because they said that it should be under, under a college program. And, of course, we were trained--for instance, I went to the one in Cincinnati [Ohio] and was part of the Cincinnati University [Ohio] and it--you had to have a mentor on or, or on the side so it took nine months of- Speaker 2: Okay. We're going to pause, pause one (unclear) syncing, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughing). Speaker 2: Okay. We're rolling again so- Speaker 1: Okay. So I went to Cincinnati University [Ohio] and I had the five children at the time. My husband was very supportive 'cause I would leave home at four, four thirty [4:30] on Monday morning to meet an eight o'clock [8:00] class in Cincinnati which is like two hundred fifty miles. Story_ID: 60654 Speaker 1: Now, now that, that raises an interesting point, too, because when you were working with the migrant workers and working (unclear) and Canton [Ohio], I mean, it took you away from home a lot. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And so, you'd have to have a supportive husband to really- Speaker 2: Oh, wonderful--he was a wonderful guy, yeah, uh-hum. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: It was really funny because the public school system that the kids were in--my daughter was the baby. She was five years old when I started this one. And the teacher called me one day and she said, "Gloria, I think you need to come up and talk to me." So I went and she said, "What's going on at your house?" And I said, "What are you talking about?" "Well, your daughter used to come to school, her hair was so neat." And (laughter), and I told her what was going on. So she said, "Well, bring me a hair brush." So I took her the hair brush and she kept my daughter's hair brushed (laughter). Speaker 1: That's the daddy taking care. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I've been in- Speaker 2: Yeah. But he, he was, he was working the day shift, you know. He'd go at six and he'd get off at two thirty [2:30], but he was home before they got home, but not when they left home in the mornings. It, it was fun. Story_ID: 60655 Speaker 1: Anyway, that lasted--I did that for five years. And we did all the physicals on the Head Start children. There was like about four thousand a year. And the neat part about that is some of those kids still recognized me as the nurse that gave them the shot, you know (laughter). So it was, it was, it's been a really good career. After that, I went to Visiting Nurse Service on a fluke because I sat on their board of directors. And she was having various prob-, problems with money and the budget and that kind of thing. And she wouldn't--outside of a line item to hire a person that she wanted and needed and, you know, called me to--help me, had me help save her butt which we did. We covered her up and, and we got through with that one. And then, my mother and father-in-law both were sick. My father-in-law had just got out of the hospital and he had a decubitus about this size on his coccyx. And the nice little nurse that came to take care of him never touched him. She never turned him over so she never found it. I went then back up to Visiting Nurse Service and I told the director whom I knew that, you know, she had a problem and what the problem was. So she asked me if I would come to work for her. And I--no, I don't want to work, I don't want a job, you know. And so, we walked about it for about three times. And she hired me then as director of ancillary services, which meant that the aides and the [physical therapists] PT's and the [occupational therapists] OT's and all that kind of things were what, where my job was. Well, it was an excellent job and I probably could have retired from it except we got into a push/pull over what I considered racism and she considered ineffectiveness. But what had happened in the town, Barberton [Ohio], we got an inordinate, an inordinate number of cancer cases. So I called our EDP [electronic data processing] department, you know, where they keep all the data and asked her to--for five different diagnoses to give me the diagnoses when they came in--where they were located. And, you know, that kind of thing so I had put up a map, and I put the little pins in the map as I got the diagnosis. Each diagnosis had had a separate color. Well, come to find out, they were doing five times the number of visits in the surrounding area as they were doing in the city. And then in the redlined city, it was even worse than that--it was like thirteen to one, you know, for each diagnosis. And I thought, oh, that's strange, so I went to her and I told her. And she said to me that it was a troubled spot for me to say that because Visiting Nurse Service was not prejudiced. And I told her that the bricks and the mortar weren't, but she had a problem with the nurses on the inside because it certainly couldn't have been that the people who had the most money needed the most visits. So after that, she started marking up every memo or anything that I did with green ink. And I--it, it hurt my feelings (laughter). And I couldn't fight it because I didn't have any ammunition, you know, there was no support system on the inside for it, so what I ended up doing was I left. And I went home and I sat down for a while. And then, I got to thinking about it. And somehow, the other--my stupidity told me that if they can do it, I can do it, too. Story_ID: 60656 Speaker 1: And that's how I started Universal Nursing Service--big, big, big undertaking. First off, I had no money. Secondly, I didn't have the skills that I needed to do it, but I thought I did, okay. I couldn't garner any money because it was during the period even though they said, you know, there was minority money. There was SBA [U.S. Small Business Association] money. There was female money. I was never able to capture any of it. I think I ended up one time with fifty thousand dollars from the SBA [Small Business Administration] that they ran to the bank, and the person at the bank kept saying spend, spend, spend, spend. Well, I didn't want to spend it. I was trying to spread it out, you know, until I could find a, a steady source or collect for the services that we were doing. And she had told the individual who helped me start this business that she'd be astonished if I lasted five years. Well, every five years, I'd send her a note (laughter)--I'm still here (laughter). Speaker 2: Was she astonished that you (unclear)? (Laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). So that's how that all started. It's been a, a huge, huge, huge venture. Three of my five children work for me. Number two son handles our Columbus [Ohio]area. He's a retired Naval, Naval officer. Number three son is an accountant so he's our, our CFO [chief financial officer]. Number four son has a degree in business so he's the COO [chief operating officer]. My daughter has two degrees. Both of them are in business. She--her Master's is from Case Western Reserve [University, Ohio]. And I'm trying to lure her back into the business, but I think she's having much too much fun, you know, doing what she's doing, you know, 'cause the last night we celebrated our twentieth anniversary by the ship. And she's in Aruba (laughter) relaxing from this big thing that she did there last week. So that's where we are. So out of our five children, we have six degrees which is very good so far as I'm concerned. We didn't lose any other children to drugs or jail. The first house that we lived in, there were forty boys in this block. And each one of as mothers, there were about five of us, we each had a different weapon that we'd paddle them on the butt with a ruler or a pancake turner or wooden spoon, you know, something like that. And they never told who hit, who got hit that, there--who (laughter) hit him, but they still all come back, you know, and visit us, you know. As a matter of fact, half of them were on the boat last night, you know. So it's been, it's been a phenomenal journey. And actually, if--my husband's been sick now, he has Alzheimer's and he's been sick for about eight and a half, nine, almost ten years. And it, without that, I mean I could say that life has been absolutely perfect for me, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So all of the obstacles and racism and segregation and that you run into, I think my parents provided us with a link and a, a philosophy of living that has served us well. And, hopefully, that's what I'm passing on or have passed on to my children and to their associates. Story_ID: 60657 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what is it exactly that you all do and, and what's the scope of it? I mean how, what, what territory do y'all go? Speaker 2: We cover Cleveland [Ohio], Akron [Ohio]--Akron's the home office and Columbus [Ohio]. And we have--approximately two hundred forty workers are individuals who work in the company and we do all kinds of home care. We go from skilled nursing services to the therapies, you know. There's physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, social work, the nursing assistants, homemaking, and companionship. Those are the services. And the thrust of the program is to keep people in their homes. So we, we have--we're Medicare certified, Medicaid certified. And the, the other programs like this--a passport program is funded by the State of Ohio. Then we do MRDD, the mentally retarded. We do that program and that's an interesting one because what we end up doing is, you know, like they have them in--these individuals live in their own homes or are fostered out. If they go to school early and they need a bath or something to get on the bus, we go and we get them on the bus. And then at the end of the day, we'll get them off the bus and bathe them into the bed with their evening meal and thing like that. We do that. Most of our population is the elderly population now, and such a need because, you know, that you hear about the sandwich generation. And you take care of--you find the individuals, you know, the buppies, yuppies are here in the middle and they have their parents, and then their kids, you know. And so there they are trying to keep the whole thing flowing. The thing that is--has changed the most, I think, is the number of people that they put into nursing homes because of the work schedule and the women being out of the home. But you still don't find it as prevalent in the black community as you do in the other major society, you know, the number- Speaker 1: So you're, you're saying in the black community, people are placed in homes more? Speaker 2: No, they, they stay at home more. Speaker 1: Stay at home more? Speaker 2: More, uh-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What, since the industry has changed though and, and there's not nearly as many people that have good insurance coverage, you can almost see that population, you know, the, my father's generation that they're dying and have died out, they had good insurance coverage. So they would--they had an adequate way to be taken care of. Now the next generation is struggling, and the generation after that will struggle even more because there's very little insurance to cover those kinds of things. Story_ID: 60658 Speaker 1: Okay. What do you think are the, okay, what do you think are the number one health concerns of the black community right now, the problem- Speaker 2: I think the diet and exercise have a lot to do with what, what we're seeing, that you know, that the diagnoses for deaths in women are cardiac related, they say. We have lots of hypertension, just lots and lots and lots of hypertension--men, women, and even down to children now, you know. We have diabetes in prodigious amounts. Then obesity, you know, and you see so many young people that had, looked they had, they would have morbid obesity, you know, they're so large, so much overweight. And I would imagine that eventually, the weight charts are going to change, you know, because of the style of living has changed. And it's--most of it is the way we eat, you know, 'cause everybody likes fast foods. And I think that some of the fast foods have more cholesterol and, you know, carbs than we would ever need to subsist off. Nobody cooks anymore, you know, very few people cook. Speaker 1: Do you think there's sort of a, a level of really not, not knowing what to eat? I mean are people just, just eating what's convenient and that's what- Speaker 2: That's what I think a lot of it is but I'm not sure that we don't know. I think that there's less knowledge, you know, because it used to be you had the seven basic foods. Now they have four food groups, you know (laughter). And it, it covers the same amount of things. But it's just like a diabetic diet, you know, you, you have a specific diet that you can put a diabetic on. That will actually help them control their diabetes. And they, they can't stick to it or don't stick on it, or whatever this mental thing is about, you know, sort of like not smoking. People who smoke have a hard time quitting. Now is it because they're addicted, or is it because their mindset tells them, you know? And diabetes, since it is so pervasive in our community, I think it's very rarely, really understood because the, the what controls your diabetes is just a little tip of the pancreas that's called the Islets of Langerhans, and that's where all of the insulin and everything is produced. Well, when you know when you say you got diabetes, well, no, we got sugar. And it's carbohydrates that turn to sugar, you know, rather than pure sugar itself. So I think it's a level of understanding that we have about some of these things. And then, that cholesterol thing, you know, with, with the veins and the heart, very few people understand that there's two kinds of cholesterol, the good one and the bad one. And they're go, well, my cholesterol isn't high because it's only--and then they, when you stop if you could really could take a look at what the, what's printed, you'd see that their good cholesterol is fine. The bad cholesterol is the one that's out of control, but they don't know the difference or even how to control it. So I think that we have a big job to do, you know, so far as educating the community. And we need to start down here and change the eating habits of the kids, but it's like the TVs are the babysitters, and the fast food places are the nutritional needs or where they're filled, you know--McDonalds and a hamburger or a cheeseburger and fries and a milk shake and, you know, all that once a week maybe. But other than that, they need a cooked meal. And, ironically, if the meals were prepared, the money that they spend taking five kids to one of the fast food places, they could buy a week's worth of groceries, but it's vogue to eat out. Speaker 1: That's right. And kids put pressure on those. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: It's what they see on television- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and what other kids telling them. Yeah, it's a, it's a- Speaker 2: It's Catch-22. Speaker 1: Yeah. To get beyond that popular culture conception of what you ought to eat, you've got to have some kind of special information coming into the community. Speaker 2: Right. And, you know, they put a big drive on that hypertensive effort, you know. They set up a, a whole national committee to tackle that problem and went into the churches on Sunday mornings and tested people and, you know, gave out information and all of it. And I'm not, I haven't seen a recent study on how effective they thought that was, but if, if it works for that, it should be able to work for nutrition, too, because some of those things are boring, you know. People say, oh, that's boring. I don't want to be bothered with that. True, but it's lifesaving also. So now, is it boring to save your life? Speaker 1: Uh-hum, yeah. People get real interested in that when their life is in jeopardy- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --when the life of their loved ones are in jeopardy. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And that's bad duty, you know, that is the kind of duty that if you don't have to do it, you'd rather stay away from it, you know. But, again, none of us are on the committee for life and death, so you play it as it's dealt to you, you know. Story_ID: 60659 Speaker 1: So now, what you, what do you see in, in the immediate future for yourself, and how long do you think you're going to continue with the company? You've got your children involved so it probably will go on for- Speaker 2: Well, actually, it has been so rewarding. If it's been so rewarding because not only have I had an opportunity to watch them grow up and their minds develop, I'm watching them develop as business people. And their analytical skills, you know, becoming top notch, and their care for me, you know, is sorta like when are we going--now, now wait a minute, when are we going to change roles? Well, I don't know if I'm ready yet (laughter). How'd you know? And I really am and I don't work every day any more, you know. The thing that has been a wonderment is that, you know, being born and reared and educated in this area, I get lots of phone calls, you know. And, and the phone call will be, "Gloria, I hate to bother you and particularly this time of evening or night, but your worker came to see me, and this is what she did." Well, tell me about it. And when you want to say call the office and tell the supervisor, you know, and I find myself still being totally involved in that kind of thing because, you know, your reputation is your business. And we have a reputation of doing good care, you know. Even the, the governmental agencies tell us that we're one of the best in the area for the care that we provide and I--that's why I'd like to leave it. And that's the legacy that I would like to see the kids have to work on, you know. It's difficult being disassociated because most people, when they think of Universal Nursing Service, they think of Gloria, you know. Now I'm getting more and more feedback about oh, the boys are involved, you know. Oh, your children are involved. Well, how do you think they're going to do? That is one query. The other comments that I get about it is they really are lucky kids. They walked into a gold mine because of you, you know, that kind of thing. And, really, if you stop and think about it, we're the only black surviving home health agency in northeast Ohio. Now I understand that there are a couple that are, that are trying, you know, that are coming along. But two, three years ago, when Medicare did the big change, there were ten thousand home health care agencies in the United States of America. They wiped out three thousand in a matter of months which left two-thirds standing. And I just feel very fortunate that we, we made it through the, the tough time. I attribute that to our good financial standing, you know. My, my son is the CFO--as a graduate of Cal State, L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles], and just knows the rules forward and backward, upside down and around, and has been really a bulwark in keeping us, you know, right there, you know, telling you what strategies to employ to do, to get any job done. And we came close because we went into bankruptcy, Chapter 11, at one point. And it was his suggestion that we do it rather than just sit there and sink, you know. What--because what happened is that the--when Medicare went crazy, they withheld all the funds, and they owed us a big chunk of monies. Then there for a minute, we didn't think we were even going to make payroll, but as God would have it, you know, we, we made it through that. But I've done unusual things, some creative financing because at one point, we owned everything. The next point, I own nothing, you know, one of those kinds of thing where we--but it was good that, that we had foresight enough to buy real estate, particularly at the time we were doing it when my husband was well, so that we had a hedge. But when we started buying it, it was not a hedge for the business. It was a hedge against Social Security, but it turned out to be the hedge for business because we refinanced to, to stay afloat. And that's what kept us there, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Immediate future, I would love to--fantasy. I would love to have a Lexis convertible and I would love to travel around and see all my old crony friends (laughter), and come home, say about April or May, and stay until the weather got hot in July, and take off again. That, that would be (laughter) fantasy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I won't (laughter). Speaker 1: I don't know if you got a lot of time left but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a kind, caring person that did well with the community and gave back. Speaker 1: Okay. I think that's highly likeable and thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome very much. I enjoyed it and thank you for having me. I'm an icon (laughter)..