 Story_ID: 599125 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Alice Randall. I was born Mari-Alice Randall. M-A-R-I hyphen A-L-I-C-E, Randall, R-A-N-D-A-L-L. I was married first to Avon N. Williams [Avon Williams, III] and at that point, I was known as Mari-Alice Williams. I'm now married to [HistoryMaker] David Ewing. So, I'm sometimes known as Alice Randall Ewing, but having married twice, I now call myself Alice Randall. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], May 4th, Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I like to refer to as Detroit, Alabama (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, I was going to ask you about that. And it, it is true that Detroit is a terminus for Alabama in a lot of ways. A lot of Alabama residents there. Do you have any idea how man- what percentage is Alabama? Speaker 2: No, I can only say that when I was a small child in Detroit in 19--born in '59 [1959], the early '60s [1960s], almost everybody I knew was from Alabama in the part of Detroit, in--on the blocks in which my [paternal] grandparents [Georgia Litsey Randall and William Randall] lived. Speaker 1: Okay, that--that sounds about right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a writer, a novelist and a professor at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee]. I am also a song writer, and a screenwriter, I'm writing a screenplay right now. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: You're gonna have to tell me. It's Saturday (laughter), I think it's Saturday, March 17th, is that correct. Speaker 1: Seventeenth, yeah I think it is, 17th. And the year is? Speaker 2: Is 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time. You don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: Oh, we're in Nashville, Tennessee near Vanderbilt University. Actually near the site of the victorious Battle of Nashville where black soldiers joined with the Union troops and defeated the Confederate Army. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 599126 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Cornbread madeleines. It's a food item I invented. It's cornbread, yellow cornbread, cooked in a madeleine mold, like (unclear) madeleines because they bring me back to Detroit [Michigan], Alabama when I eat them. I--my little tiny shell shaped cornbreads take me back to the skillet cornbread my [paternal] grandfather [William Randall] made for me as a little girl. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black and white. I almost always wear black. I'm wearing a green sweater for you all today, but I almost--I've been wearing black for about twenty years (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, do, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I have to say spring, I like the beginnings. There's a lot of me that's Persephone-like, so I like the rebirth and the incorporation of death of winter with the hope of rebirth in spring. So maybe as I'm getting older, winter is a more (unclear) time of redemption, rebirth when things seem to be fallow, but aren't. So, I'm probably moving to winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. I'm sort of beyond vacations in the sense. I love being able to work, having been a mommy most of my life, I have to defer a lot of--and a wife, a lot of the work I wanted to--I've done a lot of work, but deferred a lot of work. I've had a chance to travel to--spend a lot of time in the southwest of France and I loved that. I like islands. I've been to Chile and I've seen a lot of the world, but I now like to stay home more. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do the hard right thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It may be sugared through. I like life that is sugared through, not sugared over. Story_ID: 599127 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna you ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George Randall] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: To the best of my ability. My mother was a very obscure woman, so I can say much less about her than can say about my father's family. My mother's name to the best of my knowledge was born as Bettie Branahn [Bettie Randall Reilly]. I'm not actually sure of the spelling of it. The spelling I believe to be true is B-R-A-N-A-H-N, I believe. She was born in Ironton, Ohio, December 5th, 1937, to the best of my knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay, December 5th, 1937? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How--how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: It is completely obscure. I'm working on it in a new book right now. So, I can only say that what I have been told is that her father was--name was Homer Branahn [ph.] and her mother's name was, last name was Leathers [ph.]. I am not even certain as to what, probably Laretha [ph.], I am not certain of the spelling. My mother's mother died when my mother was five, which is why there is so much obscurity or in fact, before my mother was five. And her father either died or disappeared at that time. She always described her parents, her mother as having been black and her father as having been white. I've reason to believe now actually, they were both, and this is only reason to believe, I am not certain of this, but they may both have been largely Native American, one being more of a dark skinned Native American, one a light skinned Native American. There is a period in history of Virginia and West Virginia where they, after the First World War [World War I, WWI], designated for [U.S.] Army--for the purpose of the [U.S.] military and drafting people, light skinned Indians were put as white, Ws, and dark skinned Indians were put as Ns, I think were Negro or colored at the time, and they took out the I designation. They had had an I designation. And they sort of divi- and they sort of--and they divided them that way in the public schools. But I am not certain of that, and I can just say it was my mother's, you know, her name was Bettie Branahn. You know, and she claimed it was spelled B-E-T-T-I-E, I am not certain that was the original spelling and that it wasn't originally B-E-T-T-Y. Once she gets to Farmington, Michigan I have more specific information about what happened to her there. Story_ID: 599128 Speaker 1: Okay. Did, so, did she grow up in Ironton [Ohio] or did she grow up in Farmington? Speaker 2: She grew up in Farmington, Michigan. She was--she had foster parents called the Jackson [ph.] family, Mr. and Mrs. Jackson. And she grew up in Farmington, Michigan and she--do you want any more information on her right now? Speaker 1: Yeah, now, she--you're saying that her mother died ear- early (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When she was about five, yeah, approaching five. Speaker 1: --and so, so who were the Jacksons, were they? Speaker 2: They were really interesting. They were a light skinned black family. And I only define them being light skinned, they were the only--at the time that they were living in Farmington, Michigan I believe they were the only black family in Farmington, Michigan and I'm not certain that the neighbors knew they were a black family. They perceived themselves very strongly as being a black family. As a result, my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] actually went to a German Lutheran school and she was the only black child at that school. Again, I am not sure to what degree the sch- other people were aware of her as being a black child. And it was--it's the only German Lutheran school in Farmington at the time and I will try to think of the name of it. It's saint something another. But it was a German Lutheran school at that time in Farmington, Michigan and she went there through the eighth grade. And the Jacksons were wonderful. I did get a chance to meet Mr. Jackson personally on one occasion. And in that, he was a, a postal carrier, which was a pretty--and he was involved in a lot of civil rights or things of civil rights in Detroit [Michigan] and he had been a former Negro League baseball player. So he was very much a man with a lot of self-determination. And they did interesting things such as take in black children who were not wanted. This--my mother was a foster child. They were not paid for or anything at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so she, she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, they were a really interesting family. Speaker 1: So, she--was she in an orphanage or something or, or a ward of the state or anything? Speaker 2: Well, she was--I think it happened almost immediately. So, she would have been an orphan. She was--although I have had reason to believe that perhaps the father [Homer Branahn (ph.)] didn't actually die. I've been told for years that both of them died at--around the time she was four or five, which I assumed in a plane--I mean a car crash or something, some kind of accident. But her mother actually died in as, as it appears, at least, in Detroit. Her mother died in Detroit and I don't have a record--I've not been able to track down her father with a lot of effort on my part. Speaker 1: There's something happened that was traumatic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Something very traumatic happened-- Speaker 1: --that separated her away from-- Speaker 2: --at, at that moment. And so she was raised with the Jacksons. And they were so of the other extreme because they were this very black chi- family that could not have any children. They claimed whether or not it was true that they came from a background it was Farmington, Michigan that from blacks who had immigrated to Canada before the Civil War, you know, escaped to freedom. They claimed they're descendent, in which I have no reason to believe that it's not true. That they claim their decadency from blacks who had been on the Underground Railroad, got to Canada and then came back within the United States as far as Michigan after the Civil War, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, she had that story in her background. That was an interesting story. And the Jacksons, I think that was an interesting hard thing, because she was in this very Calvinistic environment, this all-white Calvinistic environment. The opposite of the Zora Neale Hurston environment, literally, she did not know any other black people until she, except for the Jacksons, until she got to be their family in the ninth or tenth grade, when she was moved into Detroit to live by the State of Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did, did she leave the Jackson family then to go to (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she was taken from the Jackson family because some social worker in their non-infinite wisdom decided that her environment was not like a good preparation for being a black person in America. And they decided to put her--and they took her out of this family, the only family she knew, I mean just virtually overnight against the will of the Jacksons. And put her in an inner city Detroit school where she had a lot of trouble. Speaker 1: Hm, that's sad. Speaker 2: And it was just going from a totally rural, I mean they were living on a farm, you know, where she walked wherever--from a totally rural to a--she was born in '37 [1937] so this would've been about 1950, you know, to a, you know, urban inner city environment where I think she had a lot of adjustment problems. Story_ID: 599129 Speaker 1: Now was she--did she finish high, high school in Detroit [Michigan] then? Speaker 2: Um-hm. She finished high school. She graduated from high school and she went to work for Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company] as one of the first African American telephone operators. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she had an excellent--she was actually val- I believe, valedictorian or salutatorian and I have a picture of that somewhere of her, the white private school class, eighth grade, very smart, an outstanding student. Speaker 1: She went to a private school in Detroit? Speaker 2: In the Farmington, Michigan. In the--remember the, the--it was--it was a--the Lutheran school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Farmington, oh okay. Right, the--right, okay. So when she was in Detroit-- Speaker 2: She was at public school. Speaker 1: Which one did she graduate from? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. It was--the whole Detroit experience was extremely traumatic to her. She never talked about it very much. Speaker 1: Okay. But she ended up working for Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company]--did, did-- Speaker 2: Detroit, no, no, Michigan Bell. Speaker 1: I mean, yeah, Michigan. I'm sorry. I'm a Chicagoan for thirty years. But did she any--get a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: Not at that time. She started, and I think she eventu- 'cause if you remember, she has no parents, she is estranged from the Jacksons [ph.] at that point because of this total disruption of being kidnapped and the, you know, the Jacksons were extremely Lutheran and puritanical, and so life in Detroit was a much wilder thing. And so even any sort of taint of this Detroit world, at least in the short time as my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] perceived it made her unacceptable to the Jacksons. They didn't like her friends and et cetera. So, by the time she was graduating from high school, she really had no support and was on her own at the age of eighteen. And got this--was lucky--fortunate enough to get a job and went to support herself. But she did get to college and she eventually had a master's degree and she ended up being a political scientist in Washington, D.C. (unclear), I can tell you some quick so. She did--she ended graduating getting her undergraduate degree as when it came from Howard University in Washington, D.C. and she ended up getting a graduate degree from Howard University in Washington D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 599130 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: George Stanley Randall [George Randall]. George, J--G-E-O-R-G-E, Stanley, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y, Randall, R-A-N-D-A-L-L. But they're all standard spellings. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: And he was born May 25th, 1929. Speaker 1: And was he born in Detroit [Michigan] or? Speaker 2: No, my father was born near Selma, Alabama. He was born at home, so it's been very hard to determine exactly where this is because it was not (laughter)--it's not--it was not in a town. It was in acres of some fields that are not well measured, because I've gone back there. But, he was born near Selma, Alabama in 1929, May 25th, to Georgia Minnie Randall [Georgia Litsey Randall] and William Randall, my grandparents. Speaker 1: And, I'm sorry, what was his grandf- father's name, I mean his father's name? Speaker 2: Was William Randall. Speaker 1: William Randall. Okay, yeah. What do you know about the ancestors on his side, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, I can actually trace them relatively very far back on my father's father's side. On my father's mother's side, I don't have very much, except to know that my grandmother, Georgia Minnie, who I called Dear, D-E-A-R, that her father was white and his last name was Litsey, L-I-T-S-E-Y, I believe, and her mother was black and that her parents were actually in a committed relationship and she was raised by her mother and father. And she has, you know, stories of her father teaching her to tie her shoe and various things like that. And so she perceived that, and my grandfather was a descendent of Edmund Pettus, and that's probably actually more than I want to go into in this particular interview. But he is a direct relation of Edmund Pettus and he wa- they both were mixed race with one immediate white parent and one immediate black parent. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a descent of the Confederate General Ed- Edmund Pettus. Speaker 2: For whom the Selma bridge was named after. Speaker 1: The Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], the famous bridge, the bridge on the Bloody Sunday massacre of Ap- of 1965, yeah. Speaker 2: Or '63 [1963] I think. Speaker 1: Sixty-- Speaker 2: Was it '65 [1965], it's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was '65 [1965], yeah. Edmund Pettus Bridge, right. Yeah, so he was-- Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, you know, we don't hear much-- Speaker 2: I think forty-third year, that was my three (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, it is--it's a very--I was, of course, alive and remember well the day that the march occurred and--across the bridge, and it was just so painful for my father, the complexity of that being--we'll skip to him in a mo- eventually, but my father was a Malcolm X loving, black power radical (laughter) and a--he was a very interesting man, you know, a supporter of the fir- I guess the second temple that was in Detroit from the very beginning, I mean my. And so he had no time of day for his white relations and ancestors. I will be able to tell you a little bit about that. So, what he said, he went back to Alabama very few times. In my lifetime, he did not go back to Alabama until after I graduated from college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], from the time I was born. And it's unclear how many times, I'm not sure my father went back down to Alabama more than two or three times from the time he left when he was thirteen years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, well-- Speaker 2: He hated--he--I've dealt with this in my own novels. For a long time I believe my father was a racist man. People argue as to whether or not black people can be racist. But, I will note that his racism began in personal particular with his animosity towards his white relations who had so mistreated his own father and his family when he was young, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 599131 Speaker 1: So he would be descended from a, a-- Speaker 2: Confederate general. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear), I mean, but he would be descendant of a--of a son or a grandson of Edmund Pettus or? Speaker 2: Well it is obscure, which is why I don't wanna, since this is a historical document, there are questions about this. It is what I have been told over and over and over, and you have to remember they were living down there. And my [paternal] grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall] actually did repeatedly, who I knew very, very well, and I just looked at a postcard today that she sent me from Selma [Alabama] in '61 [1961], '63 [1963]. She would go back every summer on the plane. Not every summer, but once they got prosperous enough for her to go back by alone by plane, she would do that. And they claimed absolutely and truly that my grandfather was the son of Edmund Pettus, which I actually have reason to believe is accurate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But is not, but and when--'cause Edmund Pettus I don't believe died until 1907 or '06 [1906]. My grandfather was born in the 1880s. And by that time, his family, you know, he had a grown family and a da- whi- and the son of Edmund Pettus and his housekeeper is the story that I've been told. Speaker 1: Okay, so, William Randall is a (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it--so it's just a odd generational--you would think that--obviously Edmund Pettus was a young man in the Civil War, though he was a general. He did die in Washington, D.C. in 19--what '06 [1906] or '07 [1907]. So, my grandfather was born in the 1880s. So, it--the, the story they told me I have no reason to believe that it's not true. And they were living in a small town. And my grandfather, I can show you a picture, I mean, they, you know, were a black family with no essentially, no source of income really down there and they owned land and they had a brick house and a car, and et cetera. So, clearly the Pettus Ran- Randall families funded my grand- my grandfather as long as he stayed in Alabama. So, they were acknowledging--they acknowledged the general family relationship. They have, in my opinion, I'm not--and they have--when I've tr- you know, written to them directly and tried to discuss it with them before all the DNA possibilities, and of course you. They have re- not responded to any of my letters. So, it's not that I've--I mean, I've written them as long as twenty some years ago, twenty-five years ago and extensive letters. But, my father [George Randall] was a, you know, very, very smart man who had gone down there and I think he knew. And my own grandfather, I think they knew who. And my white friends from Selma say that within the quote, unquote white world of Selma who go back there, that everyone in fact absolutely acknowledged that my grand- who my grandfather was. Does that make sense--I mean that it was known. Speaker 1: Yeah, these are--these are the dramatic ironies of the South (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And if you--if you--yeah, as they say that my grandfa- as they said it'd be hard to denounce it 'cause he looked like he had spit him out so to speak. But then that man was--had died so much--you know, long--so much earlier. And I think to protect the general's name, they always said it was one of the other, like the son or the grandson, they changed it around a little bit 'cause they didn't want this Confederate hero who died in the [U.S.] Senate have his name besmirched. Speaker 1: So, yeah the dramatic irony of the South, that's, you know. Story_ID: 599132 Speaker 1: So, so your father [George Randall] didn't really car- care to dip into that very much. But-- Speaker 2: Well, it was--and it wasn't he was ashamed of it, he was just angered by them. I mean, he was angered by the fact that my--when my grandfather [William Randall] died one of the stories that--I'm a writer and novelist, you've got--you know, the kind of record I can give you is everything I, I will tell you everything as I know it to be true, but I think about things in a more impressionistic way. The story that strikes me strongest is when my father di- my grandfather died. One of his white relations, it's unclear as to which of them it was, because as--you find this in other southern black families unfortunately, people--you have a daughter with one child and then have a child with her child, not acknowledging this is really their ha- her--their--her child forgetting that that's a child that they made all those years before because her--their name is not on the birth certificate. So people are double--can become doubly related. But my father, when his--when some of my grandfather's white relations wrote at the time of his death, my father burnt up those letters in front of me. 'Cause he read it to me and then he set it on fire. Read it in front of me, because he said, 'cause one of those people who wrote was now a federal judge, a white federal judge. And he--and this was at a time--yeah I remember the day my relatives could vote for the first time. He said he was not going to let the literate relations records stand when it could be all full of lies, when my grandfather could not read or write his name to tell his story. And he said that because he was not going to privilege the words on paper that record which could be full of lies. It's like the time I went with Grandma Bontemps, Alberta Bontemps [Alberta Johnson Bontemps], for whom Langston Hughes named Alberta Johnson poems, that was--Alberta Johnson was her maiden name. And they essentially some very young person stood right in front of me and said that, "You've never been born to Alberta," because there's no--when she was born in Georgia, they used to--this person was young enough they didn't realize there was actually--you, you could go to another set of records, they didn't give birth certificates to black babies in Georgia in the county in which she was born at the time. And this woman is essentially--here's this old lady sitting in front of them that's had three passports and she is saying as far as we're concerned--'cause they computerized the records, you were never born in the State of Geo- she's just absolutely certain that my grandmother essentially had never--I mean not my grandmother, my daughter's [Caroline Randall Williams] great-grandmother had never been born. My grandmother-in-law. She sig- said you've nev- (laughter) and she really had to school her on that fact, you know, that--luckily I have been able to find my father's family in the census records from 1937 on and from the early--I mean from the 1930 census on. You know, my father was even--not even one yet, he's in the census so that's nice. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 599133 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this--it seems since you're a writer and involved in literary things, I just can't help but ask you are you--are you related to Dudley Randall in anyway? Speaker 2: No I'm not. Who is the wonderful figure in the Detroit [Michigan] literary renaissance. But as far as I know, I am not related to Dudley Randall in any way. I'd love to be related to Dudley Randall, if anyone finds out how. But I don't think we are or I would've known it, because considering that my family was active in Detroit and he was active in Detroit. My father's [George Randall] family in Detroit were not all involved with literature or anything of the sort. My fa- grandfather [William Randall] came to Detroit with his family, you know, six children and he started dry cleaning in a bathtub. He was (laughter) one of the first black dry cleaners in Detroit. And he was a successful man, bought a house and had a certain amount of prosperity of his own, but in total street businesses, you know, dry cleaning, a little bit of real estate. My aunt moved into owning, you know, a sort of small fleet of cabs, maybe six, seven, nine cabs, et cetera. They were, you know, business people in Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan], small store owners, drugstore owners. They became relatively successful, but they were not remotely. As I told you, neither my grandm- my grandfather could not read or write a word legibly to the day he died. That's true. I mean, he had to have has rea- mail read to him. And you know, he would hit the one cent key on his cash register and made, you know, became a prosperous man but he couldn't add and subtract. He could make change they would say by laying the money out in someone's hand and looking them in the eye if the person knew the right change. He was a great reader of people. Story_ID: 599134 Speaker 1: So, now, now your father [George Randall], now he, he learned to read--he, he, he had a chance to go to school, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my father, according to the stories I've been told, he was born in 1929. He came up to Detroit [Michigan] when he was about--approximately thirteen years old, which would be about '42 [1942]. He went to Miller High School [Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan] eventually. He played for Will Robinson (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On the east side, yeah. Speaker 2: He was one of the first, if not the first, I believe it's the first black team to win, I think, the Michigan state championship basketball. Speaker 1: Oh, your--he played basketball for? Speaker 2: For Will, Will Robinson, the big famous black--I mean coach. In fact, he--last time I looked he was still a coach emeritus for the Pistons [Detroit Pistons]. Yeah, you know, he made it to the big time. But he--my father--you can imagine back in those days Michigan '42 [1942], the first black team. They did not get any breaks from the coaches when they were trying to play (laughter)--when, you know, east side Detroit high school is trying to win the Michigan state championship. But, so--but my father had, he claimed when he was thirteen years old, had never worn a pair of shoes until he came north. They stopped in, actually in New York on the way and when he came to Detroit. So he went--got thrown into high school. He'd barely gone to school down in Alabama. None of them have, because my grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall] said they beat the black kids so bad in the school that she wouldn't--couldn't send her children. And there were no--no one was concerned with some black person not sending their child to a school in Dallas County [Alabama] in the 1930s, and so they didn't go to school. But my father went to high school and graduated, I can show you a picture, you know, four years later in a tuxedo quoting Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and did go down to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] for about a year, he didn't stay down there at all which is-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened at Morris Brown? Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting story. He didn't really, you know, they had been oddly poor for so long down in Alabama, no shoes, no whatever. They got up to grand- Detroit, my grandfather [William Randall] was actually doing really well. As my father said, he was used to having a pocketful of money and a car. And when he'd go down to Morris Brown on the train from Detroit to Alabama and it literally become physically segregated during the (gesture) at some point and the--they get to and they would have to go and be in the black car and go back there. He said he just couldn't do it. And they couldn't eat anywhere. He said I'm used to--I mean, literally, I'm used to having a pocketful of money and driving a Cad- my fath- a Cadillac car and I'm down here, can't even eat at a lunch--he just wasn't seeing the longer picture, he said he couldn't do it. I think he'd just been so short a time in his freedom land, four years that. So, he joined the [U.S.] Army, that's what he did. Then came back into business with his father and brothers. And you know, by the time I was born when he was thirty, he was a prosperous businessman and I was, you know, in a private black kindergarten and then, you know, accepted to be the first black child in one of the top private schools in Detroit at the time, so. Story_ID: 599135 Speaker 1: Is there a story that's told about how your parents [Bettie Randall Reilly and George Randall] met? Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) there is. Now, you have to be totally serious and I will have to--is that there is a story and I'll tell you that story. My mother and I have extremely a strange relationship and I do perceive her as being--it's not a hap- this is--I think that something happened in that one--whatever happened zero through five and the trauma of the vanishing parents. Whatever happened in this sort of being this black person, acknowledged and unacknowledged black in this all-white town [Farmington, Michigan] where there was no other black people in this all-white school, and then coming into the inner city Detroit [Michigan] where, where she is first encountering blackness and it was just such a different--where people thought she was snobby and stuck up, and she spoke, you know, with a German, Lutheran, Canadian accent. She was not an easy woman, whether she was born that way or life made her that way by the time she had me at twenty-one, twenty-two, but I'll get to this, but the story. So, I will just say that I don't really care to talk that--that much about her 'cause I don't fundamentally understand her after giving a great deal of thought. I have a lot of love and compassion for her, but I think she is a--she and we are extremely strong story of how foster, the foster care system can be so vicious and the viciousness has echoes of generation. That the viciousness of taking her away from the Jacksons [ph.] and putting her in--trying to micromanage what her what her experience of being black should be, breaking all these love bonds for someone who had already had the love bonds broken once was hard. But, all that said, the story of my parents meeting is--my mother was working for Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company]-- Story_ID: 599136 Speaker 1: Okay, the story of how your parents met? Speaker 2: How my parents met. My mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was working for Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company] and so she would take the bus back and forth to work. And her bus stop was right across the street from where my [paternal] grandfather [William Randall] had one of h- had his dry cleaners. And every day my father [George Randall] would see this really pretty woman, he said, standing at the bus stop. He'd try to talk to her and she would pay no attention to him whatsoever. But one day, he--some guys were sort of hitting on her, trying to talk to her at the bus stop, so when he said something, she spoke back to him to--'cause she--and she said he was the richest, handsomest man she knew, so she married him. And that is exactly what happened. And he basically--it's interesting, he thoug- he thought she was very externally beautiful. And so he saw her standing at a bus stop and kept on trying to speak to her until she--he spoke to her, she spoke to him. Speaker 1: Okay now, how--when was--when, when did they get married? Speaker 2: I was born in '59 [1959], I don't think they actually got married to probably '62 [1962] and I think they got together--but they have been together for two to three years, they had been living together for two to three years before that. Speaker 1: Oh before you were, okay. Speaker 2: And so, now I think people perceived them as being married from about '57 [1957]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I'm not sure they actually got married or whether they decided for something, some question, some issue or something that they had another, but I--and I've never seen their actual wedding certificate. But it was--they'd been together, living together and committed. Most people think they were married from '57 [1957]. I had some reason later--it could've been just something was lost and they got a replacement record because she lost something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I'm not, so, so. They have been together for several years before and living together be- and their family thought they were married before I was born. I was very much a planned child. There was an interesting story about that too, so. Speaker 1: Well, what is it, if it's interesting? Speaker 2: Well, it was an interesting story that--actually that my father didn't really want another child. He was thirty, she was about twenty-two or twenty-three, she was seven years younger. Speaker 1: Did he have children already? Speaker 2: He--yes, he di- did. I have a half-brother and a half-sister. And he wanted her to have an abortion, but in fact she didn't want to have an abortion, and so they agreed. He always said that--that he didn't even want to go to the hospital to see the baby and they got the one first little picture of me and he said the guy at the bar said, "It looked like your lady laid with a chink," which was a very racist comment to make. But he said then when he went upstairs to see me he fell in love (laughter). But I love--what I like about that story is that I asked my father what did he think the day I was born, and he said to me, "Do you want me to tell you the truth," and I said, "Yes," and then he told me the truth. He said, "I wasn't happy." But he said, "Then when I saw--," then he told me--he told me that whole story and then he said, "But when, you know, I saw you I fell in love." And what's interesting is my father who didn't want the child was the one who became besotted with being a parent. My mother absolutely wanted a child and it was sort of risked breaking up the relationship to have a child, you know, sort of had a child he didn't want. I think by the time I was two or three years old, was way over having a baby, you know, that she was no--and she was never to have another child. She said she thought she was interested in being a mother and she pretty much realized she didn't want to be one. Story_ID: 599137 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely my father [George Randall] and his mother [Georgia Litsey Randall]. My father was--'cause he was a passionate, he was one of the greatest writers I have ever known. He just never wrote anything down, he's an amazing storyteller. And when I was older and I was living in Washington, D.C., my parents broke up when I was about in the third grade [at Greenfield Peace Lutheran School, Detroit, Michigan]. We would just sit up in a hotel whether he was visiting me in Det- Washington or I'd go up to Detroit [Michigan] or--and--he would regale me with stories from his [U.S.] Army days to the present to, you know, going on the trains down, when he was going down to training. And he said that these big, you know, black Army guys would start to cry in the middle of the night when they go below the Mason-Dixon Line and they realize they were back in the segregation world. You could just--according to him, you could hear weeping on the train in the dark of the night. And then it--on the other side, so he said you stop in Detroit, everyone's gambling and drinking and playing cards and talking about how the fun they had from Detroit to Chicago [Illinois], and then it started going down. And he said by the time it was dark, people were sleeping and they knew they were going back down, I don't it was fort--wherever it was, that he said literally you could hear weeping in the night. But he was a great--he was a great storyteller and I think I take after him. He was also an amazing parent. And they were, the whole family were a great family people. When I grew--was in college--well my parents separated when I was in third grade. My father would write to me, I have all these letters that he wrote to me. All the way through I was in college, he would call me. He could tell you the names of my fourth and fifth grade best friends and the other people in the class. When I was--this very street black guy from Detroit, but I was reading Jane Austen novels to write my thesis on it, my father was reading Jane Austen novels. He did it all in his own way. He came up to Detroit in his shiny--I mean to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for my graduation, his shiny suits, his bl- . You know, he came to when my daughter [Caroline Randall Williams] was born, to Arna Bontemps' house in his red Detroit mohair golf sweater and his black silk shirts. But he would just sit over the baby and tap her back and look at her. And that is just the man he was. He was, you know, when I was at Harvard it was such an inspiration to me, I would write my papers with Rand's Cleaners [ph.] pencils 'cause I knew whatever time I got up to work--to go to work, my father was up at five a.m. every morning god said, except for Sunday to go to work, to go to his cleaners and he would mop the floor if he needed to mop the floor if the person--the janitor didn't show up. And he would press the clothes if he had to press the clothes. And he was not--no work was above or below him providing to--little red leather coats for me to go to school and private school, I knew where the money came from. One of the other neat family traditions he always had for me as a little girl, is when I was a tiny baby, and you'll see a picture, he would always take and incorporate me in his world and so I used to have this--my--we lived in a very, very nice house on the first house we lived at on Parkside [Street] in Detroit with his sister, which was Mary Frances [Mary Randall]. Had a garden on all four sides and a fruit tree garden in the side yard and an apricot tree in the backyard. And it was a very, you know, for then--black Detroit a very prosperous house. Story_ID: 599138 Speaker 1: But my father [George Randall] always would take me to the dry cleaners and as a little baby he'd take me with him and he'd throw me in a big canvas, I don't even know what they're called, canvas bin with the clean clothes. That was my crib (laughter) 'cause he would, you know, he'd--a baby to him was a portable love thing. He wanted to be with me. And as I got older, you know, I started off in private school [St. Philip's Day School, Detroit, Michigan], he would always make me spend at least two weeks with him in the summer. And I got a little bit older at one point, and I didn't want to do it. And this may have been, say fourth grade. He said, "I'm gonna put a cot back there between where all the clothes are filed," as they called it, "and a television. If you wanna sit there, back in there and eat, somewhere and read books and not come out that's fine," of course I got bored. "But you're gonna see where the money comes from. You're gonna see what my life. You're gonna see what the real people are high and low, what people come in here. So you can tell everything about people by all these dirty clothes they send in here." And I love that part of him. You know, he always totally grasped hands with both sides of life with me. And--and I think I've been that way with my own daughter [Caroline Randall Williams], being very honest, open, realistic, wanting her to know people high and low. You know, my father was in Germany during the [U.S.] Army. He ended up being able, you know, had a facility for languages, speaking German. He loved Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]. He actually fell in love with Shakespeare in that Miller High School [Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan], his senior year. And my daughter is an amazing Shakespeare scholar now. But he imbued me with this love of language, love of learning, and so I think I'm very much like him. I'm not glamorous. Both of my parents were very glamorous people, superficially. They were--aside from being both extremely bright, the difference I see between the two of them, my father was bright and an absolutely loving family man, and extremely mature, able to put other people ahead of himself. My mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was a bright person who was not remotely emotional, extremely objective. I always thought of her as a Evita Peron [Eva Peron] person, she married up each time. And there's no poetry in her soul. I don't recall my mother in my entire life, I never saw her reading a novel. I do notice that she owned maybe two, but literally in my entire life, I never saw my mother reading a novel. I never saw my father reading a novel either which is interesting. Speaker 2: But he told good stories? Speaker 1: He told great stories. And of course we were in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did your mother tell stories at all? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. She didn't tell stories. She barely cooked except for (laughter)--. Story_ID: 599139 Speaker 1: Now there's something about Miller High School [Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan]. I, I was at a hearing in Detroit [Michigan] not long ago and they were talking about closing Miller or merging it and the people were just so outraged and they loved that place so much. Did you--did your father [George Randall] have a somewhere--? Speaker 2: I think so. To them it was a complete haven. I mean, as far as he was concerned it was part of all of this. What they always said about Detroit at that time, that the black people just held their chins up a little higher and that there was just something extremely special about it and part of it was located in that Miller High School. If you remember that Motown Records was being formed almost exactly the same time that I was being born. It's just Detroit was an extremely exciting place. And a--my father actually dated Anna Gordy [Anna Gordy Gaye], I have some stories about that that I won't--I probably won't be able to tell you. I think that one of the things I would like to go on the record of saying, which I think is interesting, is this combination of high and low and how you make sense of it. Is--and I also note that I come from my father's side completely from what I perceive--you know, the--what I call the merchant class or it is not--it's the opposite of my husband [HistoryMaker David Ewing], who you interviewed this afternoon. Both of my husbands, who both came from academic families, teachers, preachers, school teachers, that kind. My [paternal] grandfather [William Randall] to the degree he made money in Alabama, and I think he did make money in Alabama, I think was one step above being some kind of outlaw which is exactly why I don't know exactly what he did. He had--he owned his own land. He wrote down farmer, I'm not sure how much farming he did. I mean if you look on the census that's what it said. Story_ID: 599140 Speaker 1: And my father [George Randall], you know, my father's--one of my father's best friends from high school days [at Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan] wound up being the cocaine king of Detroit [Michigan]. One of the--this is a story I'll put on this record and one day I'll write it in another place. One of the things I was most impressed with my father as a man, was that when I was younger, maybe in fourth or fifth grade, I cannot say this man's name out loud, but he was actually murdered in broad light of day. I'll say the man's first name, his name was Lafayette [ph.]. And Lafayette was, as far as I know, a drug dealer of a very major sort who--and some of his clients were very big music industry people at the time in Detroit. My father had known Lafayette since they were kids together and they had been very close. And he said you have to know Lafayette like I knew him before he went to the parachuters, before he came back and you know, they said one, two, three jump to know. Now, on the other hand, I was in fifth grade and sixth grade and getting--fourth and fifth grade and getting very progressive and questioning him about black people selling drugs to black people in the ghetto and exploiting our own people. One of the great memories of my entire lifetime is my father took me to confront Lafayette and made Lafayette listen to me. And Lafayette listened to me. The compassion that he had for my father that--and I couldn't even imagine as a little girl, quote/unquote how dangerous this was, but also it showed my father knew something about Lafayette that I couldn't see. Looking back that seemed like a crazy thing to do. But my father was remembering the other part of Lafayette. And they didn't do it for Lafayette, he didn't know--he didn't think I'd change Lafayette's mind. He did it because of the biggest two things he would tell me is, "Speak up son," even though I was a daughter (laughter), "you're not down south," and he would say, "Speak for those who cannot speak for themselves." And he told me to be afraid of no one. And so when I've gone forward in life and when I realize exactly 'cause not long after that, maybe a year and a half, Lafayette shot in the broad light of day with all of his men around--or his boys as he called them 'cause some woman that he--my father's very unromantic about the story, some woman that he wanted to sleep with, according to my father, that he was hitting on her for some money that she owed him and she didn't realize that it wasn't just about the money and she felt pushed against the wall 'cause she wasn't giving him her body and she wasn't--didn't have the money to give him, she shot him for like sixty-seven dollars or something of that sort in the bright light of day when he was visiting one of his crew who was in the hospital for another sort of futile shooting. But it was the beginning to me that my father took me seriously and he acknowledged the rightness of my perspective and of my idealism. Story_ID: 599141 Speaker 1: He--and he taught me, and I would say to people as it come--life came later and I worked with Brandon Tartikoff, I remember once being a--I'll put this in--we were at a meeting with the president, then president of CBS, at least the, of the entertainment film division, a person who'd gone to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I've forgotten his name. And basically, he's like being so intimidating and cursing and fussing as often people do and I'm--and I finally just said to him, like fuck you, fuck you, fuck you. I said that's--that's what you're basically saying. I said, "I'm not being intimidated, I'm only scared of one person in this world, it's Dave Thoms [ph.]." He said, "Who is that?" I said, "That's my daughter's [Caroline Randall Williams] pediatrician. That person can tell me my child is sick. Now aside from that, that you either wanna do this business or you don't wanna do this business, I don't curse, I don't fuss. There's no point of you cursing and fussing at me, you're not going to scare me, what are you going to do to me." But my father [George Randall] taught me that when I stood up to Lafayette [ph.] and I realized I--he had taught me to stand up to a drug kingpin thug and when I look back on my--part of the time I used to get driven to kindergarten, I never understood this. Somebody could put this part of the history, when other people drive me to school, to kindergarten, I used to remember my father would take me to his cleaners in the morning and then sometimes drive me to school 'cause we'd leave at seven [o'clock] from there. But the guy turned out to be--when he was dead--according to the newspapers a hit man. Now why my father had me being driven to school by this person I have no idea, but what I'm documenting at this point and it's not 'cause I haven't thought about it, is I think my father was not involved in any kind of criminal activities at all, 'cause I've researched this a lot and I do believe that's true. I do believe coming up where he did in Detroit [Michigan] in the--in the--in the inner city and the ghetto there was all kinds of weirdness, a lot of the major players are around them. People who turned out to be the brightest, strongest people. Some of them, it was like that whole godfather's story. They couldn't be president of the United States, so they were becoming their interests and their powers were misappropriated to nefarious lines. And some of them were people my father had previous relationships with and he loved. And I think it's really interesting, and on the other hand I think that I have never felt as safe as being his daughter in Detroit because I think there were people like Lafayette who have died before they would've seen somebody hurt me. And there was a kind of freedom. I remember once asking my father when I was a little, little girl, I would go sometimes go in a cab somewhere, and I said and I hope you can have this be the second quotation of cursing in this thing. I said to my father, "Isn't it dangerous for little girls to be in cabs alone?" And my father said, "There's not a motherfucker in Detroit stupid enough to do anything to you," (laughter). And he said, there's just--he got--there's not many--people are not that stupid. And I think there was--so I think that my father--now I am a totally nonviolent person in the deepest sense. I'm an anti-war, anti-abortion. I've some hard things in this world and I am not a vengeance oriented person except for to protect children and my fa- my own child or children in my care as a pa- as a teacher. I actually would not--if someone came to my house and was gonna try to shoot me, I don't--I would--I would not be inclined, I would hope I didn't shoot them. I would shoot them to protect a child or my child, 'cause I've seen, I came out of what I perceive as a valley of the gun, a very violent world of Detroit in the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 599142 Speaker 1: My little childhood was torn up in the Detroit [Michigan] riots, which I witnessed. I went on to see the revolution in the Philippines. The people--when I saw, you know, a helicopter shot out of the air right in front of me. I was in Washington [D.C.] during the Washington riots. So I did not glamorize violence at all. And so I'm very different from my father in that way, but I'm like him that nobody with a gun is gonna scare me. I remember working on a newspaper one summer for the Washington Star and I never had any expenses. And it turned out I was a copy girl and it turns--that--and it was a union paper and everybody else and these adult people who had, were copy people had expenses and they literally were putting pressure on me, this union, to turn in expenses because it was making people think that the other people were padding their expenses. And I remember thinking, and it was just coming out of that Detroit thing, what are they going to do, break my arm? They might, but they are not going to kill me over this and my arm will mend and I'm gonna stand up. I am, you know, that kind of street tough, it was a different approach to it. And I said, you can come here and break my arm, but you figure out the next step because you--you're gonna break--but you're not gonna intimidate me. And so I will be right back here figuring how to deal with this thing. And they left me alone. And that was deep Detroit, and that was the deep daddy in me that he [George Randall] always told me to not be afraid of anyone, to stand my ground, to speak for those who cannot speak for themselves, which I interpreted in my novel writing. And my [paternal] grandfather [William Randall] would thump my head and say when I was a little girl, "It's the only thing they can't take away from you, your brain." You know, the great pride for them is I was one class away from Caroline Kennedy at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to that. That was all of their ambition to get their, you know, family not to be like Caroline Kennedy but to the land where you can't take things away from people, the land of ideas. Story_ID: 599143 Speaker 1: Now, I'll go back and ask some of more perfunctory questions we usually ask, but yeah, you, you explained that. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Two. One, I'll put this in here 'cause it's true. I truly actually do believe that I can remember the weekend of coming home from the hospital and more research--I've said that for years and years and years. In--I have an almost complete memory from the time I'm in kindergarten. I mean literally, I remember clearly the first day of kindergarten. I remember almost every word I learned in kindergarten and forward. But my most important early memory are two--is my first word was scooby dooby doo baby, and it was quoting Frank Sinatra and it was to my Aunt Mary Frances [Randall's paternal aunt, Mary Randall]. And I remember that, and I think that's interesting about becoming a songwriter. And that I was living at Motow- you know, in the world of Motown [Motown Records] music. And I have to stop and tell you this part of family history which again I am not absolutely certain this is true, but everyone has told me this is true, so I think this is a perfect place for this to be and you can--I'll show you some of the pictures. They say that The Supremes were dressed to look like my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] and her outfit. I mean, and the Ziggy Johnson [Joseph "Ziggy" Johnson] who my mother knew, and I can show you pictures of my mother and Ziggy from the late '50s [1950s], is the one who choreographed and dressed them. And my father [George Randall] had dated Anna [Anna Gordy Gaye], and was very close. I mean I remember going down and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy making--when--I'll show you a picture, when The Supremes opened at the Copacabana [New York, New York], I, my mother, father and nanny [Beverly Jasper] were ringside at the--we were the people they sent from Detroit [Michigan] up there. So maybe this is--I was five years old, and I'll show you a picture of me at the Copacabana when The Supremes opened. But so my early, and that was a big first memory (laughter). I remember, I do and that--I saw Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] in gold--'The Man with the Golden Arm' [Jack Kirkland] on Broadway that sam- fell asleep in my father's--my father said my scalp ticket was the most expensive seat, I wouldn't sit in it, I was on his lap. The World's Fair [New York World's Fair, New York, New York], scooby dooby doo baby, that was a big memory. I remember. So that was my early--I said my first word is one of my biggest first memories. But The Supremes were a big memory too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think that inspired me about songwriting. Oh and, I was gonna say that my father knew, but I asked him about Holland, he knew Holland-Dozier-Holland, knew all those big songwriters too, so I wasn't just seeing--most people see the stars, the stars are out on the road, the stars were being--as Diana Ross was presented to me, which is her name, that she was just this skinny person from the Brewster Projects [Brewster Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan] that actually none of them thought was a great voice. So she wasn't the big deal, but Holland-Dozier-Holland, Berry Gordy, these people behind the scenes are real creators. Everyone realized that Marvin Gaye, Marvin was a presser, I think he pressed with--for my father at one point and ended up being with Anna. They knew Marvin Gaye was a major artist as a, you know, in terms of an intellectual society, hanging out at a party. Marvin Gaye was treated in a different way, that he was some kind of genius. But nobody, I mean, in those days, you know, you wouldn't have had any of the girls in The Supremes or The Tempt- [The Temptations] over (laughter). You know, just, because they--and I think Diana Ross is a very interesting icon and has done all kinds of things, but-- Speaker 1: But in those days she wasn't--she was given that kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and it's--not all. It's interesting, because I actually sort of liked this 'Dreamgirls,' it captures the so--I was a tiny little girl I used to--I was very, very skinny. My father would say no bitt- no bigger than a mosquito in a wrestling jacket. And there was a song someone somewhere's going to love you skinny legs and all ['Skinny Legs and All'], and I used to pray to get larger and my--to be--to have--to look down and see some sort of fat on my legs, and by the time I got to be--I'm forty-seven now, by the time I got to be forty I didn't have to pray about that anymore. But it was so interesting to say--to show the difference of the aesthetics of that world that Diana Ross was considered just to be too skinny and to, to be remotely attractive or an erotic icon. And someone like Aretha Franklin that many white people are embarrassed to look at today is still considered by most wo- you know, this beautiful black diva woman. I mean it's just a wholly different beauty aesthetic that was going on. But--and, and it was interesting I was born right at the time when certain parts of black culture were being exported to the majority culture. And, and it changed the aesthetics. I was born right at that time, you could see that occurring in Detroit and how that was being navigated. Story_ID: 599144 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, in Detroit [Michigan] the part--are we still in Detroit or have we gotten to--in Detroit with the watermelon truck, I wanna put that on the record. That--instead of having an ice cream--we did have an ice cream and popsicle man, but we had daily, in the summer, a watermelon truck that would go down the road and sell slices of watermelon. And it was much more popular than the popsicle or the ice cream truck. Speaker 1: How did they know--how did they let you know they were out there? Speaker 2: They actually would just drive, the kids would all be playing. But they would let you taste it by giving a little plug taste to see how sweet it was. And they had I think a little bell, but they mainly just dri- it was like an open, wooden, slatted--side, watermelon truck and a person would be sitting in the open slats, one or two people would be in the front cab and the person who was physically selling you the watermelon. The two people, the person driving would never stop driving and the person who would sell you the watermelon would be sitting on top of the watermelons in the flat--slatted, wooden cab and they would just hand it, and it was like a nickel, dime a slice right off and just they would come--and they would maybe stop in front of somebody's house if a lot of kids were coming out. 'Cause kids would just be out in the street in the summertime during the day. It was very neighborly, I mean and people played openly until the quote, unquote street lights came on. And kids were just able to freely and you'd get nickel or a dime or a quarter for your daily budget of watermelon, ice cream. So the four o'clock flowers opening at four o'clock, it was very southern. I mean that was a part of my summer days where, you know, you rushed to see the flowers open at four o'clock. The ladies would trade. Literally, my [paternal] grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall] never worked, this is good for history, my grandmother never worked a day outside of her house in her entire life. She would iron every sheet that we laid down. She made ice cubes with little fruit inside of them. She had such a celebration of life, of love for her family. She would--I don't believe--I hardly, if ever, once sat down to a sandwich that didn't have the crust cut off of it and into triangles. And part of it was what she had seen black women doing in white homes in Alabama and Georgia, working for white people, and she was gonna have, she wasn't gonna have anyone thing or feel or her children--I don't mean outsiders, that any child was better taken care of, that anything that can be done with labor and love, which is cutting every crust out of the sandwich, she did it. She would make me dress boxes full of just baked apples colored fairy tale colors, like blue ones or green ones, and make a dress box full of just, just for the beauty of it. You'd open it up and you'd have fourteen--she'd take the skins off so the apples would look actually blue or purple. This is before anyone did--I mean way before Martha Stewart. And literally, she always would freeze flowers or cherries or slices of fruit into the ice to make the ice tea. So that was--those are some of the memories of my childhood. It was in the summer mornings was going to the black Baptist Sunday--Vacation Bible School (laughter), we'd walk down the street and do that. And then playing school and playing double jump Dutch jump rope which so. Oh my favorite nursery rhyme from when I was little and that was, "They said the best was Sugar Ray [Sugar Ray Robinson], that's before they all saw Clay [Cassius Clay; Muhammad Ali]." We did not have any of these weird European nursery rhymes. We had, this was back in the days of the dozens, before they had hip hop and all the end of the--my father [George Randall] claimed that he was a cursing champion (laughter), which I guess where we channel a little bit of him with those curses earlier. And but the--all the nursery rhymes of my childhood were urban and most of them have been lost to me and I have not seen them recorded, but that one I record everywhere I can, 'cause--I wa- they sai- that's before Muhammad Ali was called (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did it go again--how did it go again? Speaker 2: Yeah. So they said the best was Sugar Ray, that's before they all saw Clay. So those were some of the sights and sounds, and of course from me the smells included dry cleaning perc [perchloroethylene]. I still love the smell of gasoline when I go get the car filled up 'cause it smells like perc, dry cleaning fluid. And that was a smell of my childhood. Cooking, my grandfather [William Randall] made cornbread and coffee every day of the week except for Sunday when my grandmother cooked. So cornbread and they would make it in the skillet in the oven with bacon grease beforehand. We drank Tang of all strange things, it was considered being modern. There came a moment they--not my grandmother's house but my father--they loved TV dinners 'cause they thought it was modern. And for people who had grown up on farms and every--all the food was fresh, they liked this modern food. So those were--I would say for summer days, those are the things I remember. Now I still came from the time period that it seemed totally normal at that time and again you have to remember by this point, by the time I was born my father was thirty, you know silk suit, Cadillac wearing--Cadillac driving, silk suit wearing, prosperous, Detroit man. But he would definitely cook for breakfast hogshead cheese. If he was gonna cook something, it will be slices of, which of literally when it was still made from the hogshead, and I mean it was not any kind of cheese, it was some kind of congealed, which I mean none of that sold I don't even think anywhere. And they would put a hot sauce on that, that was sort of a meal food item that would be cooked. My mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was completely different, you know, she was definitely into French toast and he would--there was a part of--it was a time you could start to go downtown, so I remember going to the London Chop House [Detroit, Michigan], I remember having first Crepe Suzette around seven or eight [o'clock] going to Detroit fine arts museum [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan]. Story_ID: 599145 Speaker 1: So very beginning of integration, one of the interesting things, I believe the school was Roeper [The Roeper School], but whatever the top private white school of the time was, my parents [Bettie Randall Reilly and George Randall] went through the process and I was finally accepted, but they had to have a vote, vote of the board of directors. I remember, again, my father when they voted for the kindergarten, he said, "If these fools have to take a vote to let you--," he stood by it 'til I got in and then he sent me to an all-black private Lutheran school. 'Cause he said, "These fools," (laughter), "have to take a vote, they're not getting my child." And so that was--but he sat--he stood through it until it happened. And so I've always loved the fact that I didn't start off in an all-black school and I think--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Oh okay, now I just wanted yeah I just wanted you to finish the sentence-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah okay. What--what school was it? Speaker 1: That was called, I have a picture of it. St. Philip's Lutheran school [St. Philip's Day School, Detroit, Michigan]. Story_ID: 599146 Speaker 1: So you started school at, what was the name of the school again, the, the--? Speaker 2: St. Philip's Lutheran school [St. Philip's Day School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: St. Philip's Lutheran. Speaker 2: And my kindergarten teacher name was Tinlay Barnes [ph.] and I loved her. She is a black woman who spoke French, made a huge impression on me. And then I went--my schools, we can get this very clear. St. Philip's Lutheran school, then in the second--I did there kindergarten, first and second, then the third grade I switched to Greenfield Peace Lutheran School [Detroit, Michigan], which was a majority white Lutheran school that was just then integrating. And then my par- my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] moved to Washington [D.C.]. I went for half a year at Amidon Elementary [Amidon Elementary School] in Southwest Washington-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --and then I went to Georgetown Day School [Washington, D.C.] from fourth grade 'til I graduated in twelfth grade. And then you have my--and I went to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] from '77 [1977] to '81 [1981] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait, wait a minute now (laughter), okay. Speaker 2: That's all my education. Speaker 1: All right, I couldn't get it all down but, but it's--when you were in the third grade your parents split up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They split up, okay. Now how did--how did that affect you, you know, in terms of? Speaker 2: I think it was definitely hard. I've written about that kind of estrangement in my second novel, 'Pushkin and the Queen of Spades' [Alice Randall]. I mean, I feel that I was kidnapped essentially from my father's [George Randall] family. I wasn't exactly literally kidnapped. My mother arrived at my school one day and said, "I'm leaving your father, you can go with me or stay. But if you stay, you won't ever see me again." So that was as close to an emotional kidnapping (laughter), so. And--but she did say, 'cause she is a very firm woman, "If you stay with your father I'm sure he'll take very good care of you. But if I--and his family. But if I--I'm going," I mean, she was on her way to the airport. Speaker 1: And did you have any sense of that--that there was a problem when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: I had a sense in a fundamental sense there was a problem with my mother as a person, that I had a fundamental sense. I never really perceived her as my mother, though she was there, and she was--'cause was not a motherly person in any fashion. So what is surprising to me is that I went with her, because I really did not know her. But I think per- perhaps the reason I went with her is because I didn't know her and I wanted to know her. And she looked like such a glamorous princess, I mean she was so beautiful. And she was so adored by outsiders that I was so eager to get to know her that I went with her. But, no, I did not have any notion when I went off to school that day, (laughter) neither did my father that he would come home to, you know, his child's bedroom missing and the dog sitting where the bed used to be crying. Speaker 1: Now, why did she whisk you off to Washington, D.C.? Did she have--well I don't know she didn't have any relatives so, who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. She did--she had some friends, she had some friends there. Story_ID: 599147 Speaker 1: Now, by this time had she completed school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No. She had done a little bit, so that's--so she came to Washington [D.C.]. She would've been at this time maybe twenty-nine years old, if I was about eight, she was you--I was born when she was twenty-one, twenty-two. Her birthday is December 5th, so. So, she came to Washington. She was looking at a couple of different places. She was a very thoughtful woman. She was extremely smart and ambitious and directed, and I think she thought that the greatest opportunity was in Washington. And she found a lot of opportunity in Washington. And in certain ways it was a very good idea. I went to--she--Washington was an exciting city in, you know, it was within about '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. I was there in fact, what is the date of Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death, assassination? Speaker 1: April 4th, 1968. Speaker 2: Okay, well I'd a been in Washington since about January. 'Cause I am actually one of the few people who lived through in real time the Detroit [Michigan] riots of '67 [1967], and moved to Washington in time to live through in real time, right in the neighborhood, the Washington riots (simultaneous). Story_ID: 599148 Speaker 1: Let's rewind a minute to Detroit [Michigan] in '67 [1967]. Now, those are big riots in Detroit. What, what are your recollections of those riots? You would've been seven, so I don't know if you had--would have any understanding of the cause or anything or any sense of that. But what, what happened, what's your story? Speaker 2: Well, I had a sense. My understanding of it was just that I didn't know about the part about the blind pig being busted and that part. But I knew tha- what I was told was that black people are just gotten too tired of all of the inequities and the police brutality and the unfairness of what was going on in Detroit and how they were being exploited. And that essentially the fire from Alabama, Selma, was catching in Detroit. And that it was a good thing, as was perceived. It was a hard good thing. They perceived it as a real war zone, as a civil war, a civil--a civil war in Detroit. And they were afraid of the National Guard and the federal forces coming, and you know, destroying the neighborhood even more than it was being destroyed. They considered the difficulties of what is was to be burning down your own stores including things that my [paternal] grandparents [Georgia Litsey Randall and William Randall] owned. It was right in their neighborhood. But my--their feeling was that in some sense, certainly my father [George Randall] and the adult male feelings of family, is that almost it was necessary. I mean, they were more of, they were not rioting, but they were--and they were people who were landed in property by that point. But they were familiar with what they thought were inequities in the unions that were sti- that were going on in Detroit. Inequities, you know, there have been. It was right around--the Algiers hotel [Algiers Motel, Detroit, Michigan] incident. It was a horrible major event that, that I think that they--that the phrase burn baby burn protest make bringing to the larger national stage what we are--what are people are suffering was a very powerful notion. It was scary because you realize that once these events get set into motion as a child, that--that you don't know what the real outcome is gonna be. But in fact, and Detroit never really recovered from the Detroit riots. I mean, it's interesting, the two things that I've seen in my life were the expected outcome and the in- and the in- and the actual outcome are completely different. One was school integration. School integration which I'm completely a thousand percent for in general principle and as a pr- social policy, I have seen not work. I think school integration has created a tremendous assault on the egos of black children that nobody anticipated, which we'll go into in a moment. But going back to the Detroit riots. So, I physically saw smoke, you could see smoke from my grandmother's house. It got to a point that once we were taken out of there, we couldn't go back in because of troops that were around that, you know, area was essentially cordoned off. We lived in a majority--my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] and father, and I by this point, lived in a majority white, upper middle class, perhaps largely significantly also Jewish very--neighborhood. And all of our neighbors were totally terrified of what was going on in the inner part of the city and that was--I remember my neighbor boy was instructed not to say anything to me about it, not to discuss the riots at all. And I remember being scared. I remember that poem, there's a book Callie [ph.], the young black woman--girl poet--she's a girl actually, she was I think maybe even less than ten years old. She said, you know--what is--it was something that is learning--poverty is learning that your neighborhood is a ghetto. That when they kept on calling it the Detroit ghetto, the rio- you know, riots in the Detroit ghetto, that was--it was strange for me to realize that part of what people--that my grandparents' neighborhood which I still do consider a paradisiacal, you know, one of the most wonderful places I have ever known. Maybe not for everything, how it, everything looked, but the inside rituals of the women sharing roses daily, I meant to tell you that. Cutting roses and competing which, which was the pretty. There were so many beautiful things going on that to outsiders they looked just ugly and horrible, and that was inters- that was, that was the biggest shock to me of the Detroit riots. To also watch it on the news and to see how the news portrayed it and the lack of complexity of the story. I also looked at the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots. I happened to be on a business meeting in L.A. So I lived through the Detroit riots, the Washington [D.C.] riots and the L.A. riots. Story_ID: 599149 Speaker 1: Now, in Washington [D.C.], 1968, now you were aware of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I guess at, at eight years old I guess (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. In fact, I had seen Dr. King in Nashville, Tennessee with my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] at Fisk [Fisk University], come down here just maybe within, within that year. Maybe it was within months before that. Speaker 1: Now, what, what was your mother doing at Fisk at that time? Speaker 2: Well, we have to get her to Washington. When she got to Washington, one of her first jobs was at a consulting company called Surveys and Research [Surveys and Research Corporation], I can still remember the name of it. And they had a contract to discover--look at why it was and then try to increase. Black people were not signing up to be Volunteers in Service to America [AmeriCorps VISTA]. So it was a consulting. So, she got it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she worked for VISTA? Yeah, okay? Speaker 2: No, she worked for Surveys and Research doing consulting contract to try to figure out how to increase black involvement in VISTA. And particularly at that time the war [Vietnam War] was on and the draft was on, and one of the ways you could get out of the draft was serving in VISTA and that people were arguing that black people weren't getting the same invitations to do that. And so she was basically down here at Fisk trying to right some of that wrong. And took me, being a single parent at the time, she took me on some of those trips, particularly that first year when I was in public school at Amidon [Amidon Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and didn't have any--many friends 'cause I was just brand new to Nashville--I mean, excuse me, Washington, D.C. So, I actually traveled to several campuses. It was not all-black campuses, 'cause she--we went to Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] which was really interesting. All on the same project, trying to see how it was being handled differently in different places. Story_ID: 599150 Speaker 1: So, so I had a chance to see Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Nashville [Tennessee]. I had seen John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in Detroit [Michigan] shortly before he was--I remember that open parade, we actually have pictures of that and standing out there. And then I was--Amidon [Amidon Elementary School] is a school in Southwest Washington [D.C.] not far from where some of the riot--and I was--my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was out of town on a business meeting the day he was shot. It may have been the day afterwards the rioting started and so I was actually walking home as some of this stuff was actually physically starting. The Washington riots didn't have nearly the impression on me. It was not in my nei- it wasn't in a neighborhood I loved, it was not the intensity. I mean, literally, Detroit looked like a war zone afterwards. I mean when the--when the smoke had cleared three, you know, three weeks later when you went down--there were blocks and blocks and blocks of things and places I knew that were leveled to the ground. So, that--there were not places and things I knew and loved in Washington that were destroyed that way. And there--I mean, there weren't blocks and blocks, it was a different kind of thing. Story_ID: 599151 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Anthropology and English. I loved anthropology. I originally wanted to be an anthropologist. I wrote to Marg- to oh--Jane Goodall, and she actually wrote back to me. Speaker 1: Now, now, this isn't in grade school, right or is it, is this in grade (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was probably in seventh grade. Well, from literally to the fourth grade I can still remember and when I say anthropology, I mean from the fourth grade. The fourth grade, 'cause I was in this Detroit [Michigan] Lutheran school I told you. I came to Washington, D.C., I go to Georgetown Day School which is the first independent school in Washington founded as an integrated school. It was founded and integrated in the '40s [1940s]. It has a very strong progressive part. It's integrated. It's Jewish, secular, humanist, and yeah Christian, all of the--every, everybody's there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this is Geor- what, what is the full name again? Speaker 2: It's called Georgetown Day School. First--and it's the first integrated independent school founded in the United States, founded as indep-as integrated in Washington and one of the first in the country founded as--as integrated. And, I get there and nobody even believes in God. So, I get invol- introduced to evolution and a wholly different worldview than my black, evangelical, Christian worldview that I--I mean nobody at this school. So, I remember say--so, I, you know, think about australopithecine. You know, I was thinking about Adam and Eve before this (laughter) and so. And I got interested in Vikings, got interested in this sort of food history. I told you about my madeleines. I remember making a Viking porridge. I absolute--all of that in that very first fourth grade year. And I stayed interested in anthropology and took it from fourth grade all the way through high school, and actually did a semester at the Institute of Archaeology, University of London [London, England] before I came to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I did also love reading. I remember that week reading--I mean that year reading 'Little Women' [Louisa May Alcott], 'Tale of Two Cities' ['A Tale of Two Cities,' Charles Dickens] that first year. Fifth grade I read my first Jane Austen novel, which I ended up writing my thesis about Jane Austen. I read 'Sense and Sensibility.' So Georgetown Day School was an amazing school. It was a place where you called all the teachers by their first names, as though--as though like a Communist school. I mean, (laughter) (unclear) and it was very egalitarian and very unpretentious and you wore the grubbiest blue jeans you could find to school. And I did love it. I say sometimes (speaking German), "Ich bin ein GDSer." John F. Kennedy said, (speaking German), "Ich bin ein Berliner." I am a GDSer. My most fundamental identity. And at GDS, the worst thing was for something not to be fair. It was a very ideal--the goal--and I will never forget this--was that we would not drive, ride or design the trains to Auschwitz. That we would never look the other way. It went with my father's [George Randall] message, we'd always do the hard right thing and we'd always look down the road to see how anything we were doing, how it would be used in the long run. Story_ID: 599152 Speaker 1: And what were the unintended consequences and the unintended implications of all things, including, say, the interview. Who owns your image, I mean, I will just note, you know, that I--and I want to go on the record saying I commend this project, I commend the history of how it--the--so much research we only have a knowledge because people took the time to interview newly emancipated slaves. I commend the exhaustiveness of your approach, 'cause you never know what the future will find important. I love that. I challenge, while I can still embrace 'cause I'm enjoying this experience, the issue as a--as a woman--as a black woman the idea of allowing men to be in control of my identity. I question the--I mean the physic- of my physical image. I question--there all kinds of questions, but to me, as part of the GDS [Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.] thing, was a wonderful, this is really another black-Jewish issue. The Torah and the Jewish part of what I got from GDS specifically, is you argue about what you love. To raise a question is to show a concern and involvement. It is not to be against it. The whole idea of Torah studies is to argue about what you love the Torah because it's that important. It's that important to get it right. That important to know what you're doing. And that is the attitude I bring to all of life, and that is that GDS. The place where the slavery narrative of freedom and the Israelites narrative of freedom. The--in the time of the Washington [D.C.] riots, came out of that a Freedom Haggadah that said all of the Seder story into the black civil rights setting. I was at that first Seder when that was done, when the Freedom Haggadah was b- was shared. That was the year after the riots. It was written by a person or started--who's--who is walking to the riots during Se- you know, Seder happened around the time of the riots that year. The next year, by the next year, left leaning white liberal--you know, Je- had done this wonderful Freedom Haggadah. But in my own heart with all that evangelical, black Christianity that I had gotten--seeped into me in Detroit [Michigan] from the Baptist church, I had already learned--knew that let my people go is a Israelite song and then when--so I learned the Seder song, trumpet into your little (unclear). One of my favorite songs of all time is this one, (singing) "Behold this bread, bread of affliction, wonders bread baked in the wilderness. When our Father's out of Egypt fled the bonds of slavery, they seen dangers in the desert with the courage to be free, all the ga- welcome--all the wonder--all the wonder you are welcome here. Lift your glasses come and join our cheer and rejoice all Israel." That is a Seder song. That's not a black freedom song, but that is my personal freedom song. I love that Seder song. And I feel that I come from that part of the history where that part of the young Jewish liberals who went down to Alabama and risked their lives, and gave their lives to stand up--inspired by the freedom stories they had learned in Saturday school. To come down and join their story to the black history and the black fight for freedom. And I know there've been other strains in that history later, but the strain that I come out of is where black arching towards freedom and Jewish arching towards freedom twined and made a very strong braid, which a lot of people pulled themselves to freedom on. And that--that song, that Seder song is my favorite song of all songs I know. Story_ID: 599153 Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers at Georgetown Day School [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Let's see, fourth grade, Pat Good [ph.] and Adelaide Crosman. Fifth--who I loved both of them, Pat and Adelaide, one was very English oriented, one was history oriented. Fifth grade was a woman called Mrs. Perlman. I did a big project for her on film. I am now writing a new black fairy tale princess for BET [Black Entertainment Television] for the president. I have, you know, sold maybe nine films to major studies. Helen Perlman got me started. Helen Perlman's daughter is Miss Manners, Judith Viorst [sic. Judith Martin]. Sixth grade, Wes Gibson, I still speak to him. He's a professor out in California now. Seventh grade, Walter Ailes, I still know him. He taught me what a theme was in literature. Eighth grade, Laura Rosberg introduced me to 'The Crucible' [Arthur Miller] and the Commedia dell'arte and the more structured literally studies. She came to my high school graduation, even though she was living in University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] then, and she came to my Har- took a trip with me when I finished my thesis at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we're still friends to this day. That's eighth grade. Getting into ninth grade, I'll just give you some of the teachers I liked the most, Dorothy Jackson [Dorothy Campbell Jackson] was an African American woman teacher of mine who introduced me to the Harlem Renaissance, and she was amazing. Charles Psychos, a good friend of mine, my first adult gay friend, introduced me to French existential Malraux [Andre Malraux], and I'll tell you a little Malraux and Gide [Andre Gide] and Proust [Marcel Proust], and changed my life. And--so, I'd say Dorothy Jackson and Charles Psychos were my favorite two teachers. One was a white man, Greek, one was a black woman in high school. Those two--and Wes Gibson, I go back to him in sixth grade. He invi- intr- invited me to invent a utopia. Mine was called (unclear) and that was such a wonderful innovation to think of exactly how the world should be if it was under my construction. And I still love him for doing that. And so I had a wonderful education. Story_ID: 599154 Speaker 1: Books, I spent a lot of time in the, the Takoma Park Washington, D.C. branch of the public library [Takoma Park Neighborhood Library, Washington, D.C.], the one that is on the Washington side. Speaker 2: Okay, so, your mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was really on the cutting edge of this education--I mean, in terms, terms of getting you in Georgetown Day School [Washington, D.C.], I guess it was her idea (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she was, she was totally on that. And she--although to be totally--she did and she applied me to Washington Cathedral School [National Cathedral School, Washington, D.C.]. And she was very good about that kind of thing. As I said my mother's strengths were doctors and schools. She would get you the best doctors and send you to the best schools. After th- that I mean, now she was not one that would ever remotely think of, for example, driving you to school, though normal parents do that or carpooling. I took the bus, you know, an hour and a half to school. The--I'm talking about the public city bus, which was fine and really fun, you know, for an hour and a half because she was not going to pay to spend fifteen minutes to drive me to school. So, but she did get me into a great school and I loved my school, and I do give her good credit for that. And she always did see that you had the best doctors, and she was pretty good about, I remember when I was in the fourth grade and I wanted to read 'Lilies of the Field' ['The Lilies of the Field,' William Edmund Barrett] and one of the teachers said it was too advanced for me, she definitely stood up for my right to read the book I wanted to read. Story_ID: 599155 Speaker 1: Now, did you--did you like--we mentioned music on some level, but did, did you like television and movies too? Speaker 2: Yes and I would say that when I was very young, I've, I've been a big reader, I literally, if you notice, as I told you my [paternal] grandparents [Georgia Litsey Randall and William Randall]--my parents both worked. My mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] worked first at Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company], then she worked for a hospital in Detroit [Michigan] in the psychiatric hospital in the library over, she was like the librarian in the hospital. And my father [George Randall] had his dry cleaners [Rand's Cleaners (ph.)]. So, I always put a lot of time with books, and so books were always my primary from the time--I could read by the time I arrived at kindergarten. My bad sad kindergarten story is that there were only, in my class, like four people who didn't know the alphabet and I didn't know there was any order, because I was reading for so long that no one told me that--as far as--what does it mean an order. Learn apple A, then P, then Zurich, I mean there's no order, no one told me, no one bothered, this is how illiterate a family I came from. How busy everybody, no one bothered to teach me the alphabet. I arrived at kindergarten [at St. Philip's Day School, Detroit, Michigan] and everyone else, all these other black chil- everyone else knew the alphabet. I mean I think there were four and those kids were coming from totally dysfunctional families. I was the only, I mean, but I learned it over one night and they were all sad they hadn't taught it to me. When I came home, I was just so sad because it was gonna put me in a wholly different group. I mean it was like the most dysfunctional group of the people who didn't know their ABCs, I didn't even know that referred to, even though I could read. So, I'm not sure where I was going with that. But that was--she was very good--but she was an odd preparer. Like she wouldn't--she didn't bother to teach you the ABCs. And what I learned to read on was my father, actually with a newspaper. I (laughter) and he would read the newsp- I mean the Free Press [Detroit Free Press], I probably learned to read the Free Press, that colored paper they called the Chronicle [Michigan Chronicle] and probably letters to Playboy. (Laughter) I mean that's what I'm learning to read on. My father ask me and I was like--he would just read aloud to me whatever he was reading. Story_ID: 599156 Speaker 1: Okay, so, I was asking you about film and movies and stuff like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, about film and music. Didn't see--I only had seen like one or two movies before I moved to Washington [D.C.]. Now, in Washington D.C., yes Biograph Theatre, Cerberus theater. One of the things I could go to both of those theaters. Those are reparatory film houses. So I could see standard things and I saw lots of big movies and enjoyed them. As I told you, I wrote a big fifth grade paper on film and still not be in the film business, and I have had written and produced movie of the week for CBS and had other things done. So, I did see that. And then I could go see like Lina Wertmuller, I love, the German [sic. Italian] director. 'Cause you'd see all this stuff at the Biograph and the Cerberus and it was cheap and the comfort--and you--I didn't even know what I was going to see, I would just go see and all these different--these worlds would open up to me of other places. And but I would take, get one of my babysitters and we'd go to the--and, and whatever they call it, the little bit of old black group, city--inner city thing that Washington had going down 5th [Street] and I don't remember, 5th and something, and go see in the all-black theater, 'Dark Shadows' the movie or some strange thing. I loved movies. I went all over town to go to see movies. I saw all these weird, obscure, independent films and I saw big things, and loved them. I did--I sort of got into the radio maybe seventh, eighth grade of popular music. I was never a huge popular music person until I got interested in country music in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then hip hop older. Story_ID: 599157 Speaker 1: I love museums. Growing up in Washington [D.C.], museums were all free. So, the east wing of the National Gallery [National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.], I mean I literally go to multiple museums a week, because you just--from the time I was in fourth and fifth grade literally. We would take, fourth and fifth grade, kids from southwest, almost these would be mainly groups of black kids. We'd get on the bus and go to the natural history museum [National Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.]. I loved seeing the Hope Diamond--the jewel hall, the mineral hall, and we would just ramble through those places, that's what we did. The kids go to the mall today or to the park if they're littler. We started off when I was fourth and fifth grade, it was the natural history museum. As I got older, it was more the--it was the west wing of the National Gallery of Art and then it was the east wing, the Hirshhorn Sculpture Garden [Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.] was a--these were the kind of places I'd go--I've gone, I'm talking maybe seventy times. Places I go over and over that became, they were a part of my physical neighborhood in Washington. I also went to Dumbarton Oaks Museum [Washington, D.C.], that's an American collection, that was very important to me. But I would say the museums where I spent the most time were the natural history museum, the west wing of the National Gallery initially, the Hirshhorn Sculpture Garden and then the inside, and then the east wing when it was added when I was in high school [Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.]. I also used to love--so I was a museum person. Story_ID: 599158 Speaker 1: I watched television. I've never been afraid of television because at certain pieces of my life 'cause--no, my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] would go to work, I was an only child. There was no family in Washington [D.C.]. She would always have a babysitter or someone for me. But, basically I was left on my own all of my childhood until I went to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Well, (laughter) I mean, she brought me to Washington with me and my mother could go for days at a time without ever really saying more than two sentences to me. So, I did watch television. I never--and it didn't--I know--I had shows that I liked. I remember having my--I loved 'Batman.' The first long distance phone call I ever made was to protest 'Batman' being taken off the air (laughter). They--she didn't support me on that. Speaker 2: What did you like about 'Batman'? Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's--I don't--one I think I like the hero--heroic rescuing, I liked Catwoman, I liked the [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt Cat- Catwoman. But I wrote--that was the first thing that I wrote myself into. I noticed that there was nobody that looked like me in 'Batman' and that was--I started to write my own alternative scripts that added someone like--a black female person who was helping rescue. Speaker 2: So, you were aware that it was script and you know. I think it was Lorenzo Semple, Jr. that wrote the scripts of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I definitely was aware of the concept. And instead of getting irr- I realized I loved it, but wanted to add to it. And that would--that was--so I liked--'Batman' was a favorite show of mine, I liked 'Ironside.' I liked these justice oriented things. I think when I got older I went through a brief 'Charlie's Angels' stage. I even liked--oh I loved 'The Mod Squad' of course. "One's black, one's white, one's blonde," (laughter). I thought that was a little--I'm trying to think if--and I love the old movies. The old movies was--I would say from fourth grade on TV, like the old 'Wuthering Heights,' the Jane--Joan Crawford-y--weird film noir. I think I was subconsciously getting the structures of the visuals of them. But a lot of books I went on to want to read like why I wanted to read 'Wuthering Heights' [Emily Bronte] early and 'Sense and Sensibility' [Jane Austen] that I've seen these old movie versions of them and it sort of introduced me to them. So, a lot of my interest in the classic, 'cause you know what cable channels. But I would be doing the ironing of the--here on our own in Washington. So I would get--Saturday afternoon it was my job to help with the ironing. I would turn on some old movie and iron. And so I loved ironing 'cause (laughter) you could watch old movies, and so it was (laughter). Story_ID: 599159 Speaker 1: And you were describing old movies that, that inspired you to read classic books when you were coming up. I wanted to ask you, when is the first time you saw actually 'Gone with the Wind' successfully? Speaker 2: I believe it was in seventh grade [at Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.] and it did inspire me to read the book ['Gone with the Wind,' Margaret Mitchell]. I saw the movie first, I believe and it was at the Uptown Theater [Washington, D.C.], I remember that distinctly and I went with some friends of mine. And there were parts of it that I was shocked by--one, there is a sweeping story and I do think that Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara] is in some ways a feminist heroine and I was taken. She so takes change of her life and survives. But, the way they depicted Mammy to me was so--although Hattie McDaniel I think is a wonderful actress and imbued her with an intelligence that Mammy doesn't have in the book. I could feel--I felt so uncomfortable that the white audience I was sitting with largely was so disgusted by Mammy and didn't see her beauty. You know, that--that whole and the physical--physicality of it, how much they just laughed at what they perceived of just even the buffoonery of her presence. And that I was really very shocked by that and took notice of it. And then shortly after that I read the book. And I had such a hard time getting oriented in the book because the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] is prov- presented in the book as a good thing and people forget this, but Scarlett's second husband [Frank Kennedy] dies on a Klan raid. I knew that the Klan was a bad thing, so I couldn't understand how this was considered to be good. And it was so confusing. I was trying to think is it sarcastic, what are they saying. And then, so by--I was actually somewhat outraged by the time I finished reading the book and the relentless use of word nigger, and I was shocked that other people weren't outraged. It took me a long time to do something about that, but I waited and I did something about it. Story_ID: 599160 Speaker 1: Okay, now did it, did it occur to you in those days that maybe there's an alternative history being told someplace that you didn't know anything about? Speaker 2: You mean alternative in what sense? Speaker 1: To--well, you say, well how could somebody--how could the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], the Klan be heroes, but they clearly were to somebody, right? Speaker 2: Well, you know it's funny. It was so, coming from where I came from and, and my father's [George Randall] perspective, it took me awhile to get--that, you know, until I came into this world of country music and realized--and down here people will try to defend Nathan Bedford Forrest. And I said well maybe he didn't belong to that white terrorist organization. You know, people would say well he didn't actually, the Klan he foll- founded is not the Klan we have. He belonged to other white terrorist organizations and I hope we get a chance to stand up, 'cause I have a wonderful, I feel, print of 'The Fort Pillow massacre' [Kurz and Allison]. Speaker 1: Right behind you, right, yes. Speaker 2: And I love it, is a black woman in a green dress and all she has is a rock in her hand and she's probably about to be killed. But she is holding that rock up and she's gonna strike it down and fight back. And that's the thing that Forrest's Klan can't kill out of people. But, but-- Speaker 1: Fort Pillow was a horrible massacre. Speaker 2: It's a dreadful massacre. Speaker 1: It was probably worse than anything the Klan did to one or two pe- people. There was a whole group of people were slaughtered and butchered. Speaker 2: Hundreds, hundreds of people, largely women and children, defenseless women and children. But yes, it did not--I had yet--'cause you have to realize I went from this all-black environment to this very liberal white and black progressive environment. And so I actually was taught in my high school days and my middle school [at Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.] experience, that--and we were in Wa- Washington in time for Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Great Society. I truly thought until I arrived at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and this is an interesting thing to document, within this enclave of integrated liberalism in which I was raised in my next stage of my life, I thought that racism of that sort were historical facts. Because I knew Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.], I knew a secretary of the army who's a black person. That on the streets that I finally lived on in Washington, D.C. there was a black federal judge. Harold Ford, Jr.'s father [Harold Ford, Sr.] lived behind us. There was a black congressman, there's a black oral surgeon, there's a black right next door to me is just a regular black judge. So, Washington looked like we had all arrived in those days, you know, that in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. It looked very diff- it looked--it looked like certain inequities were going to quick--soon be things of the past. Does that make--it wasn't like they were things of the past. Story_ID: 599161 Speaker 1: So, it was only--so, I--never occurred to me actually at that point that there was anybody out there who loved the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. That was a shock of coming down to Nashville, Tennessee. Now I love Nashville, but coming back to Nashville when I arrived here, and this is skipping ahead, but in 1983 and no one even wanted to rent me an apartment. I had to rent an apartment sight unseen through my bank. I never got to see my apartment until I had the rental contract because no black person had ever lived in the bui- it wasn't just one building, I was willing--I had many normal, I mean buildings I wanted to live in. It wasn't like my mind was set on one thing. But the normal buildings that they normally wanted to--they thought you should--that I might want to live in, they said, you know, if you come see, you're not gonna rent it. I mean it was like they couldn't tell you that upfront. And when I tried the next time to rent a place of my own 'cause I just couldn't even believe this, after--and I'm paying this ridiculous rent for my first apartment to get a place that would take me, take me, 'cause they have such a high rent that they were happy to have whoever it was, black, white or green. And I wanna go back and actually stop and put a story about this so people understand what a graduate from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1981, came to Nashville in February of 1983, just as '83 [1983] was new. I was, so this is, March or April of '83 [1983], I go into my laundry room to do--I am washing my Calvin Klein sweatpants I had bought at Harvard and the lady comes to me and she says these exact words, I want this to be on this tape, "Whose are you?" I said, "Excuse me," I thought I misunderstood her. She said, "Whose are you," again. I said, "Excuse me again." She said, "Who do you belong to?" Not who do you work for. Who do you belong to, Mrs. Such and Such in apartment such and such, or Mrs. Such and Such in apartment such and such. One of the great moments of my life, I just screamed at the top of my lungs like this (yells), like a--like a horror movie. 'Cause I say she was a monster, I would just scream. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I screamed at the top of my lungs. I mean I didn't even say a word, I just went (yells), like you're a monster, and I ran out. Well, it was really interesting response, 'cause I guess she tried to--she found out that I was actually a resident, a Harvard graduate, da-da-da-da-da. She went through all these apology, this apology note, and sent me some tickets for the symphony. But that was a startling introduction for a twenty-three year old black woman who, at that point, arrived in Nashville with some family friends who decided to invest a hundred thousand dollars in my trying to start a company, and some lady is gonna ask me who do I belong to, not who do I work for, as if slavery is still existing and I am owned. Whose are you, as if this was a normal question. She repeated it twice, whose are you. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And I wanna get that on the record, 'cause there were some things I experienced when I first got here that I almost have repressed that I would not have believed coming from--I mean it was just shocking, that was one. I'm trying to think of what some of the--and then when I tried to rent an apartment, you know, I wanted to get out of--I was literally paying, I think my first rent six hundred, and this six hundred ninety-five dollars a month, and when I finally got the apartment I really loved the most, my rent was a hundred ninety-two dollars, fifty a month. This showed you how disproportionately I was being charged for being black and wanting to live in a decent neighborhood. I mean finally that a white friend of mine had to go. I just gave up and go rent the place with all my real information, yeah I was totally quali- and then I just moved in. You know, 'cause there just wasn't a way to do it. Story_ID: 599162 Speaker 1: Oh another one, that was just another one to know--and this would be, I'm trying to remember what exact year this was. This has been the last ten years. I've had two of these happen. One was just four years ago, but, but in the last ten years ago, I was going to go on a trip, business trip I believe to Ireland. And let's see my daughter [Caroline Randall Williams] is nineteen right now, so this might have been just over--and I literally went to cash this check, I was going to--and I was wearing a pair of black and white designer shorts and a T-shirt and I went to my--to the bank. And they check your balance like you normally do and the woman actually said to me, now this is interesting, she said, "You don't look like you can have this much money in the bank." Not that she wasn't gonna cash my check because I didn't have enough money in the bank (laughter), and so I finally get a manager and what the most interesting thing was and this manager, he said, "Well," and I am not a very wealthy person, I am a happily, struggling, semi-successful novelist, but a semi-successful novelist and not--and teachers, professors I assure you do not make. Said well, you know, essential--they said, how would they know, there's so few black people who do have in Nashville [Tennessee] that have any money. They totally justified this. He said, "I would expect--," he said, "I would expect that she wouldn't think that this would be your banking account." And actually felt it was appropriate and reasonable for her not to check--to cash my check because I had, you know, five figures in the checking account. I said, "Well then I guess I shouldn't be having my money in your bank account if you think it is appropriate and reasonable for people to question just because I am black whether or not this--and I've been banking with you for twelve--whether or not I have money, I could've saved that much money." Now isn't that wild. Speaker 2: Yeah it is. Speaker 1: Or more recently, three years ago we went to the bank and I was on our way to Palm Beach [Florida] actually and the woman said, "But this check isn't in order." I said, "What do you mean check isn't in order." I mean, you, I have more than check--and I get the manager out there and he says, "Oh we've been having problems with maids stealing checks from the people they work for," (laughter). And I am dressed to go to Palm Beach, on my way to the airport. I said, "Do I look like a maid to you?" I said, "Now--now I am going take this one--," I did, 'cause I said, "My housekeeper Vivian Williams, I adore her and I'm gonna make the world and this bank safe for poor black women who look like maids and are maids to cash checks." 'Cause I said, "There are white and black people--white people who steal money, larger amounts of money then this and I assure you you're still cashing checks of every white man in a suit. You're not--'cause some white men in suits steal money and embezzle. Does that make you not cash checks of other white men in suits?" But, I said, "I'm gonna make this bank, when I get finished with it," and I said, "we're gonna see that it is comfortable for black women without checking accounts to come and work in Belle Meade [Tennessee] every single day to be able to cash their checks without being accused of being robbers. Just because you have like--." I said, "Exactly how much have you lost cashing checks for stealing what maids in the last year." He couldn't even document that they lost any (laughter). And at the most--and they are going to create a policy. So that was an interesting, those are to me the interesting small places where you have to--and I said, 'cause he would say, "Oh we're gonna do this for you and that for you, and we didn't mean to confuse you with these people." I said, "No, no, no, no, no. The problem is I am concerned whether Vivian Williams who is my housekeeper and every other honest housekeeper can cash her check in the neighborhood where she is working. It's not fine to make it right for me, you're gonna make it right for them, gonna make it right for her." And I definitely saw to it that that, you know, that that policy was changed and we followed up and followed up with that, up and down the line. And you know, said the day that thinking that's was acceptable is over. Story_ID: 599163 Speaker 1: Okay, so, we'll rewind back to the beginning of culture shock (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, those are just some of the odd parts about living in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: But, you're gone--we were talking about coming out with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell]. Speaker 1: --'Gone with the Wind' and some of your early thoughts about that. And what did you--did your classmates have any thoughts about it or this? Speaker 2: Oh yes, one of them actually said that was an interesting thing and so--and she said, "But you're not like Mammy, Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Randall], you're like Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara]." Which reminded me of the time when we were at the SAT and we decided to take it at an unusual school just 'cause we didn't wanna be in all the tension of every other person from our school [Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.] and the private schools taking it at this one place. So we just randomly picked another place a couple of my friends and I. And we got there and one of my friends said to me, "(Unclear) my god, we're the only black peo- we're the only white people here." I said, "You're the only white person here." (Laughter) "But, but, but I am a black person." But she really meant something else, but she also really meant what she said in some sense. I didn't think--it wasn't until years later in about 1997, '98 [1998] I was asked to give a speech about costume in 'Gone with the Wind' at a Belle Meade Plantation here in Nashville [Tennessee]. And character and costume, because there was--I had done things in the film industry and there was a, a exhibit coming that examined the real historical costumes and the ones they put in the movie, and the exhibit was all concerned was that these costumes were not accurate, like the--. And I say, "This is the least of what is not accurate. Where are the mulatto children on ca- Tara?" I could not believe the irony that I, as a black woman, have been asked to give--research and give a speech supporting this question of costume authenticity and lack of costume authenticity. I said, "You're missing the larger picture of what is inauthentic." And that's really when I decided to write my book, 'The Wind Done Gone' [Alice Randall]. Story_ID: 599164 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're gonna rewind back to high, high school and get you out of high school, then to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], then we'll--we'll pick this up. But, so, so you were in Georgetown Day School [Washington, D.C.] through-- Speaker 2: Fourth grade through twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, through twelfth, okay. So, it goes all the way through high school. Okay. So, did you--any, any memorable honors or, or, or incidents in Georgetown to--you know, between the? Speaker 2: Well, they have me on their Wikipedia web- web- website as one of their distinguished members. I think that our school did--was not a traditional school so they didn't do class rankings or anything of that sort. I was definitely a little star at my school and was asked to speak at the graduation. I chose to read a Blake [William Blake] poem. So, I was one of the people who was chosen to speak. I wouldn't say it just wasn't that kind of school and it wasn't that kind of--but it was very interesting intellectually and I had--I'm trying to think of what my--. But I would just have to honestly leave it at this, that my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] remarried and I was going to--I was going to the tenth grade and my high school experience, on the surface, was just coping with a very hard situation at home, a difficult mother became impossible. Speaker 1: After she married? Speaker 2: Yes. I mean, and just went around some just almost unspeakable bends. And I ended up going to the British embassy library and just starting at A going to Z thinking there must be something I can go do to get myself out of here. And I found literally on the library shelves of the British Embassy some kind of program at the Institute of Archaeology, University of London [London, England]. I sent them a telegram, they never responded. So, then I sent them a telegram saying I was coming unless they told me not to (laughter). I went to my school and said, will you give back the money that my parents paid you for the second semester, which I think was all of twelve hundred dollars. And armed with twelve hundred dollars to fly and live on, I left for England. So that was a-- Speaker 1: So, you just, they didn't-- Speaker 2: --memorable experience. Speaker 1: --your mother didn't know you were going or? Speaker 2: Well, I--she knew but she didn't support it. She didn't give me any money. She finally brike- she broke down and I told her I was going. And I left in high school--my-- Speaker 1: So, you were able to get the money from the school to? Speaker 2: I went--she--yes, I got the school, I appealed to the school and got the money back that they had paid for the tuition. The twelve hundred dollars. Speaker 1: Now, you were still a senior in high school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I lived in a room that was--I--the beds are two--I shared with, with this other girl, had her own situation, her parents divorcing. We went over together and we shared a room so small that you couldn't stand--both of us couldn't stand between the beds at the same time. And this, I mean two twin beds. And I would get up and go to breakfast before Dais [ph.] so she could get dressed. And I would make an extra sandwich 'cause they would give us this fried egg at breakfast and bring that up for her breakfast and both our lunches. And I used to walk across London [England] to go to the Institute of Archaeology. I mean, I think in the beginning it was sort of like a two and half hour walk, that's how far it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well how-- Story_ID: 599165 Speaker 1: How did you find a place to, to live (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I had no money. Speaker 1: How did--I mean, how did you--did you just ask around or what, what happened? Speaker 2: It was just good luck and hard times. We had one place that someone had found for us and it was just so horrible I couldn't--as bad as--I couldn't do it. And then we were--someone--this girl--I don't know her name, she was a nanny. She overheard us, she said, "I heard that there's a place." I can still remember, I think the address is 3331 Holland Park road [sic. Holland Park Avenue], it's 30-something Holland Park road. And it was before Holland Park [London, England] was a fancy neighborhood back with Princess Diana. And it was--and it was, what was called at the time the Catholic international youth chapel. Seeing this sort of crazy priest who I think probably done something we- and they had isolated him into this one house. And he had--could have about twenty kids in this one house at any time. And the rule was it could be only two kids from anyone country and you just rented rooms. It was like, I think eleven pounds a week, which is about twenty-five dollars, which is telling you what kind of room it--you know. And this girl and I split it. But it was, and you know, no, no bathroom, but it was heaven compared to what I was dealing with back in Washington [D.C.], which would give you an idea of what I was dealing back in Wa- Washington. And so, you know, whatever they were with that money and I think four hundred or six hundred dollars went into the plane ticket. So, I mean, literally we made boiled pasta for dinner, we cook our own little dinner. And I remember getting a green pepper and this was just stepping out (laughter), to cut up some green pepper for this tomato sauce. We couldn't even afford, you know, regular tomato sauce or tomato--it was--I'd never seen--we'd get the tubes of tomato paste and add water to them, it looked like toothpaste, but it was a wonderful time. You know, that in certain ways it was my first taste of freedom. And it was a very George-like [George Randall] thing. To it--now, this is an interesting thing, knowing my father, this is a very complicated, but interesting thing. Knowing my father and knowing who he was and what he was, if I had told him what the real conditions of my home were, I was terribly afraid he would kill my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] and/or my stepfather. And then I would be a estranged from him because he would be in prison or dead. So that is an interesting, weird, 'cause he came out a tough, strong gun culture world. And I knew like for example once my aunt's husband had hit her [Mary Randall] or my father thought that he had. I think he basc- did--I mean absolutely said, "If you hit my sister again I will shoot and kill you." And I think he meant it. I mean, he was that kind of man. So, I--my hands were very tied, but I do think I had an innovative solution so I went to England. And, and it was a wonderful--I got a blue guide to London ['Blue Guide London'], you know, so I did everything you could do for free in London and barely went to these classes [at the Institute of Archaeology, University of London, London, England]. They hardly knew we were registered. I mean, I just said these tel- they didn't. But it was--it was a great time, the British Museum [London, England], just the city, the architecture. 'Cause we couldn't--it was wonderful about doing the hard right thing for yourself and taking self-reliance. 'Cause I think it was a good calculation of what I--I think I actually had a logical assessment of the problems of telling my father any more than I did at that time. Later we were able to talk about it. And--but, I was that--that was I was not gonna be I was gonna sit there and suffer in silence, so, I took--I got, you know, quote, unquote got out of dodge. Story_ID: 599166 Speaker 1: And it was--that was a good decision. But I sent my Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] application. You know, you think about kids and privilege, and my stepfather was actually quite well to do man, a Harvard grad- country house in Middleburg, Virginia that was a modest one, but it still fifty, you know, middle, you know, or in that area, it was actually closer to a town called The Plains [Virginia], it's rural so it's not in anywhere. But a country house in that hunt country of Virginia, sailboats in Annapolis [Maryland], da-da-da, whatever it was. But, it was a horrible situation and it was great living in London [England] in a poverty with integrity, you know. And it was, it was just one of those--in certain ways it was just a great opportunity to know that all you really need is your freedom, all you really need is your space and your time. And so I sent back my Harvard--so I was at Georgetown [Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.], my Harvard application, I wrote it with gloves--my hand--we were in this room that was freezing, that first horrible place, with gloves and we finally went to Harrods' Tea Room [London, England] with--and I had to send it back. This is how--so you said when she was good about schools, but--I--my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] would only allow me, whatever that means, to apply to two colleges. She said if I di- couldn't get into Harvard, I didn't deserve to go to college. That was just like one of the more normal parts of her craziness. (Laughter) And I did apply to one more, 'cause I wasn't totally crazy. But she wouldn't give me the money to apply--whether it was fifty [dollars]--I had no independent money. And so I applied to those two colleges. But I sent that Harvard. I lie--I think I flew to London on January 3rd, the thing was due January 15th. I had no idea even what overseas postage was from London back, had no idea to weigh it. And I think I sent it back June 7th--I mean January 7th, hand wrote the whole thing. Everything was completely truthful. And it's a wonder that I got--I mean it's not a wonder 'cause I was a great student. But it's a wonder given those conditions, a wonder that the application even arrived back at Harvard 'cause I figured out the right postage to put on it. I was jet lagged and scared to death, and you know, and it was the middle of January in London. It was, it was wild. Story_ID: 599167 Speaker 1: But those are those tough times, and the story, I'll tell you this story, the, the story I wrote about my college essay. This is a memorable thing from high school [Georgetown Day School, Washington, D.C.]. It really--it was a story from that country house of ours that I tried to grow strawberry plants one year, the first year to, I think to give myself something to do and hold onto my sanity and have a piece of my family--father's [George Randall] family from Alabama with me, a gardening thing. And I planted two hundred strawberry plants and I invented a way to keep weeds coming on them by putting garbage bags over them and slicing this way so that weeds couldn't get any sun. Tended these things for two years, learned what backbreaking labor was, 'cause stooping over this, again even (unclear) weigh like one hundred five pounds. Weeding, taking care of them. The second--grew them and for two years to big enough to have a crop and this one particular weekend I come and the crop is just looking gorgeous, you know, it's gonna be ready to pick the next day. They needed like one more day of sun from turning pink to red. End of the day they look almost there, just needed this one--I woke up in the morning, there's two hundred plants, so there's probably, that's like ten stra- seven, ten strawberries a plant. There were three strawberries left. Rabbits had eaten them all in the night or in the morning. And that's what I wrote about 'cause I realized it was a defining incident. I had two choices, there were three strawberries that were good left. I could eat those strawberries or I could be angry about and figure out what to do the next time so rabbits couldn't get in, or I could be angry about it and just throw away all my labor and not experience. Now those three strawberries, they were three--the most exquisite strawberries I have ever eaten. I had figured out a way to have respect for all the labor I put in and all that was lost, but enjoy what was there and move forward. Figure out what the solution was and move forward. If I ever have to raise or tend a strawberry plant I'll know exactly what to do. I honored both the loss and also took part of what I had and moved forward. And that to me--and I think that choice to write about something I really--that was not. 'Cause I could've--I had done all kinds of interesting academic things, et cetera, et cetera, but when it really came down to it, I think that was the beginning of me as a writer. I told the story that really told the truth about me and who I am. And I told the story that really--and about what it was, what I learned what backbreaking labor was and to have simply how far you are from town, like when my stepfather did cut off his fingers and to realize--with a saw there by mistake. What it means to be in the rural environment as opposed to being in the city. It's one of the reasons I live in this house now, 'cause if--what--if my husband [HistoryMaker David Ewing] had a heart attack I could put him in a wheelbarrow and get him down to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee] or in the car, and he could run with our child in his hands to the hospital. 'Cause you go out into the ru- you realize that out in the rural, I mean that's one of the hard parts of the rural, that's not people idealize, that you die of small things far away from the hospital and the doctor. And anyway, that's--that was my Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--that my high school experience was spent trying to (laughter) stay alive, stay sane and get to a better place, and Harvard was that better place, and I did all that, and I did. Story_ID: 599168 Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] like when you got there? Speaker 2: I loved Harvard in many ways. To me, I've said in my novel, you know, Harvard to me was a safe haven and to me, Harvard was a safe haven. It was like my personal welfare office that was socially acceptable. It allowed me to free myself from my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] and stepfather completely, economically from the day I arrived there I never asked them for any money. I paid for my own tuition as soon as I got there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1977, right? Speaker 2: Yes, and I earned my way through Harvard, which is one of my most proud--. And I wasn't--and I wasn't eligible for really normal amounts of financial aid or anything because I had parents who could theoretically pay. So, I was able to get loans and stuff, but it was a very complicated circumstance. So I had a whole series of weird jobs I--bread baking, and extra jobs in the summer but it all worked, you know, and it was really--and again it was very defining. It was very important for me that I didn't like these people and once I got on my own got away, I wanted to pay for myself and to--I didn't want to be beholden to anyone I didn't respect. And I had a--so I actually had a wonderful--I mean there are moments I encountered. I said oh Harvard has invited me here to be a male person, a white male person, but I actually ended up really figuring out how to make Harvard my place too and have it be as many, many things. And I actually loved Harvard, because I took a--the very first semester, classes were too big, but I studied with Harry Levin, who had known James Joyce personally, and I just came back from Memphis [Tennessee] where people were actually studying me as some kind of descendant of James Joyce now, just wild. Harry Levin is one of the great Shakespearean scholars of the 20th century. I got to study with him in the last couple years of his life. My child is now a major young Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] scholar and I think, which I was not, but part of what I learned from Harry I passed on to Caroline [Caroline Randall Williams] and Caroline has. But that second semester to get something small, I called every course to see what didn't have anybody in it 'cause I knew there was a Harvard rule that if three people signed up for a course they'd give it. So I literally called to find classes that had zero. And there was this one class about rural migration from the urban--I mean migration from the urban--rural South to the urban North, 1890 to 1930 Chicago [Illinois], a case study. So I got three or four of my friends, we signed up and took that class. It was wonderful. You know, that--and of course it interested me because of my family's migration to Detroit [Michigan]. There was enough objectivity 'cause it really was the Chicago story. And that was the beginning of trying to make Harvard my own place. My--a Japanese woman, Mimi Oka [Megumi Oka], signed up for that class with me. She is my best friend, thirty some years later. We've been to Tokyo [Japan] together, and Antarctica together, and France together, and Rome [Italy] together, and I am godmother to her two children, she is godmother to my child. So, and we're--that is really literally twenty-nine years ago now. Story_ID: 599169 Speaker 1: You're talking about Nathan Huggins, one of the great historians (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Wonderful book on the Harlem Renaissance. It was my honor and pleasure to study under Nathan for three years starting in my sophomore year at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I'm very proud of the A I got I think in his class. And we continued a professional mentor-mentee relationship and in fact, one of the things I'd love to document, my first year out of Harvard I started a program for public school kids with two of my friends in which we had kids read and re-read the same book over and over for a year to try to create higher levels of meaning. And Nathan actually flew up for our little graduation ceremony and presided over it with the students. He died tragically of pancreatic cancer many years later in about, I'm thinking ooh was it, Caroline [Caroline Randall Williams] was born in '87 [1987], maybe about '90 [1990] or '89 [1989], and very suddenly. And that was an immense loss for me. He was an absolute academic mentor for me at Harvard and that book 'Harlem Renaissance' [Nathan Huggins] influenced me greatly and encouraged me to want to be a novelist. Story_ID: 599170 Speaker 1: I think that was when I first read 'Passing' and got in- introduced to Nella Larsen. I fell in love, absolutely with the Jean Toomer 'Cane.' I think--myself I worked on--my Detroit [Michigan] background, the Sleeping Car Porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], A. Philip Randolph and labor union rising. I wasn't really writing about the writers and poets yet that much, except for I also loved the wonderful Claude McKay, I did write about Claude McKay. But it was just a treasure trove door opening of details of the Harlem Renaissance. It was so interesting, I used to study under the portrait of Arna Bontemps that was in the black, I think it was called black studies or African American Reading Room [African and African American Studies Reading Room] in Lamont Library at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] which is no longer there. Lamont is, but the African American Reading Room isn't. And then I ended up marrying Arna Bontemps' grandson [Avon Williams, III] (laughter), and Mimi [Megumi Oka] and I, my, my best friend who's Japanese American, we used to study in there together. And she's the one that actually loved Nella Larsen. So I studied with Nathan Huggins. Story_ID: 599171 Speaker 1: Another important memories to me was I had a job, said I was trying to make my living getting through Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], to help organize speakers for something called the Radcliffe Forum, and one of the speakers I organized was for Huber Matos when he just got out of prison. And he was one of the four generals or five generals of the Cuban Revolution. He had been in prison since almost the year I was born. And I must've met him in 19--I mean when I was twenty, had been twenty-eight years in prison with Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, Huber Matos and there was one other I think. And I asked him, how did he survive. And much of this time he was naked, some of it beaten, alone. He would write poetry in his head. And it re-inspired me with a sense of the power of language and the creation of capacities to endure and to make sense out of things. So, that was a wonderful--that job. And that's wh- I do think that adversities, one thing I would never trade, just life experiences, not of people, love is the most important thing in relationships. Was the need I had to put--or my money to go through Harvard and study created the opportunities and the strengths and the--that chance to meet Huber Matos. I worked with Jim (Unclear) and one female Irish Senator Kate Mallet [ph.], the people I worked with Huber Matos the most. To meet a man one or two weeks out of prison, who'd been in prison all the time I've been on earth. Any problems I thought I had and not to say I did not have any, they were eclipsed by this living presence of what this man endured. And of course in a larger sense, I go to that Langston Hughes poem, 'Mother to Son,' in this sense of the African American experience. One of the things, one of the reasons I am truly believe in this project The HistoryMakers, is to capture the part of black history and to be born black is to know that you can persevere, that you can transcend, we are a transcendent culture with the examples of it all around us. And I think that--I think that's one of the reasons the suicide rate is so low, much lower in the black community. But it is hard, though we face often difficulties. It is hard to perceive of what would be compared to trying to register to vote in Selma [Alabama] in 1961, an insurmountable difficulty. Well, it what--and--or a (unclear) I love that phrase, I'm gonna do it or die trying. That commitment that you are going to take an action or die in the attempt. I've almost stopped saying that, but I know what things I will do or die trying, and I know that it is honorable to die trying, whether or not you can do them. So, I think for me though in real life, part of that integrity was going through my experience of earning money to put myself through Harvard at that time and then learning that so many of the things that I did in that experience are things that inform me now. Story_ID: 599172 Speaker 1: So that was a fun--that was--then I graduated--the more important things were the friends, Mimi [Megumi Oka], David Feinberg, and then I graduated and I worked briefly for a literary agent, which came in handy later. A writer in residence at the Wolf Trap, the National Park for the Performing Arts [Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts, Vienna, Virginia]. But shortly, so I graduated in '81 [1981], but I fall in love my senior year while I was typing papers listening to this horrible, but wonderful radio station called Boston's Best Country, briefly Boston [Massachusetts] had a country station. And as--I was actually typing a screenplay. I took a course in screen writing with Alan Trustman my sophomore year, who wrote 'Bullitt' and 'The Thomas Crown Affair.' And this is before computer, so typing a one hundred ten page screenplay for someone who cannot type was a big deal with lots of white out. I started listening to all this country music and realizing that American tha- that--I've taken a course that--one of the few courses that I did truly poorly in at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on British metaphysical poetry, and I'd been taught that metaphysical poetry didn't exist anymore. And I said, "You know it's alive and well in country music, that 'Dropkick Me Jesus (Through the Goal Post of Life)' ['Drop Kick Me Jesus'] is a metaphysical conceit as it's quote, unquote cowboy." So, I got a little adversary there and I started getting interested in that. And I came up with this concept that I wanted to be a novelist, but I thought how am I gonna support myself since I have no family in a position to support me. You know, that my father [George Randall] by now was old for his age and had had suffered a couple of strokes. And I wasn't really in very much contact with my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] and stepfather. So, I decided--I came up with this idea that I would be a country song writer to support my serious writing. And the strangest thing is, the idea worked, it's exactly what happened. Speaker 2: Now, that is a, a idea that would seem strange, you know. Speaker 1: And it worked. Speaker 2: Someone who really didn't have much affinity to, to cou- country music before and, and all of a sudden, so, how soon was it after you wrote your paper and listening to the station did you become--decide that that was the course of action? Speaker 1: Well, I was, was writing that paper I think would've been in '79 [1979], that's when I started listening to country music. So over the next-- '79 [1979], '80 [1980], '81 [1981], I went from--I started listening as a joke and noticing some interesting intellectual things about it. Story_ID: 599173 Speaker 1: Over the course, by the time I graduated as a senior [at Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts] I co- come to respect it and was really interested in the unknown black. I recognized these simila- samar- similarities between the music I'd grown up with in Motown [Motown Records] in the early '60s [1960s] and country music. There're a lot of similarities. I was interested in the affinities between the two cultures. I--I've lived my life in two music cities, Detroit [Michigan], Motown and Nashville [Tennessee] Music City. The two of the most interesting songwriter communities in the United States (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what would be the affinities, I think, between every--just briefly, what, what would the affinity be between those two? Speaker 1: Well, literally they're both towns where there are songwriters who make their living as-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, the music, the music? Speaker 1: Oh, well they're both, country music--I teach now a course at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], Country Lyric in American Culture, is essentially the South--what is the southernness of country music, it is evangelical Christianity and the black experience. The banjo is an African instrument exported. The African influence is all through the actual music--I mean the fusical [ph.] instrumentations that banjo being the most extreme example. It's also through, when bluegrass groups trade solos, they absolutely got that from looking at jazz musicians in jazz clubs. That has been completely documented, that trading of so. It's not at all existent in old time music. Open throated singing is a mimicking of the way black people sang in the black churches. They used to do the shape duck singing which is a completely different thing. So country music is an Afro-Celtic style, it's more African then it is Celtic. Country music is--it's just sung with--by people with Appalachian accents sometimes. But the actual music, itself, is extremely southern black in terms of chord progressions, in terms of--then this affinity and concern with both poverty and alienation. One of the best examples is the song 'Son of Hickory Holler's Tramp' ['The Son of Hickory Holler's Tramp'], which is better known as a O.C. Smith's song. But it's been sung by Merle Haggard, it was actually written by a white songwriter. And it's basically been--it's a hard poverty song, a woman left with fourteen children. It was written in the white context, whose husband goes off. Everyone's gossiping about it and basically at night when she puts those chil- she promised fourteen children they'd never see a hungry day. Puts those kids to bed and then she whores in her own house. And the song is, "Yes I'm the son of Hickory Holler's tramp. The path is beaten, low footsteps leading to our cabin, upon the door they hung a scarlet lamp and late at night there--a knock would come and there would stand a stranger. Yes, I am the son of Hickory Holler's tramp." And then at the end of it goes, "And every year there's a big bouquet of fourteen roses and a card that says to the greatest mom on earth." This is the deepest affinity. Country music and soul music are music of dispossessed, marginalized communities who have to assert their own significance, particularly in moments in which they are in survival mode and doing things that the larger society does not find attractive or respectable. Story_ID: 599174 Speaker 1: And you know it's interesting, and I'll put this on the tape for this whole thing, I have a lot more to think about on this. I probably one day will write about this. But, you know, largeness in black women and I was thinking--my grandm- my mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] was a very slim, glamorous woman. My [paternal] grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall], I said, was big as three houses. I felt that I spend so much time writing, teaching, wife-ing, taking care of my child [Caroline Randall Williams], I don't have a lot of time, you know, to go to the gym, to do certain things. I do not eat weirdly. And when it comes down to it, when I really look at the difference between my friends who do not work at all. When I think of how I physically work and support my housekeeper's family with one daughter in ja- in and out of jail, her son who graduated high school I consider being one of my greatest achievements. I worked on everything from his teeth to his schoolteachers, with people and this other one, that, you know, I have nothing in common with women who have a lot of time to go get mani-pedicures or exercise for three hours a day. I am busy from--I came down in, you know, my paj- pajamas I'm wearing. But I start at 5:45 most mornings and I'm on the computer, and I'm working and writing and tending and doing usually until after midnight. And so, you know, at times I think there're people you could sit there and you can say oh my god, she's not taking care of herself. And then I think of those children, I think of that maid, that child of mine at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who isn't taking out--doesn't have to take weird loans because her godmother and because of us to go to Harvard. I think of Vivian's [Vivian Williams] children, the role I play in them. I think of the forty-three kids I'm teaching right now and I get back their papers, one week later when I turn them back their tests, these three hour tests this past Wednesday, they are all shocked, they said, "Normally when they do a test like that we don't get it back for a month." But I know how I want my child to be taught and I want those kids to be taught the way I want my children to be taught. That they have the benefit of my criticisms and my awarenesses of what they done well in real time when they can really benefit from it. Story_ID: 599175 Speaker 1: But so this, this--what I love about country music and then--is why is it not respected. It's interesting that Merle Haggard is not perceived as one of the great American poets. Well, 'cause he is not from the establishment, he is not educated, he does not--does not have the imprimatur of any institution. Neither does [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson. It doesn't mean that they are not among the most significant poets of the last century. I do believe that Smokey Robinson is a significant poet. I do believe The Temptations, who I remember when I want to remind myself of what I consider weak in myself, I remind myself that once upon a time I was ashamed of their shiny suits and their synchronized dancing. I think it's a far more significant performance art than anything done by Twyla Tharp or lots of more or Christos [ph.]. But the fact that society will not recognize the complexity of that performance, and I'm not talking about the songs, I'm talking about the synchronized dancing, the shiny suits and what it all says about modernity and glamour and transcendence, and you know, the way in which they are like quote, unquote machines, mimicking and commenting on the pistons and ime- and engines that they worked on and didn't work on, on the assembly lines. There is so much to still be dis-constructed about the dancing of the Motown [Motown Records] era. But yes, in the same way there's so much to be constructed. People wanna sneer at Dolly Parton and Loretta Lynn and not acknowledge that Loretta Lynn with her song 'The Pill' sent more women into having control of their own sexuality by having control of their own bodies and not having had babies, then all of these so called punk feminists who have never informed anyone's life. So, that is what I consider to be the close one--both of them, country and soul music. The soul--deal with are close to the rural South, close to the black experience and are not, I think, deeply and properly read by the outside culture because they don't like the superficial way in which they are coated. They're both extremely transgressive and that the people refuse to follow the norm. Some people think R and B isn't that way in terms or at least Motown R and B as opposed to blues. But to me, I see songs like, you know, 'My Girl,' "You could've done anything you wanna do," as being tremendous assertion--assertions of humanity and the significance of the potential for romantic love. And when you are asserting that significance and the delicacy of that, you're asserting humanity. Story_ID: 599176 Speaker 1: I just gave a lecture of this past week on a song that is both country and black, it's 'Memphis' by Chuck Berry. I think Chuck Berry is probably the greatest country singer. But when you think about it, he says--but he's also a very significant black si- singer, writer, performer, and two of the songs I'm most interested in is when Chuck Berry sings, "Go Johnny Go" ['Johnny B. Goode'], he's--he is singing a potential for black mastery. But when he says the line, "Oh but that little country boy can play," when do we--you know that the line is really, oh but that little nigger boy can play, but he is asserting his mastery as he demonstrates his mastery. And then you look at a song called 'Memphis, Tennessee' which seems like a little ditty, "Help me info- operator give me Memphis, Tennessee," but it's a song about a father trying to reunite with his child. It's a little girl, the only person who would call Memphis, Tennessee, that the child has been kidnapped away, which is sort of like my story in some way and the father, people want to talk about vanishing black fathers, I say look at that song 'Memphis, Tennessee,' look at that father desperately trying to call his daughter who is too young to even know her telephone number and leave it. These stories in which black men and black people have tried to reunite their families, and that song 'Memphis, Tennessee' is a country standard. It's a rock--baby rock standard, but it's also a very important piece of black literature that is not recognized. I put it right beside the Charles Chesnutt [Charles W. Chesnutt], 'The Wife of His Youth.' But that man is sitting there and saying, "Help me get in touch with my Marie. All the fun we have," and you think of some kind of erotic statement about a girlfriend he's separated from, he's talking about a little child that he did love to play with and that he did cherish. Story_ID: 599177 Speaker 1: So, that's where I think of these country and R and B have rejected text, text that have been rejected. I am very interested in that as well, and within country, the black influence has been rejected. I mean I definitely think I came down here [Nashville, Tennessee] because it was a very subversive thing, I thought I would take this part of the exploited black culture, I'll get it to support my very Afrocentric novels, and I did. That--overall working with it, I fell in love with a lot of country music and it's interesting. With a lot of the writers of country music, because you cannot write and know country music without loving many, many, many elements of black culture and not having a very strong understanding of caste, class and poverty. And songs such as, "I turned twenty-one in prison doing life without parole, no one could turn me right, but Mama tried," ['Mama Tried'] the Merle Haggard. There are many a hip hop artist could sing that same song today. And I'd like to point that out when people think or Johnny Cash singing and writing, "I shot a man in Reno just to watch him die," ['Folsom Prison Blues']. Then people want to--I do not see any great movement to keeping these songs off the radio and people wanna ban hip hop because it has quote, unquote violence in it. Well, why doesn't anyone say anything about Johnny--, "I shot a man in Reno just to watch him die." I mean there's plenty of people murdering people all over country music and no one. But it's interesting in that context to accept that. But what I am interested in is it--when you put them together you realize that poverty will cause people to do desperate and strange things. And the song 'Fancy,' another country song, it causes a mother to whore her child right after a cockroach is walking over the tip of her high heel shoe. I still condemn that, I could condemn that in a black or a white context. But country and R and B deal with these hard moments where sisters and friends, there's 'Goodbye Earl,' there's a hip hop song, I'm forgetting the title, where sisters and fri- friends go and kill a man that's abusing their, their friend, or 'Goodbye Earl' said, "He walked right through a restraining error--order." And--but the friend knows what to do, she feeds him poisoned black eyed peas. I mean, she's not--she can't deal with the law anymore, she's not gonna sit there and let this man kill her friend. And that was--I mean that--I find that--I find 'Goodbye Earl' a very significant country song, I think there's a lot of black strength in that song too. And it reminds me of--you know, I've gotten to be very interested in Tupac and I write in my second novel, 'The Negro of Peter the Great' ['The Moor of Peter the Great'], I translate Pushkin's [Alexander Pushkin] incomplete novella, 'The Negro of Peter the Great' into hip hop language. And I strongly contrast Tupac to Pushkin, they both die from bullet wounds, they're both great poets who bleed to death over a period of days. And I'm saying, there's too much of that. That we have to move beyond that. These great brilliant people. But I wo- so what I'm saying there is, I think though Pushkin is a country writer 'cause what did Pushkin do. Like Langston Hughes, he took the folk country, the serfdom of the Russian experience and the folk language of the countryside and infused it with a high language of Saint Petersburg [Russia] or Petersburg or Moscow [Russia]. It's a very country thing to do. Story_ID: 599178 Speaker 1: What was your first country music hit? Speaker 2: My first recording (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how did you--I mean, you know, how long did you have to wait for it? Speaker 2: Two years almost to the day I came to Nashville [Tennessee] I had my first song recorded and it was the B side of a number one song. So, that's sort of a pseudo-semi hit. That was called 'Reckless Night' about a young unwed mother, Forester Sisters, and that would've been '84 [1984] or '85 [1985]. I got married in '85 [1985], it was the year before that. I got proposed to and the song recorded the same day. Then, a little bit after that, my first hit was a top five song called 'Girls Ride Horses Too' from about '87 [1987], and remember I started in '83 [1983], so I had my first top ten in less than four years. And then my first num- my number one, I've only had one number one, was I believe in '94 [1994] or '93 [1993], and that was 'XXX's and OOO's (An American Girl)'. I've had approximately thirty songs recorded. I am, depending on how you look at it, the only black woman in history to write a number one country song. And what I mean by that, is a song that is not a pop song that was recorded by a country artist. That is a song that actually charts primarily on the country charts. Donna Summer, some people claim, wrote a--she had a Dolly Parton hit ['Starting Over Again'], but it was when Dolly was mainly charting on the pop charts, and it's a pop song. There's nothing in the content of the song nor in the p-- Speaker 1: But she didn't write it, right, she just--she performed right? Speaker 2: Donna Summer wrote it-- Speaker 1: Donna Summer wrote it, okay. Speaker 2: --but Dolly recorded it. But she recorded it not as a country artist, as a pop artist. So, I'm just saying that-- Speaker 1: Which one was that, was that the? Speaker 2: It's a really unknown song, it's not a sig- you will never have heard of it. It did-- Speaker 1: But it was a one--a number one hit, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was, but it was like an oddly, you will never--no one has ever heard of this song. It's like, I can't even think of it. I've never heard the song in my entire--I mean, I've never heard the song. It was just spoken to the popularity of--I'm not even convinced how, how it has been located as a number one song. It is recorded as a number one song. It is a song that no one has heard of--I mean, and I believe in Dolly. I belong--I believe in Donna Summer, I think she's an amazing writer and singer of disco. She certainly wrote no other country songs and this song primarily charted on the pop charts. But I was just getting that--'cause I'm normally credited and in most text credit is being the only black woman. The only other debated ones are that one, there's that--there's a Donna Summer possibility of whether or not, but most people don't consider that a country song, it was just-- Speaker 1: Now, that's not the one that Whitney Houston recorded is it? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, that's a beautiful song that had a country--that's 'I Will Always Love You.' I have to tell you that I have literally not met any person who had ever heard of this song. And you can find it on Wikipedia if you look up either Dolly or, or Donna Summer probably. Story_ID: 599179 Speaker 1: Now what was, was the content of your number one song, do you, you consider that one of your best ones or was it--? Speaker 2: I consider it a very important song ['XXX's and OOO's (An American Girl)']. I've had about thirty country songs recorded, so I am a country songwriter. So in that way, again, if you put it as the only country songwriter, I mean Donna Summer is not a country songwriter, I am a country songwriter. So the only black woman country songwriter to write a--I thought it was a really important song I could tell because it's about the balancing of love and money in women's lives. So I think that's an important subject, so and the how working and nurturing balance together. And so--and I--you never know whether they're gonna be successful. Whether people--they find people. And it specifically references Patsy Cline and Aretha Franklin. So, it has some things that are--it's not as complex as some of the things I have done. I love the song I add- added to the country lexicon by a person called Mark O'Connor who's Grammy [Grammy Award] winning and it's a bluegrass song. It's about a man who gets lynched between his wedding and the reception. I'm more pro- I think that's more a complicated song I'm in some ways more proud of because I was horrified that there's almost nothing in the country repertoire that speaks to lynching and that's such a southern experience, and I wanted to speak to lynching. Speaker 1: And it certainly is and not eve- and not just even for black people. They lynched white people in those days too (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly. I mean-- Speaker 1: Though, though far more blacks, but-- Speaker 2: No, and lynching in fact, of all irony, we have the word comes from a family called Lynch, from--who are associated with Lynchburg, Virginia. And Melanie Christian, whose father's name is Lynch Christian, has a daughter whose name is Sarah Christian, and Sarah Christian was one of my daughter's [Caroline Randall Williams] best friends. And they are the Lynches from whom lynching was named. And originally it was referring to lynching up of royalist, white, English sympathizers in the area, which is just an interesting thing that we are actually friends with and have had in this house the family for whom lynching was named initially when it was mainly acted upon other whites. But I do think that this is--one of the things I've tried to do as a country songwriter is very consciously to broaden the number of experiences that are recorded and considered, and the course of that song is, "Who's gonna dance with Sally Anne, who's gonna take her trembling hand," ['The Ballad Of Sally Anne']. Who's--after her husband is killed between the wedding and the reception, after he hangs from the tree. And she originally in life, goes to all the weddings asking for her Johnny Dear. She's almost growing crazy and then in death she haunts these same--asking for an answer, asking for a response, asking for who is going to come in and join in her life now that her man has been stolen away from her by this violent crime, race based crime. Speaker 1: So is it written in a race context, it's a black man that's being? Speaker 2: It's a black man that's being lynched. "With love in his heart and flowers in hand, Johnny proposed to Sally Anne. Sally shivered as she said, 'I'll love you to the day you're dead.' But the ride--I refer to the ride to the church bore strange fruit as he--you could hear her cry as he hung from the trees, you could hear her cry." It's a really--and there--I'm trying to think of other-- Story_ID: 599180 Speaker 1: And then as I said in the song 'XXX's and OOO's' ['XXX's and OOO's (An American Girl)'] which is about a mother work--trying to balance work and as I say, "She's got her God, she's got her wine, Aretha Franklin and Patsy Cline, she's an American girl." Other songs I've actually done. I had a song recor- recorded by Glen Campbell that was called 'Who's Minding the Garden' that is overtly ecological in its concern. I had a song recorded about a European artist called 'I'll Cry for Yours, Will You Cry for Mine?' and it's about the legacy of the Civil War. And the song 'Girls Ride Horses Too' was much more of a feminist slant, I've done a lot more in that way, and that was really about drug dealing and men who are trying to intimidate women in that area. It sort of applies in both white and black context. So I've actually loved, though I went to country music to support my serious writing. It's a place where I feel I've done a lot of serious writing, particularly as a feminist. And 'cause that song, 'Girls Ride Horses Too,' I have another one called 'Small Towns (Are Smaller for Girls),' you can see some of these themes. 'Reckless Night' is about a young woman who's forced out of her church. I mean she's pregnant, unmarried, where her boyfriend/lover is kept inside the church. He's still singing in the choir 'cause he won't acknowledge it's his child and the girl and her baby are extras--exiled. But you know, sheltered in the arms of God. So I feel very--and my most recent song I've recorded is called 'Blinded by Stars, Tangled in Stripes' [sic. 'Blinded by Stars'] about the war in Iraq [Iraq War]. And people pursuing after oil and this patriotism and they're blinded by stars, tangled in stripes. You know, this is just not what freedom, the nature of what freedom is. But--so, I feel that my work has actually been much more political. I have written very few, nor have many recorded, but I don't write them to begin with, you know, sort of boring love songs. And when I went into this, I do think it's an important part of about preaching not to the converted to--there are bigotries in the modern suburban country audience that need to be addressed and the parts of the history that needs to be filled in, and I've worked to try to do that. Story_ID: 599181 Speaker 1: All right we talked about the country music to a certain extent. And I don't know if we're ab- and exhausted the subject or if we can, but like when did you start writing novels and I mean--I mean you're, you're-- Speaker 2: I perceive myself in my twenties, I was primarily a songwriter. In my thirties I was primarily a screenwriter. And in my forties I've been primarily a novelist, and so--and that was pu- by purpose. Speaker 1: Okay, well let's go through it chorn- chronologically. Screenwriting, now what, what, what contributions are in screenwriting did you make and--or what successes did you have in screenwriting? Speaker 2: Well, I really perceive I've only had one, quote, unquote depends on how you measure success, but success of a movie of the week that was pres- that was for CBS. I did a movie with Brandon Tartikoff and I and it was called 'X's and O's.' But when I first--the project that took me to Hollywood was a project called 'Mother Dixie' that [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones ended up buying and that Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] bought at one point, and la- those two different people have purchased it. That project has never been made, but who knows whether it will be and it was a--it is a wonderful project. And it was successful in the sense that it introduced me to Quincy Jones and from him I got my second best girlfriend, and did some interesting work, I think, along the way. And so I guess on one hand my success of things I've sold to major studios that one day might--one was 'Mother Dixie,' one was a story of a black cowboy called 'The Black Diamond Express: The True Story of Britt Johnson' ['Black Diamond Express'] is a fascinating character out in the Texas. Story_ID: 599182 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us a little bit about him I mean that's, that's somebody we ought to know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's really an interesting man. In the last great Comanche raid, we're talking in the late 1800s, there was a town that, that a black family, a wife and two children and maybe fourteen white women and children were kidnapped and all the white people Britt Johnson (unclear) were slaughtered in the town, it was one of the last biggest Comanche raids. Britt Joh- most people never wanted to get their family's wives back once they were kidnapped in that way because it was known that they were raped and soiled, and et cetera. Britt Johnson took three or four years and he got his wife and children, and several of those white women back. Speaker 1: This is a black man who goes after? Speaker 2: A black man. He took three years. He went into the Comancheria and to--where no one, white or black or Korean has ever gone. Speaker 1: You know what this sounds like, in terms of the story, it reminds me of 'The Searchers' with John Wayne in some ways. Speaker 2: But is a true story. This is a real man. I saw his real--I mean this is a true and it was just wild, and he made a life with his wife afterwards. He didn't care if she had been with, actually had a--some kind of committed--some kind of relationship with--ongoing relationship with the person (unclear) and brought his wife--he rescued his wife and children, and it took years. And he ended up ge- really gaining the respect of the Native Americans that he encountered and that essentially had div- he basically had to work with them to get them to give his wife and children back. Because where they were, three years ride into this was a land completely controlled by the Native Americans. So, he was a really interesting man. Speaker 1: So, wh- what time period is this--when did this happen? Speaker 2: It must be, now it's been so long since I've worked on this, but I feel like this was like the 1880s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Britt Johnson. And I flew out to--we were back of Canyon, Texas, back of beyond to do this research. I hiked under, over, and between barbed wire, stepped in, you know, I was way back in the middle of nowhere. Speaker 1: So, they made the movie ['Black Diamond Express']? Speaker 2: No they didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't make the movie. Speaker 2: Well, that's another one. Speaker 1: Okay, your-- Speaker 2: That--sold that to Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover attracting [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. So, I am--I'm telling you ones I've sold to major studios. That's one of the interesting--this is a little bit of black Hollywood history you're gonna get here since this is--. This is a hard thing that often studios will buy these very good stories, they'll pay you to do them, but then they don't want to make them. They end up controlling this part of the history because then you sold, you know, you--they paid you good money to do this thing, they own the script, then they control it, and if they chose not to make-- Story_ID: 599183 Speaker 1: I've worked on that, I've worked on 'Brer Rabbit.' I've worked on 'Parting the Waters.' I've worked on another--I guess one of my success noted to be, I worked as one of the writers who worked on 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' for Oprah Winfrey's company, Harpo [Harpo Productions, Inc.]. Ultimately, I'm not one of the ones that is officially credited just because really Susan, this is the fact, Susie-Lori Parks [HistoryMaker Suzan-Lori Parks] wrote the final script, period, exclamation point. Won the Pulitzer Prize [sic.]. I personally believe she should be given credit for it, even two of the other writers who worked before me and--they were--wanted credit just, they had worked on it, they had a different attitude. I felt that she should have it, so I would not put my name forward for credit. And I said I did not wish that. You know, it's collaboration, all of these scripts add to it. I think that I did some interesting, but that's just the interesting part of the history. To me, I felt the final script was Susie-Lori Parks, for good and for bad. There are things--a lot of things I didn't like about that final true piece script of 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' the Zora Neale Hurston. Speaker 2: So, screenwriting, you can actually make money but have your ego really wounded in the sense that if you--somebody buys your script-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --and sit it on a shelf and they don't do it, or maybe they change it completely and turn it--and turn it and appears (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh they, they change it to the point where you can't even recogni- I don't think--I don't feel that my--I have actually loved my screenwriting experiences because I take them each for the pleasure. I feel Oprah Winfrey, and I honor her this, gave me the money, paid me to sit down and think about Zora Neale Hurston for six months. That was an honor. And help pay to send my child [Caroline Randall Williams] to private school and off to France and skiing and whatever. But I love the, the opportunity to read about the vegetation in Zora Neale Hurston's world. I love the opportunity to climb under, over barbed wire in the middle of the Comancheria to give witness to Britt Johnson, and to go try to find the place his parents were buried. Even if they don't make that movie, it takes it further and I have a chance to pass that history down in some way. So, I--it's a complicated thing. I've worked on, I said, 'Brer Rabbit,' 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' 'Parting the Waters.' It's amazing to me, that book ['Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-63'] wins, I think, the Pulitzer Prize-- Speaker 2: Right, right, it did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Taylor [Taylor Branch]--it's an amazing book. It should be a miniseries. Harry Bel- everyone in the world's behind it. They had all these great--Jon Avnet, they don't do it. No, it's just heart--Diane Nash, and I love Diane Nash in that one. So, on the other hand I've had a chance to work on, you know, the--'Brer Rabbit' that I worked on was based on really interesting black scholars' work on it. All of these were wonderful projects, I don't regret each--and for a studio. I mean, I'm doing all of these for pay, for hire. Story_ID: 599184 Speaker 1: So, the other part, part of it doesn't worry you much-- Speaker 2: It worries me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I guess you have to-- Speaker 2: --the larger system of what Hollywood wants to green light and the images of quote/unquote us that they want to give permission to. That we end up with-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, so screenwriting is good? Speaker 1: I like screenwriting. I am concerned about what Hollywood actually finally produces. I'm really excited about working right now with BET [Black Entertainment Television] and Reggie Hudlin [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin], who's the president there. And Reggie and I go back to our Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] days. We were--both lived in North House [Pforzheimer House]. He was a sophomore when I was a senior. And we were making some of our old dreams come true right now. Speaker 2: He's a filmmaker, right? Speaker 1: Uh-huh and the president of BET. I really wish Hollywood would be more open about the number of dimensions of script, of stories that they tell that so many of the quote, unquote black historical stories like 'Amazing Grace' right now it's completely centered not on the black characters. And that even stories such as, I was trying to think of the wonderful historical--they're still doing a film about the victorious Battle of Nashville where the black soldiers with the white soldiers actually defeated the Confederate Army. Speaker 2: There's a film being? Speaker 1: No, there's no film on that, but there is a film 'Glory' about the slaughter, 'Glory' is a wonderful film, but it's really about black people get slaughtered, ultimately. Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's not even acc- in, in terms of what it--I mean, pe- people think they all were killed and they weren't all killed? Speaker 1: No, but I'm saying the film they made is about black people ultimately getting slaughtered. Denzel Washington being beat. These are the things that they are choosing to make dramatic. So, I--why do we not have this wonderful story of at least interesting alliances of the Battle of Nashville where runaway slaves joined with the Union Army and actually defeated the Confederates. Why is there no movie of that? And I don't really completely under- I mean, I, I have no--I don't even come to any conclusion. I am disheartened by that part. The process of writing movies and reflecting on these histories. Story_ID: 599185 Speaker 1: My own private part of it as a screenwriter, and this is for your history project, is there many more people toiling successfully, making six figure, I mean my most profitable probably per thing because of this number you get to sell, I also sold a movie called 'Shadowboxing' to Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation]. That was probably the first movie, in fact that was the first movie I ever sold about a black woman and an Asian woman who kidnap a dying boxer and try to give him a good death in Ireland. So, 'Shadowboxing,' 'Mother Dixie,' 'Black Diamond Express,' 'Brer Rabbit' that was called hip hop, that was a cleaver time, way back. Working on a version of 'Their Eyes Were Watching God'. Those are five that I've sold. I also sold one, 'The Voice of God' [ph.] to HBO. I was a non-credited, this is an interesting, my biggest success has to be--this is a nice little bit of history you'll be able to document, is Eddie Murphy's movie, 'Boomerang' for free 'cause I'm good friends with Reggie [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] who directed it and his brother Warrington [Warrington Hudlin] who produced it. I got to go work on that movie. I only survived about three days 'cause Robin Givens totally drove me crazy. And we were having dinner after my first full day of working with her and I picked up my water glass and the water was just shaking at the top of the glass. And she said one more thing, and I just said I quit. And she said, "You can't quit." I said, "I live in Nashville, Tennessee where you can live in abject luxury for a hundred thousand dollars a year, I can and do quit, right now," (laughter). But what was wonderful was, I told them afterwards, I said, "I'll give you one thing for free, my ending for the script." 'Cause originally as that script was written, the Robin Givens character got the man. I wanted the Halle Berry character to get the man. And I wanted her to capture him back by her artwork, and that's exactly what happens. And they used--and she--he sees her art work on that bus when he--and he realizes he wants her. So, that was--and so I got to do the ending. And Reggie wouldn't tell me to the, the opening at the, you know, whatever Chinese Theatre [Grauman's Chinese Theatre; TCL Chinese Theatre] in Los Angeles [California], which ending, whether they used my ending. I said, "I'm gonna give you that for free." And what's so funny is Halle Berry at that time was not remotely a big star. Speaker 2: No she wasn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She had just been this sort of crack [crack cocaine] ho, and what's cute is when they were talking about the script they referred to the Robin Givens character as the Kimiko [Kimiko Jackson] character, who's my second best friend who's very beautiful and you know, brilliant, but also a former model, and the Halle Berry was the Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Randall] character, the me character, because she was sort of quirky, funky, fun, that's how Halle Berry was perceived at that time, as this sort of quirky, smart, pretty, but not beautiful. She has--was beautiful in that movie and has turned into being a stunning beauty. But it was funny, when she was being cast, she was considered as a quirky, smart, funky, fun, interesting girl, not--. But that was--so, I think that my ending of 'Boomerang' which Halle Berry does credit in most interviews as being a breakthrough roll for her. And I think it was much more of a breakthrough because it turned her into being the character. If she had not gotten the Eddie Murphy character at the end, I don't think she would've been the same significance. And that to me is a great example about doing quote, unquote the hard right thing. That I wanted to do that, but I didn't want to do that for money. I wanted to do it because it was a right thing. That the more intelligent interesting woman, not just the superficially cute one should've gotten that man. And Robin Givens needed--oh, I remember the line she said to me, I'll put this in this history too. She said to me, I was taking--they had a line in the movie where these two black women walk into a restaurant and they start talking French to each other, it's a restaurant in America. And I was gonna say, that maybe they didn't want the men at the table to know why they were--what they were saying and that's why they were talking French. I wanted to change that part. And she literally said something to me, "You may not be aware of it, but there are black people who can speak French." And that's when I brought my glass of water and was trying to drink. And I said to her, "Robin, not only am I aware that there are black people in America who can speak French, I am one of those black people in America who can speak French. At this moment, I actually own a house in France, a teeny tiny hovel of house, but a house nevertheless. My best friend owns a large house in France. She went to middle school in France and then to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But in all the times that we have been able to speak French together in France, I have never had reason to walk into a restaurant in New York [New York] with her and start speaking French for no reason whatsoever," (laughter). This--and that's about--and the next one was, "I quit. I'm not working with you." And that was--but I love that, said, said, although I might not be aware of it, there were black people who--in America who spoke French. And that's what she--and I said, I just wanna give them a reason to speak French before they just start speaking French (laughter). That was one of--that's a little funny historical moment. Story_ID: 599186 Speaker 1: Wow, so screenwriting can be interesting, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've loved it, it's taken me all over the world. I mean with--I've them--here's a--oh I wish I could remember the name, the man who bought my first movie, which was 'Shadowboxing' was an African American man who produced the movie 'Big Boy and Little'--it was about nuclear fusion. Something like 'Big Boy and Little Man' [sic. 'Fat Man and Little Boy'] it was about nuclear fusion, something like 'Big Boy and Little Man,' you can look up the title of it. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And he was an--a first--a big--a significant--one of the first African Americans apparently to be in a green light of thumb there. And then I came to pitch a movie to him, 'Mother Dixie,' but he wasn't very nice to me in my meeting. And so I thought I'm not gonna tell him my real idea. So, I invented a movie on the spot. I said, "How would you like a movie about a black girl and a Japanese girl who kidnap a dying boxer and they take him to Germany for a good death." No wait--they take him to Yugoslavia for a good death. And he said, "Wait, wait, wait, I love it, but let's make it unified Germany." So I tried to make it unified Germany and I'm thinking he's not gonna buy this movie. I go to my hotel room that night and the agent calls me and said, "Paramount's [Paramount Pictures Corporation] calling and they want to know something about some movie I've never heard of. What are they talking about." I said, "There is no movie, I just made that up on the spot. Just ask him for some money," and it wasn't like a bunch of money but it was more than whatever the (unclear) and maybe it'll go away in a moment. I said, "Do not do this." So, she calls back and said, "Mazel tov, you sold the movie." They bought it. So, I tried to put in unified Germany, but I don't speak German, I only tried it about ten days, and they didn't want to buy Yugoslavia. I've been to Yugoslavia which is why I threw it. But--we--I put in Ireland, so everyone can speak English and it was really wonder- it was, and of course the day I turned that movie in, that guy a week later gets fired, and so that's the end of that movie. Hollywood is a funky, funny, little place. But, that got me started. Story_ID: 599187 Speaker 1: Well, we wanna talk about novels now. Speaker 2: Yes. So, I wrote movies in my thirties, got frustrated when I was writing scripts and people were paying me, but they never finally got made. So my fortieth birthday present to myself was gonna be a new novel, so I started it about a year and a half in advance, and it was 'The Wind Done Gone' [Alice Randall]. And I've always wanted to be a novelist. I felt like I'd been putting it off too long. And that I sat down and I wrote--ever since I had heard about 'Pamela' ['Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded,' Samuel Richardson] and 'Shamela' ['An Apology for the Life of Mrs. Shamela Andrews'], the novel was being born. 'Pamela' was one of the first novels which--written by the British writer Richardson [Samuel Richardson]. And right afterwards, Fielding [Henry Fielding], who had 'Tom Jones' ['The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling'] wrote 'Shamela' 'cause he didn't like 'Pamela.' And so I was familiar with book link critiques of other novels in the form of a new novel, 'Pamela' and 'Shamela.' I was familiar with Jean Rhys' 'Wide Sargasso Sea' that retells and tells a portion of the tale from 'Jane Eyre' [Charlotte Bronte]. I was familiar with the African American history of the cakewalk coded parody. I'm particularly touched by Skip Gates' [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] work in that on the--in 'The Signifying Monkey' ['The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of African American Literary Criticism']. And so I wanted to write a novel in a coded parody in a kind of black English that was a book link critique of the other text, the 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] text, and so I did that. And I loved doing that. The moment I started writing novels I realized I had truly come home as far as it was concerned with the genre. I love songwriting. I think songwriting is the most elemental form. Every culture has songwriters, 'cause mommies always sing to their children. There're cultures that don't have sculptures, cultures that don't have plays or ballet. There is no culture in the world that doesn't have singing and songwriting. 'Cause mothers invent songs. But I love, so I love songwriting. I will always be a songwriter at heart. In terms of ordering my own experience, transcending life, loving li- falling more deeply in love with life, there is nothing for me like reading or writing novels. I love writing novels. 'Wind Done Gone' is a very formal and intellectual novel. It's taught--this is a nice thing to get documented, it's been, you know, taught twenty some universities and major courses. It's been taught at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it's been taught at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], it's taught University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], taught at Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] as a preeminent example of American parody. It's--I was just at University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], it's being taught in all kinds of classes there. It's taught out west. So, all over the country. Story_ID: 599188 Speaker 1: And then, 'Pushkin and the Queen of Spades' [Alice Randall], as I said earlier, it's a story, you know, simply put of a black woman intellectual kind--whose name is Windsor Armstrong who has a child between her freshman and sophomore year at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which I did not do. And she raised him to be the most intellectual black boy in the world, but instead he becomes a defensive lineman for a team like the Titans [Tennessee Titans] and is about to marry a white, Russian, lap dancer, and this woman is about to go crazy. And it deals with unintensi- unintended consequences of Brown versus Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and integration. And because one of the things people don't know, is that now that little black children are going into white schools at very early ages. When I contrast my kindergarten experience to my daughter's, my daughter in all external markers has a far more privileged life, I told you external markers than I had. She went to the finest preschool in the city [Nashville, Tennessee] and she went to the finest kindergarten in the city. But as a kindergarten child, she had a child say to her, "You are doodoo-esque color." This is a child I am paying good money to take out to lunch 'cause she's gone to an all-white preschool until she arrived at this integrated kindergarten, a different preschool than what my child went to and she's never met black children. And so all of her hostilities and anxieties about this come out, and my child was confronted with as a little child in her--where she was a star student and well loved and many friends. But I didn't experience intimate racism in my kindergarten class [at St. Philip's Day School, Detroit, Michigan], everybody was black. The smartest person was black and the dumbest person was black. The richest person was black and the poorest person was black. So blackness was really not an issue. In Caroline's [Caroline Randall Williams] class, by the time she's in middle school in her integrated school, she was the only black girl across four grades of middle school in the accelerated math. That took its toll on her. Caroline has never--until she arrived at Harvard, I don't think she has one--had a black subject area teacher. She started off with a kindergarten--I'm talking about kindergarten to twelfth grade. She'd never has had--no her schools has had them, but just the luck of the draw of her classroom, with integration, she has never had a black teacher teach her math or English. She's had black sports teachers. I have hired black people to tutor her, so something--so she'd have the exposure in different. She's never had a person sitting at the front of the classroom, standing there that looked like her. So when people talk about affirmative action, I talk about equitable assessment. My child did get an 800, in fact this is one thing I wanna talk about in depth for one moment is the achievement gap. I consider my greatest achievement as a person, period, that my child was not a victim of the achievement gap. There are not forty black children in the United States, and there's probably not twenty who have four grandparents who are African American, the descendants of people enslaved in these Americas, who achieved 800 on the SAT in the entire country two years ago, the last time it was looked at. My child is one of them. And it is not by happenstance and it's not just 'cause she's bright. I have worked on, watching and looking at the invisible bruises and barriers to achievement that come up, that I did not take them down for her, I taught her to take them down for herself. And when she only to--she got a 700 and 800 the first time, that was great. And she has lots of--but what's more important is she's deeply educated, but, but is wild is that 700 on the SAT in math, because my child's math IQ is substantially higher than her verbal IQ. But I think of her third grade teacher who said to me, "I'm so surprised Caroline is my best math student." This is a private school I'm paying hundr- lots of money for her education and she's not on one dollar of scholarship. That's when I was a single mother, I paid every dollar of it. And I said, "Do you think it makes har- harder or easier for Caroline to be your best math student that you are so surprised, and you want to continue to be so surprised all year." And ultimately, I considered that one of the saddest--not--it's not sad, but it's a sad thing for other people who are not Caroline and do not have me as their mother. That that 100 points that Caroline who has a much higher, her IQ has been measured and her math IQ is way ove- ranges up to 180, it like st- about 155 and there're pieces of it that range up to 180. There're pieces of it, as they told me, like they report that people, the average person winning the Nobel Prize in science does not have Caroline's math IQ. However, Caroline is not a great math student. That the drip, drip, drip, I mean, you know, I'm not saying compared to the rest of America, basically she is. But the drip, drip, drip on her, the fact that I couldn't even find, scrutinizing and looking and searching an American born, I'm not talking about West Indian, Nigerian, black woman to put in front of her and to let her meet who was a brilliant Ph.D. in algebra. The fact that you can count the number of black American women who have Ph.D.'s in the hard math, you know, using your appendages, hands and feet, is a hard thing. Story_ID: 599189 Speaker 1: Now, I love one of the reasons we sent her away to boarding school, she went to St. Paul's [St. Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire] which have a lot of girls of color. Although interestingly enough, not as many are--have four African Ameri- grandparents who are of African--were descendants of Africans enslaved in these Americas. One of her best friends was Nikaba Runabi [ph.] who is at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] now. Brilliant math, science person. Both of her parents are black M.D./Ph.D.'s and both Afri- African immigrants to the United States. I'm not sure that they're--whether they're American citizens or not. Both brilliant. Mother is M.D./Ph.D. Father was an Olympian and a scientist and ma- now Nikaba is a brilliant, young, black, math, science person. I am thrilled to death that Caroline [Randall's daughter, Caroline Randall Williams] had lived next door to Nikaba and learned, and Nikaba cried the first time Caroline did spectacularly well in math test. And they--and then Caroline helped push her up in humanities. But you have to work against this, I had to send my child away to school, my adored child. She has a thousand square foot bedroom upstairs. I had to send her away to school so she could meet Nikaba. So that when the president of my school Ha- Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], last year Larry Summers [Lawrence Summers], two years ago said that, you know, was wondering about genetic inferiority of women in the math and sciences, he s- Caroline just naturally said he hasn't met Nikaba. He wouldn't say this if he had ever met Nikaba. But--so, I'm just saying it's a hard row to hoe and so many are lost. And when literally when you think of the--and the achievement gap is greater--I don't know if you're familiar with this, these hard numbers pro- provided by the Educational Testing Service, which I have sought out and gotten, among privileged black children than it is among under privileged black children, and I think that is part of the sneaky weird effect that we're still dealing with of integration, which I'm a hundred percent in favor of integration, but we cannot be stupid about it. And we have to realize the tax of when you put children in integrated environment you're often putting them in quietly racist environments and truly getting beat down. And by the time they get in high school, they're exhausted. And in more privileges like 'The Rage of a Privileged Class,' [HistoryMaker] Ellis Cose's book. The more a black child--my child has had more opportunity to have more people confounded by her very existence, antagonistic to her very existence, unwilling to recognize her achievement and then also--'cause everyone thinks there's so much affirmative action. I've had friends here over and over say, "Of course Caroline got into Harvard that she--," that was black essentially. Well I'm thinking, well if your child had an 800 on the SAT on the first time she took it (laughter), your child probably--a white male child with Caroline's exact grades would have a very good chance of getting into Harvard. And in fact, the majority of people who were admitted into Harvard last year are white people (laughter) still--that's it's not--. So it's just such a weird thing that what you're dealing with that the achievements they have, people are assuming that she's getting it because she's black, whatever that means. Whereas I can say that in--I think it's a wo- but it's a very inter- it's a very interesting unobserved issue of how few black kids by these external measures, SA- achievement test scores are achieving--I think it's in--it's like sixteen to eighteen thousand white children who get the 800 and maybe even larger than that now, it's just wild what the difference of this is. And, and people really haven't looked at the impact on privileged black children where in fact it's showing up that the achievement gap is actually greater. People thought it would be li- less at--when you mean for family education and wealth, it's greater. Story_ID: 599190 Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back to 'The Wind Done Gone' [Alice Randall] and the response to 'The Wind Done Gone.' We were talking about the southern interpretation of its own history and which now have challenged is called revisionism, believe it or not. Well, you know, but, but people didn't like your--I mean, what prompted you in the first place to--I mean what was your--what was your perspective on 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell], wha- what side were you trying to show when you wrote 'Gone with the Wind'--I mean 'The Wind Done Gone' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was trying to tell the untold story. You know, I was one--I was literally that daughter [Caroline Randall Williams] I was just talking about. I was worried that she was coming of age in a southern society where girls and people start to read 'Gone with the Wind.' And I didn't want it to be there assaulting her images and ideas about herself and to stand on the shelf un-rebuked, un-scorned. So I wanted to do that. And my--one of my favorite compliments I've gotten, is someone wrote that it was my book is like Prissy slapping Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara] back. The literary equivalent of Prissy's qo--slapping Scarlett back, I love that. But, on a more serious level, I wanted to note--I wanted to try to pa- bring attention to the fact that I think 'Gone with the Wind' is an actively act of propaganda that was more about 1937 then 1837. Because you're just writing a southern love story, you wouldn't need to even mention black congress people, which the book 'Gone with the Wind' mentions over and over. If you were just writing a love story, you would've maybe given Mammy children of her own. But, Mammy in 'Gone with the Wind' rocks no baby of her own. It is--and relentlessly the black people in 'Gone with the Wind' are depicted as being stupid and I think it was about trying to find an apology for Jim Crow segregation in 1937, and argue that the proper role of a black woman is to rock no child of her own, but to take care of white children. And that we need to keep black people down in their place to make them available to be the most attractive black character in there Mammy--not the least attractive black character in the book, the bad black congress people that she literally depicts as goober eaters. Speaker 1: Now, those are not in the movie ['Gone with the Wind'] and I've heard that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] actually did some protest during, during the day (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they--and I--it's interesting, they lobbied strongly and had a whole letter writing campaign to keep the word nigger out, to keep the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] out. People forget that Scarlett's second husband [Frank Kennedy] died on a Klan raid to clean out quote, unquote darky town. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one that was portrayed by Leslie Howard, the fir- the second husband, oh okay, I'm not even sure what you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The second husband who is--owns the sh- the store in town. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so, I--the book--the movie is much less racist. Also because the achievement of Hattie McDaniel. Hattie McDaniel imbued the character with an intelligence it did not have in the book. It specifically says that Mammy was not smart, that she had elephant like eyes, literally. And another document I have personally witnessed that's interesting, the contract that she signed. She weighed three hundred pounds when she signed the contract it said to portray Mammy. Mammy in the book actually weighs two hundred pounds and they said that--that she was not allowed to lose any weight, which is a wild controlling of black women's images. That they were afraid Hattie McDaniel would lose some weight and they did not want her to lose weight while--before filming the movie, even though in fact she was larger than the size that Mammy is li- was said to be in the book. So again, it's a controlling--a distorting of the black woman's image. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a dancer at one point before she gained all that weight. And she ate like lots of donuts to get fat to play maid roles, that's what-- Speaker 2: Right. Those--it's a very complicated, interesting issue. But, so the book is much more racist. It relentlessly uses the word nigger and it depicts all the darkies. So I said if you had a plantation as large as Tara, if there was someone as stupid as Prissy, she would be in some far off hill. She would not be helping anyone quote, unquote birth any babies. Story_ID: 599191 Speaker 1: So, I decided to address the text of 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] with a text of my own ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall]. And also I wanted to report on the historical experience that black people had in response to the book. 'Cause one of the most interesting things is one of the judges said, Judge Charles Pannell [Charles A. Pannell, Jr.]. He literally said, from his bench in the court the first time we had to go to court in Georgia, "You kill Miss Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara] and marry Rhett [Rhett Butler] off to a stranger." He actually pointed down at me like this (gesture) from the bench, speaking quote, unquote out of turn. Although I was told a judge could speak anytime he wants in his own courtroom. But the other opposing council was actually speaking before he broke in and just said--addressed me, pointing at me, and said, "You kill Miss Scarlett and marry Rhett off to a stranger," like these are real people. Then, he put an injunction against the publication of my book saying it was more dangerous imply- than the Pentagon Papers. We pointed out the Pentagon Papers, they didn't stop the presses. He said this was worse. Speaker 2: Why these characters are sacrosanct, don't you realize that-- Speaker 1: Yes, we talked about Miss Mitchell's [Margaret Mitchell] and his ruling. Miss Mitchell's beloved characters. Now that helped us. He took belo- and I always said I wrote in the pages of the Los Angeles Times beloved by who. It is not as if I am writing for people who love 'Gone with the Wind.' I said anybody who loves 'Gone with the Wind' and wants to keep loving 'Gone with the Wind' should not read my book. I do not wish them to read my book. But I--we pointed out--I pointed out, Malcolm X put in his autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X'], which I well know was not just written by Malcolm X but was also written with Alex Haley's help, that an entire summer of his life was ruined by watching the movie, 'Gone with the Wind.' That it shamed him that much. I pointed out a text that could shame Malcolm, what could it do to a lesser person, white or black. Truly damage their mind. But this judge, it was new information to him and that's one of the ways we won in the federal appeal case, that one of the most dramatic and ironic things about the whole issue was, that it turned out that even intellectual people, a white judge on the federal court bench was not aware there are black people who took issue with the depiction of the blacks in 'Gone with the Wind' and the South portrayed in 'Gone with the Wind.' This is just pure new information to him, which is something that is protected under the First Amendment. New information. This is--but it is wild to me that this was new information to him that black people--that he--I said they're not beloved to everybody. A sequel to 'Gone with the Wind' could be written from a black perspective which is what they were alleging I had written. And I said that could be called Cynara goes to Tara. And that book would be all the black people are just as dumb as they were and all the white people were just as beautiful and that's the world I'm continuing. That's not what I did. I turned it all si- upside down very consciously. Most all the white people in my world are dumb and evil, and the black people were almost all beautiful and brilliant. That is not because I think all black people are brilliant and beautiful, I was trying to get them to keep readers to notice black and white, that the starkness of Miss Mitchell's portrayals, the politicizing of these images and stereotypes. How she was using them to justify Jim Crow's co-segregation. I brought my black congressman to the fore, because people failed to notice, as I point out, that she mentions many, many, many times black congressmen always to say they are stupid and corrupt. Of course actually some of the black congressman, one of them had gone to Eden, others of them had gone. They were some of the most extraordinary, the black congressman who got to go to [U.S.] Congress in the restoration Congress. A lot of them were just absolutely amazing figures who had, had great educations. So it was just so--it's still--but, literally, they sued me for $10 million. I did not put on weight until that suit. I literally probably weighed to this day sixty to seventy pounds more than I did before that lawsuit. It was so traumatic, so shocking, the stress of it was so horrible. They sued us for $10 million, more than anything we have. You know, our house, my child's [Caroline Randall Williams] education, everything I ever saved and worked for. They had one of their people testimony called me a literary parasite in one of the documents. It was just horrifying. Our legal fees were seven figures to defend me, you know, to defend my book before my book got freedom. Story_ID: 599192 Speaker 1: I had death threats, threats to my house. Speaker 2: You had to have guards you said? Speaker 1: I had to have Pinker- my publisher had to hire--for us to go out on a book tour, they finally said the day, "I'm not sure I can say that you should go on a book tour or not, we cannot recommend it, we cannot." And we had to hire Pinkerton guards, those guards. When I spoke in Atlanta [Georgia], I think we had three or four. The entire opening book tour. It was that serious, it was that serious. I had people be ugly at the just even dry cleaner. Although my dry cleaner sort of--and some other. It was just--some places it's interesting that people also stood up for my work. But it was extremely wild. I mean, I was--what my child had something horrible said to her at school and another child said that I should never--'cause they didn't like the miscegenation that Cynara and Rhett [Rhett Butler] are married in my book ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall]. And, and this child said to my child, "Well my parents are against interracial marriage 'cause black men are more violent and your mother should not have written that book and caused all this trouble in the first place." And so that was funny 'cause my child said, "Well then I think your parents are racist." And the school got mad at Caroline [Caroline Randall Williams] for calling the other child a racist and she--or saying that or referring her parents as being racist 'cause the other child started to cry. And they wanted both children to apologize. Of course my child would not apologize. And they called me and they--luckily they said that she should talk to me about it. And I said, "Well I will rebuke Caroline for being rude and idealistic. I think that she was attempting to inform the child that she felt that her parents--," I said, "I think it's a definition of racist that your parents say that they're against intermar- interracial marriage 'cause black men are more violent. That is clearly a racist statement." So I said, "I stand by the truth, is its own reward. Caroline spoke the truth." Now I said, "I think she was being idealistic and tactless to share that truth with the child, but I certainly do not believe that my child needs to apologize to anyone for that." And those two actually ended up taking their children out of the school the next--the next year. They removed. Because they actually thought it should be acceptable to say to--that my child should've apologized to their child. And the whole family, I mean, paid a price. We had a lot of retaliations in a lot of different ways acted on us for, for my having the audacity to throw dirt on Miss Mitchell's [Margaret Mitchell] beloved characters. Speaker 2: Okay, so, but how, how was the suit resolved (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well, ultimately we won on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit]. It was--and it was interesting. It was a hundred--all the three judge panel all agreed. They said that it would've been quote, unquote egregious abuse of judicial discretion that Judge Pannell [Charles A. Pannell, Jr.] had ruled that he has. A weird ironies in life, when we went--I went later and spoke on a panel with the American Bar Association with one of the judges, he and his mother or grandmother and Miss Mitchell were very good friends. And he said he loved 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell]. He basically did not like my book, but he acknowledged, he said that I had conscripted the elements of Miss Mitchell's book to wage a war against it and that the law allows. That it was clear that my book was not a substitute for any book that they would publish. That my book was all about rebuking, scorning, critiquing 'Gone with the Wind.' It wasn't that I was trying to be on the shirttails of their audience. Nobody who remotely liked 'Gone with the Wind' would like my book. The Melanie [Melanie Wilkes]--the Melanie character my--Mealy Mouth is a sadistic multiple murderer, because I am raising the question. And in 'Gone with the Wind,' the book and the movie, that's the Olivia De Havilland role. She's the sweetest, perfect, but I say how sweet can you be if every floor you walk on, every roof above your head, every dress you wear is paid by, by someone else's slavery, shackles, sold children, beat husbands. How sweet can you be? And my point is, you can't be sweet. Every one of those people is ugly and disgusting no matter what they think. If they wanna benefit silently in that time or afterwards from other people's suffering, as far as I'm concerned they are all multiple murderers in some sense. So, including the--you know, me who is part white, part black and I'm a descendant of a planter and a descendant of slaves, we all have some kind of culpability in this thing. So, that was very, very interesting. Story_ID: 599193 Speaker 1: I mean one of the most horrible experiences of my life. I would like to tell--is when we went to go speak at the Margaret Mitchell House [Atlanta, Georgia]. There was a man in a Confederate uniform marching (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how did--wait a minute, before we even get into this, now how does such a thing even be of--how was that arranged that you would speak at the Margaret Mitchell House? Speaker 1: They contact- what was ru- it was when the book ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall] had been released after the three judges voted that I should. But then they threatened to take us to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and I'm not even allowed to talk about that, because then we had a settlement. All I can say is, if you could imagine the settlement included that--I think we gave forty thousand dollars to Morehouse medical college [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], you could imagine I was perfectly happy with our settlement, that I, I did not feel--I thought that was a really good thing. I was happy to pay--do that punishment. That a--and that--and people who have noticed it, other people said, "That sounds a lot like something you would do, like Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Randall]." So I was very--so we, I'll say that we pa- we settled, we paid in tribute to this and I was very happy with that, that was-- Speaker 2: But, but-- Speaker 1: --so that they wouldn't take us to the--'cause what they could do and that's one thing good to note, justice is available in America but it's for sale. If you don't have another $4 million to go to the Supreme Court and have all your money tied up while you're going to the Supreme Court which is--that's the cost of getting lawyers to go to the Supreme Court. Our family couldn't have done with the stress of that. The reality was, we could not afford to go the Supreme Court. And that's where, you know, middle class black people are right in betwixt and between. If I was some poverty stricken black person I don't know who would've happen to write this and had no family. Maybe some kind of social justice group would've come up and take--and pay for this. But this all had to be done in normal business constraints here. It's my publisher, me, us. But, anyway we settled and when the book--so, when the book came out I went on a book tour, this is when we got some death threats, calls. Weird people--some, you know, people sometimes showing up at the house. Story_ID: 599194 Speaker 1: And I cannot say 'cause I don't wanna blame anyone, but somebody on one of these sides probably thought it would be a good idea to go speak at the Margaret Mitchell House [Atlanta, Georgia] and this is like asking--this is why I've learned to ask questions about where I'm being seated, how the picture is being taken. 'Cause I thought this was like they're holding out an olive branch. They told us that just no one had--they never let people speak inside, which is not true. It's documented that there have been readings before ins- inside. They made me give my speech outside on the porch. And if you know, old black, weird, southern segregation, black people stand outside, don't get--. They actually had me speaking outside on the porch with chairs in the lawn. Speaker 2: Now this, what does this house look like, is it--I'm imagining a plantation or a big (unclear) house (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, 'cause she actually wasn't that rich. It was semi-fancy. It's not some kind of very fancy. It's a southern house in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] surrounded by the city. Everything around it has pretty much been torn down and they kept this and this lawn. And there's a--like a wrought iron fence around it. And there was, literally, a man in a Confederate uniform with some kind of sidearm marching in front the whole time that I am--. In fact, he tried to put something in--well I don't know that--I won't say that. There was a man in a Confederate uniform with a sidearm and he actually--glaring and being aggressive. And someone later, when I was signing, I had either a cup of coffee or a drink, meaning a drink like a cup of coffee or a Coca-Cola. One of the guards had to go take my drink, 'cause they thought someone had attempted to do something with my drink. I mean this is how careful we were having to be there. I mean, I don't know--we didn't pre- do a thorough investigation, but something. We had to be, even be careful in that kind of way. So, but I really did think, and it really was, there was a various aggressive, belligerent people outside of the gate of it. And they created in the--in the--in the environment 'cause I'm speaking on the porch where we gonna be subject to these people and anything could happen because they're just on the other side of the fence and they didn't. But they took me on a tour beforehand and some of this was recorded by Entertainment Weekly. And the head of that house, I wish I could recall her name, my husband [HistoryMaker David Ewing] will hopefully tell you what her name is, it's a three part name. And she got me alone. She showed me a picture of Malcolm X--excuse me--Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] dressed up like a little pickaninny at the opening of the movie of 'Gone with the Wind.' And she did not say these exact words, but this is a very clote- close paraphrase, essentially, "If Martin Luther King, Jr. can just go along to get along with us and do this and support this, why can't you." And I said, "It's good thing that I read my history and I know the rest of the pic- the story and I've seen this picture before." That Martin Luther King, Jr.'s father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], to get certain concessions from the white establishment in Atlanta at the time of the opening of the movie, made the women and children of his church available for a party to sing. He was rebuked at his national meeting of his church later that year. It's something that is understood that his son held against him for--it was something between them, they had a very good relationship, but it was something between them that he did not like. But can you imagine showing me this picture of Martin Luther King, Jr. as a little boy dressed up like a pickaninny singing. All these women and their hair is tied up in slave rags and tried--and. So, I, I actually exhibit one of my most triumphant southern moments of the day after going on this horrible tour. But, it was all I could do to not just cry at the meanness of it. And of course, she wanted to do this sort of secretly. I think I did speak of it in my talk, but and luckily there are a couple witnesses to it. But it happened. That's the kind of--and I said to her at the end, you know, there's really two differences between Margaret Mitchell and me (laughter), and one of them, these are not things I really truly think, but I did say this, I'd like to have this documented. I said, "The big difference between Margaret Mitchell and me is--." She said, "What is that?" I said, "Is that I got into the National Ju- Nashville Junior League [Junior League of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] and Margaret Mitchell wasn't asked to join the Atlanta Junior League [Junior League of Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] when she wanted to get in," (laughter). And this poor woman was devastated by this. "And the other one is I am noticing I see that you are--your renovations have been funded by Mercedes [Daimler Benz AG]." You can see that she thought that I was gonna be some sort of materialistic black person taken in by Mercedes. And she said, "Yes." And I said, "That seems so appropriate and wonder- and just interesting, not wonderful--appropriate." And she said, "Yes it is," and goes on and on, and just so appropriate. And she finally said, "Well why do you think it's so appropriate--." I mean, she's trying to figure--I said, "Because I just keep on thinking of how the early incarnation of that company funded Nazi Germany. And that these--the tanks that were plowing over our democracy and hopes for Western Europe, supporting the Nazi cause, all have these same Mercedes emblems on the front of it. It seems so appropriate as you plow over black American freedoms by holding up this icon that is so damaging, that you would be supported in that by this company," (laughter). That was about the last thing that woman said to me. But, then I went on and gave my little talk and had the Confederate reenactors. Story_ID: 599195 Speaker 1: But the wonderful end of that story is later, at the end of the day when I was signing books and the line went on so long they had to finally just close the building [Margaret Mitchell House, Atlanta, Georgia] down, they didn't want--. And one black lady said to me and at this day, this must've been 2001. She said she was fifty-seven years old that she will have been one of the first blacks in Atlanta [Georgia] to attend the white parochial Catholic school there. And that when she first went to the school, and I believe she said she was in the seventh grade, that the first book they gave her to read was 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell]. And she said she started to read it and she was so afraid, I didn't even know what she was talking about. She said, "I was so afraid," and I said, "What were you afraid of?" And she said, "Every morning my mother would leave me in the darkness, take a bus to Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia] where she would work as a housekeeper taking care of little white children. I was so afraid that my mother felt about the--those children the way Mammy felt about Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara]." And she said (laughter), "I don't know if I wanna read 'Gone with the Wind,' I don't know if I'm gonna read 'Gone with the Wind,' but I'm not afraid to read 'Gone with the Wind' now that I've read your book ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall]." And I presented a whole new perspective that Mammy didn't love Scarlett, that she loved her own child, that she had to work, pretend that she did to be able to help try to provide for her child. But that woman said, "I don't know if I want to read 'Gone with the Wind,' but I'm not afraid to read 'Gone with the Wind' anymore." And so, those responses as of the untold history of my book, one out in San Francisco [California]--two--I'll give you two more anecdotes on this and then I won't say anymore. Of a, a man--Hispanic man looked very prosperous came to one of my readings in San Francisco at a small book store. And he had on a suit and I--but he seemed so involved with it and at the end he came up and he had my signed book and I said, "Well what got you interested?" He said, "Well I got interested 'cause I'm a lawyer and I was interested in the issues of the conflict between the First Amendment and copyright." But he said, "I read your book," and he said, "after I read your book I went--I asked my mother a question." He said, "My mother--and I asked my mother this question, I asked her," it's a white Hispanic man, he said, "I asked her why did she always keep those Mammy salt and pepper shakers on our table." Said when he was growing up he was really embarrassed by them and he didn't like it 'cause he thought his mother was a racist and she kept these little Mammy salt and pepper shakers. He said, "I asked her after I read the book," and he said his mother said to him, "I thought if black people could endure slavery I can clean toilets and be a maid and do everything I have to do to put you through school." That she--and so he said it was about the multiple reading of singular text. He thought his mother was being a racist, he didn't know that Mammy salt and pepper shaker for her were power images of women enduring. And so it made him go back 'cause he saw that Mammy meant something so different to me then it meant to Mitchell [Margaret Mitchell], that he wondered if it didn't mean something different to his mother. And he was so proud of her in that moment. And so proud that she saw something so different in those sha- salt and pepper shakers then he saw. And then once I was giving another lecture in California and this young woman came up to me, it was really sweet 'cause she was a black woman and her friends were--was white was with her. And she was almost leaning on the woman's--young woman--they're two young women's arm to come up and say, and her friend saying, "She's got something she she's gotta tell you." And she said, "Will you tell the story about that fifty-seven year old lady," those--that's not a long time ago, and this girl was about twenty-three years old, she talking to me--maybe twe- said, "that was my mother. My mother would leave me to go on vacation 'cause she was a housekeeper, a domestic servant. And the little children every year come time to go on vacation, and my mother was gonna go and spend some time with me and the kids would cry so hard and said they couldn't be happy if she didn't go with them on vacation, they couldn't be happy on vacation without her. And she would leave me to go on vacation with them." She said, "That story is not yesterday." Story_ID: 599196 Speaker 1: And so this misappropriation of the black mother and the stories that I have gotten--I do have to tell you this last, last one. When I was down in North Carolina, a black woman, I wish again I knew her name--right there--she--but she was the first black librarian in the university system in Charlotte, North Carolina. And they put me up at some fancy--I think it was a Ritz [The Ritz Carlton Hotel Company, LLC] down there or some fancy hotel, and, and we had a big very formal talk in the downtown setting, you know, three, four hundred people, part of their book festival. And on the way back, the woman hadn't said too much to me when--at the little private dinner. On the way back I thought god this is taking a long time to get home--back to the hotel and she's not really talking to me very much, I'm wondering what is going on here. And it doesn't even seem like we're going back to the hotel, I'm thinking what is going on here. And we stop in front of this mansion house in Charlotte. A very formal black lady, you know, very business like and very cold and business like the whole time. And she looked at this--stopped in front of this house and she said, "My mother was a maid in that house." And she said, "Every other women she work--loved 'Gone with the Wind.' And they--what they thought about my mother, what they thought about me was informed by 'Gone with the Wind.'" She said something like, "I bought twenty-nine books for our library, your--," she said, "thank you for writing your book ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall], I bought twenty-nine copies," (laughter). "I want everybody to read that--and have that informed of view." And she said, "I used to be so ashamed of my--," and she touched on maybe a kind of shame, not so ashamed, but--. And that book had helped redeem and say a woman just like this deserved to be the center of a novel with all of her complex motivations and all the things that she--ways she play low to be high for her child. And again, I was so--so one of the most wonderful stories about my book are the stories I've heard. It's not the $10 million lawsuit, it's not the death threats, it's not the guards, it's the way it has freed up other people to talk about what it's like to have a mother in domestic service. What the rest of that history is, what it is like to have other people's ideas about you formed by this horrible book that says all black people are stupid. And how could this go so unacknowledged for so long. Story_ID: 599197 Speaker 1: The book was ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall] was The New York Times bestseller list-- Speaker 2: Six weeks I think. Speaker 1: --for six weeks, yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. It sold a lot. Very successful. And what was interesting is that people--and I think it's largely from going out and talking all over the country, and I have literally talked from New York to California, from--down to Lafayette, Louisiana to Ann Arbor [Michigan]. I've been all over this country talking with this book at different times. That it--and I get gigantic black audiences. I mean I get white audiences too, but it's really interesting. People say over and over for serious literary fiction they've almost hardly seen, you know, where it's the book, it's not me, I'm not a celebrity. This book, people love it and read it and they have taken it into their hearts and their lives because it speaks to a, an affliction that they have felt--of how they are afflicted by these sets of images. And I find that very exciting. And 'Pushkin and the Queen of Spades' [Alice Randall] has gotten a different kind of recognition. One of the things also interesting, just to document, is there was a rush to judgment about that book because of the lawsuit. People assumed and because I was an unknown, I didn't come from the two big places, you know, the place that creates writers of America, the Iowa Writers' Workshop [Iowa City, Iowa]. I didn't go there. I don't have an M.F.A. And so people hear this book, 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] from a black perspective so they think it's just some kind of high concept trash book. And so it got dreadful reviews initially in The New York Times and other places. I mean, it did get some great reviews, but it got lots and lots of dreadful reviews in this rush to judgment. What's been wonderful is the academy and university and scholarship and dissertations, and things have been written about it, in--international conferences had absolutely acclaimed the depth, the complexity of the book. But before that happened, it was acclaimed by washer women, literally, I love--I have had more--I read the book out loud on the audiotape, which is a very hard experience for me 'cause I'm not an actress or interested in anything like that, because I knew the book would be loved by some people--I remember my [paternal] grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall] who could not read or read well enough to read an entire novel. So I wanted to make sure they had access to the book too. Story_ID: 599198 Speaker 1: Okay, now are--what are you working on now if you can divulge that, I don't know? Speaker 2: Yeah, I am working on a novel called 'Rebel Yell, the Life and Death of a Black Southern Conservative' ['Rebel Yell,' Alice Randall]. It basically answers questions like how does someone like Condoleezza Rice get to be Condoleezza Rice and why are there so many blacks in Bush's [President George Walker Bush] White House. So, that's what I'm looking at. And I'm enjoying that a lot, although it's very upsetting as well. I'm mainly looking at the parallel between two different times of terror, America in the early '60s [1960s] and the Civil Rights Movement, and terror now, terrorism. And that children raised in one cradle of terror often become good watchdogs of terrorism in the world if you can be a good watchdog. So, or effective watchdogs. So that's what I'm working on. Primarily I'm working on a BET [Black Entertainment Television] project I wish I could tell you more about, but it, it started before Disney [The Walt Disney Company] and now it's--so they're gonna have a black fairytale princess and it's gonna be a better--it's a fairytale princess I originally, who's black, that I invented it for my daughter [Caroline Randall Williams] when she was very little. And at least I can say that mine has (unclear) my little girl through her life and up to her days at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It's part of what I gave her that I helped get those nice achievements with. And so I'm working on that with--and excited about that. That'll be animated--this movie and a DVD that will be available from BET. So, those are two of the big projects I'm working on right now. Story_ID: 599199 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: I say the two simplest ones are education and children and home life. I am concerned with this achievement gap. I am concerned with--we got to see--we went down three weeks ago and marched with Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and other people, Reverend Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], that bridge named for my ancestor. And Barack said something in his message to the Joshua Generation as he calls it now that I found very evocative and it's something I've thought in a different way before. But basically that we have to help ourselves is what it comes down to and help ourselves and have a certain kind of discipline. And my grandfather [William Randall] said the--to me it's the old, old school way. He always said, "Be three times as good and have what you want." And when people complain about bad schools, and there's horrible schools all over this country and there's racism in the classrooms all through this country, but there's no more racism today then there was in that little black school in Selma [Alabama] when my father [George Randall] had to try to go to school when my grandmother [Georgia Litsey Randall] said they beat the black kids so bad that she wouldn't send them to school. And still two illiterate people made the whole house full of kids who could all read and write. And the next generation, my half-sister has a son, graduate from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I've got a daughter at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because what I want to export and I'm concerned, giving Caroline [Randall's daughter, Caroline Randall Williams] many privileges, but the one thing I've always done is make her work hard. And when she wrote a paper once, I remember when she was little, maybe seventh or eighth grade, I didn't think it was very good. She asked me about her advice and I just tore it in half and I said, "Caroline there's not much I can say to you about this paper that you shouldn't already know. And I'm not going to do any work until you've done all of your work, and my own work is gonna be asking you questions. I'm not gonna sit here and pretend something is good that isn't." You have to be strong about kids. I said, "I work every day of my life, I work hard and I expect you to too. Because there're people with cancer and they need you to go find a solution. There're people who need to vote or there're people--the people need you." There's a reason we have to all work, 'cause there's work to be done in the world. Alone we have to all be self-reliant. So I do think that message that--the--has--mo- I don't completely agree with Bill Cosby but I am sympathetic to what he was sort of alluding to. I think that no matter how bad the schools are, that as long as books, if you are not literally something--is something fundamentally, mechanically wrong with you, if you have a very low IQ or something of the sort. But for your average rank and file person who can get dressed, put on their shoes and go to school in the morning, they can better their lives. And I notice that there's so much I wanna--I believe in catching people being good. And I notice all the discipline in the black community today, in the black ghetto. For example, basketball courts, which I have written about. If you look on Christmas Day, and have traveled on Christmas Day across these United States, you will see young boys and big men dribbling basketballs, practicing, practicing, practicing. If people would practice seven days a week to be a CPA [certified public accountant] or a pre-investment banker. There's no lack of discipline in the black community and that actually, I think, particularly in the black male community, you see people making extremely discipline efforts to become sports stars when only a tiny number of people ever get to go from high school to college playing, let alone to sport stars. If you spend all this time trying to be a podiatrist, you could be making six hu- a hundred thousand dollars a year. So, I think we need to redirect some of these energies and direct them to a larger variety of things. I think that--and not just attempting to be a few flashy things. I think that so much--I have--you know, my most audacious plan for America, I wish somebody would take, make an effort to connect some young drug entrepreneurs, fifteen, sixteen year olds who are showing a lot of skills into top level American business programs, literally. Because I think that some of our most entrepreneurial spirited kids are getting into businesses that are illegitimate and destructive of our community. But one, so number one is this issue of education. And I think particularly in upper middle class black homes, when I see my peers who are afraid to make their children work hard, who are afraid as they've gone through so much themselves to tell them the work isn't great, who keep buying these kids dresses and clothes and vacations out the wazoo, but won't make them sit down. And I said to Caroline, "I want you to walk as earnestly behind your books as your ancestors walked behind a mule and be grateful you're not walking behind a mule. I want you to take us to another place." So, but I don't find that to be a common language that of parents talking of--privileged black parents talking to their children about excellence and insisting upon it and insisting. I've told my child--I, I've never asked her to make her own bed, if she wants to make it she can and sometimes she does. I have not asked her to do domestic service. But, I have told her that this entire family counts upon her to be everything that she can be as an academic and as an intellectual. And, you know, I don't--and I think that's a message that we need to export, so one is education. Story_ID: 599200 Speaker 1: And two is about family orderliness. I resented it, I was--I divorced when my child [Caroline Randall Williams] was three. I remarried when she was nine, about to be ten. There was six, ni- seven years I was single mother. I hated it. I told that to Bill Frist, he needed to stop talking about single mothers and start talking about disorganized families. And when I was a single mother in a tiny little house (laughter), when I first got divorced I made twenty-eight thousand dollars a year and my nanny cost fourteen thousand. And I had a mortgage to pay that was twelve thousand. So I know what it is to be--trying to keep all these things together. But I put that bed--child to bed on time 7:30 and that house was clean. If I had to spend the entire--that lady you were talking about--the weekend, on Saturday, that all I did was clean my house from the top to the bottom 'cause I was working, when I had no one to help me, that house was always clean. And my child went to bed on time in an orderly fashion so that she could study and think and have an orderly life. That sacrifices, that means, you know, there're a lot of things I didn't get to do and I loved my li- that because I was providing that. But I think that mothers and young mothers, whatever age you have your child, if you have them seventeen, twenty-seven, you've gotta be able to put that child first and provide an orderly home. I would like to see--when you talked--told about the domesticity, when I was a little girl in black Detroit [Michigan], black children lived in immaculately clean homes. I would like to see more children, black children living in ordered clean homes today and they are in poverty. The poverty does not have to mean squalor. I remember black people back in Alabama, I saw rake the dirt in the yard when they didn't have grass. We have to have self-respect in a different kind of way. We have to have a virulent, vigilant self-respect. Now on the other hand, I'm a funky, fun, artist person. I am not big into clothes and makeup and this kind of stuff. I think I want a disciplined mind, I never--I handed in projects late. I don't think it has to be the appearance of right doing. It's the reality of right doing. But, some kind of disciplined approach to living, that doesn't have to be in every area, but are in the areas that matter the most to you and our children are certainly one of them. I can be late about things, not my work, but I've only been late to pick up my child once in my entire life and that was a total emergency. And I think that we have to--I think that we have the skills within us as a community, if we get back to some of our old school ways and remember about those raked dirt yards. Remember about those immaculately clean houses in what other people called a ghetto. That I think that it's in those discipline--and stop worrying about federal--leave no child behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], which I don't believe in, that, the Bush [President George Walker Bush] policy. But we should say that to ourselves, from our churches to our schools to our neighbors. To leave everybody--I, you know, pick one person. I consider to be--at my--Vivian Williams and I have a great dynamic alliance. She helps further my family, I help further hers in some very profound ways. We each--we need to do that, and I think that--I do think there's something about the movement from rural poverty to urban poverty and high rise ghettos, I think is just not very stimulating to the mind. I also think that if you look at television and all of this, as much as--I don't think television, itself, is a problem and video as a modern medium, and it's not going away. But what happens is, when my father [George Randall] was poverty--didn't have any shoes in Alabama, white or black or green, he didn't really know anybody 'cause he was so isolated that had a lot more than he had. They had to walk miles to a radio to hear the fight when Joe Louis won. You know, they--so, when a kid today, if you're a poor child--my child who's not a poor child, you know, has been to Palm Beach [Florida], Antigua and this, that and another is sitting here telling me about things I've virtually never heard of about flying little jets here and there, and odd strange places she wants to go. They are so assaulted from the time they are little now, a five year old who has cable in their house, with these images of people--of people who don't look like them, who have all these material prosperities that they're not understanding what underlies to achieve them even. It creates lives of frustration by the time children are six and seven years old because of all this desire to have possessions that they don't even understand how the things are achieved. Story_ID: 599201 Speaker 1: Even in a BET [Black Entertainment Television] video to an MTV video. You know, people who know about Cristal champagne who do not know Langston Hughes. Culturally ignorant, culturally impotent, culturally bankrupt. When you know, when you have little children who can tell you three champagne brands and cannot tell you three poets from the renaissance [Harlem Renaissance]. But that is our fault, it doesn't cost anything to go and teach a child 'Mother to Son' [Langston Hughes]. I had to send that to my child when she was complaining about something and she's had a hard--we had a--she had a blood clot in her leg starting in December from a medicine she took. And it's been a hard thing. But I've taken out that poem, I said, 'Mother to Son,' it's what Cheney [Dick Cheney], the vice president has now. I said, "Caroline [Caroline Randall Williams], life for me ain't been no crystal stair either. Look at this poem, you've just gotta keep on going. This is one of your places where this is boards tore up and this not--this is beyond no rug, carpet on the floor." When, you know, when she's walking around at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on crutches with a 3 percent chance of dropping dead. I said, "But, you know what, your grandfather Avon [Avon Williams, Jr.]," that's my first husband's father, he got death threats all the time. The Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] burned a cross on his lawn at her father's thirteenth birthday. So, I said, "He went down, he desegregated every school system in Tennessee, but Shelby County [Tennessee], with death threats and guns, people shot at him. So, yes you could be afraid of dying today, but if you stop being afraid--I'm afraid you're gonna die, but you--I, I was afraid I was gonna die standing on the front porch of the Margaret Mitchell House [Atlanta, Georgia], there's some crazy person with a sidearm is going here and we know we've had death threats. They can't stop you." Speaker 2: You're referring to Attorney Avon Williams (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Williams, that's my daughter's-- Speaker 2: --famous civil rights attorney here in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, his name is--that's my daughter's grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my first husband was Avon Williams, III. Yes. And my point is, so you know, Mr. Looby, they bombed his house. I told Caroline's first school, at one point they had some sort of weird--oh that's a whole other story, but the University School of Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee], which did take black students, her father early on. But there all kinds of issues. Like I told you about that third grade teacher that told me that they were so surprised Caroline was the best math student. I said when you took--when I sent her to kindergarten or first grade after I got divorced, I sold these bonds that Mr. Looby had given Avon that Avon gave me and I gave--to pay part of her tuition. And I said, "Well you took Z. Alexander Looby's money, you cannot expect me, in my Georgetown Day School [Washington, D.C.] environment, I am not gonna look the other way. I'm not gonna not question these things. That man risked his life, they blew up his house so that black people would have better educations. I'm not gonna sit here and just think because I put my black child in this chair in this quote, quote good school that she is getting a good education." I am asking questions about this education. I wanna know what happened to the other black children she started out with kindergarten in that by the time she's in the fifth grade there's not one other black child in the accelerated math. And I also blame some of that on the black community because the kids that Caroline started off with, in most cases in that class, I can name ri- I won't name any names, but one of those little Jenny Doe's, her father is a doctor, more than one. They--mothers--one, the parents are both lawyers. But they were too busy--I have never been too busy running my career to be a mommy first. I quit one job, a big Hollywood job, I said do not call my house before my child goes to school. I said I'm her only mother. If I drop dead tomorrow you'll get another screenwriter. She is--I am her only mother, so I am--she is first for me. She is much more important to me than your movie. You think your movie is worth $27 million, do you think I'd give up--no I don't care about--she's worth more than $27 million to me. But these pa- but these other children who are not doing well now in college, and it's not that I--they don't--aren't even happy with the colleges they got for them. Their mothers who are too busy, and I don't wanna name any jobs, getting these jobs--and some--and I've had my share of good jobs and great things, but there was nobody I've ever worked (unclear) time with Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] and they said something about we want you to put this first, I said you don't get to be first, I still have a child getting raised, she's almost raised. She comes first, David [Randall's second husband, HistoryMaker David Ewing] comes second, and you can come third. But Vanderbilt University is not as important. You've gotta ta- and I said if you want--if you can pay me less, I will take three classes. 'Cause, being her mother is my number one job. Story_ID: 599202 Speaker 1: And when you look at this achievement gap--and mine is not about arguing for her. She had a racist teacher all through eleventh grade that was just horrible in English and history. It was one of the strangest things. I personally am worried--wondering if he was not a very light skinned black man passing with some very complicated issue towards Caroline [Randall's daughter, Caroline Randall Williams], 'cause of some details. However, I never said one word to him, never. I told, "Caroline, you cross every T, you dot every I. You make it impossible for that man to give you less than an A." He harassed her. He--I fr- every single thing. But he--when it was all said and done, I said, "Caroline, no excuses, you had to write the paper three times over in advance. You showed it to him in advance, do not give--," and he had to give her an A, and she got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And that was a strength, it wasn't sitting there. I think I could've had that--I could've documented seventeens times over what he was doing wrong. That wouldn't make my child strong. What made her strong is I said, "You watch his game, don't ever let him see anything about what you feel or think, so that he could adjust any of what craziness he is doing to try to get you. You put that frozen smile on your face, you don't--and then you listen to everything and then get your work in early so he has to review it in advance. Do not miss one point," I said, "he's not going to give you the benefit of one doubt." And he didn't. He took away every possible win--the hardest thing is he took away some of her sense that she was good at this thing, that she is great at. I mean, she ended up winning the Dickey Prize number one [ph.] in the whole class. But this man was just--and he insisted on calling her child. I mean, here she is eigh- seventeen to eighteen years old, he called her child. I mean from the Deep South and it was one of the last schools in the South to desegregate. They had to be taken to court in real time. But my point is, I made her strong, not be fixing it for her, by telling her that old Will Randall [Randall's paternal grandfather, William Randall] thing, be three times as good and only half what you want. And she was proud, proud, proud. And we--and at the end, that last thing, I said Caroline, "You don't know how he's gonna deal with that exam." And I remember almost cry- I said, "But whatever you have done the right thing. You're going into it with an A, you've done amazing work. And up or down, now this is on him, that part. You did it. You know, whether he's gonna finally--." I said, "This man could get totally strange and not give it to you." Now, I would've then done something about it at that point. But, he didn't, but she didn't. She didn't give him a chance. She didn't--but he let some student, a boy, take the chair outsi- out from under her in this tiny little class of eight people, so she fell in the floor and injured herself. I mean, he actually let a white male student actually--I mean, that he was like egging on other students to be mean to her. And he was just wild. But, I said, "You keep your equilibrium, don't say a word and just--it'll freak him out," and it did finally. He gave up before she did. I said do not show any emotion to him, he doesn't deserve any. I won't even tell you his name, we need--we gonna forget him. He'll be back teaching high school and you'll be on with your life. But, that man was hard--with a man like that and black kids have to be taught how to not let these people become obstacles, just challenges. If you give them too much emotion, you pay too much attention to what they're doing wrong, as opposed to what you do right to overcome it, you could've--the whole family could've freaked out on him. I mean, he literally did raise my blood pressure because I couldn't believe. He wouldn't shake hands with David [Randall's second husband, HistoryMaker David Ewing], you saw how sweet and nice David is. The first time we walked into the school--to the classroom, David put out his hand to shake it, he wouldn't shake hands with David. I mean, it was horrible and I thought my child has to go in this five days a week. But, that's the world and we keep forgetting, so p- fearful and that's not the whole world. The world is also brilliant, white psychoanalysts who help put battered black women back together and all kinds of--my best friend [Megumi Oka] is Japanese American and she's proud of that, but she said her children had a black southern and Japanese identity. Yeah, from spending so much time with us. So the world is full of other things too. But if children are going to get and young people, and people are going to have these very adverse things happen based on race, I do believe that is still occurring in America. And you either have to figure out how to make that small and minimize it and take that self-reliance and make your family a haven. I mean you can feel, this is--we didn't clean--we've been out of town and I haven't cleaned up. Our house is a peaceful, happy, sweet haven. That is my job to make it that way. And I think that black women have to re-takeover that roll, and black men be partners that way and create havens for our children. A quiet place for your child to study and do homework, and trounce over other children (laughter). I believe that. Story_ID: 599203 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, we always ask this one too. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any--is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: (Pause) Hm. In the most profound sense, absolutely not, 'cause I feel that my basic judgments have been about family and I have loved, and I love who Caroline [Randall's daughter, Caroline Randall Williams] is and how's she was raised. I love David [Randall's second husband, HistoryMaker David Ewing] and this marriage. And I love my work. I think that that the one, there was someone in my music career that I should've sued that I was too intimidated to sue who actually, in my opinion, wrongfully gained from my work and one might say that--I'll leave it. And after having gone through that other lawsuit when there was a question of am I gonna let these people intimidate me and have my book ['The Wind Done Gone,' Alice Randall] silenced. And I realized no, I don't care whether it's right in front of the whole country and people--they're calling me a literary parasite. I'm gonna fight for what's right. It made me wish on that other side that I had been--would've been hard to fi- I was willing to, but it was hard to even find a lawyer who wanted to take it on. You know, that, and it was--you know, a lot of the music industry, historically, is set up to exploit writers, particularly poor black and poor white writers. I'm not a poor black or white writer, but it's the exploitation when you work in those fields it's still in, at that time at least there was some of it that was still present. And I wish I had been willing to confront that. And so, I stand that up on the historical. And I may one day be able to right that wrong. I would love to right that and give that money to a foundation that helped--I'm, I'm supporting a group, they're starting to do some support for a group called Lawyers for the Arts [Volunteer Lawyers and Accountants for the Arts]. And I always would like to try to standby helping young artists and writers feel their own agency and feel a right to stand up for their rights. And I encourage--you know, it's harder--and this is something I would like to say for the record for me, is it I think people not understand how much harder it is for black people to go before the law and the court, because we have not always felt we get justice in the courts. And that court is not an easy thing. I read 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Harper Lee]. It makes white children feel good about Atticus Finch, well what about black people when this poor man is about to be murdered for raping someone he never raped. It's not a happy story, it's a tragic--I mean, I love the book, but it's tragic. And it's differently tragic for a black person. So I was scared when I went to court because I was not--all my white friends including at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] were so shocked by Judge Pannell [Charles A. Pannell, Jr.]. I was not expecting him to be that ignorant and it was three white conservative men who freed my book; however, it did not shock me that he would feel the audacity to do this. You know, that, or feel probably the worst how easy and simple it was for him to do it. So, I wish for myself that someone had told me. It was funny, it was in that time period where I was learning the graciousness of backing down from some fights, and as you can see that I am willing to fight about things that are important to me. But, I was going through a period where I was learning the graciousness of backing down and picking your battles. And I think there's one battle that I should've picked that I didn't, one more. So, it's not that I wish that I was in one less--there's one more battle I wish I had gone in along the way. But, I think I will probably put that energy into--I'm definitely the friend of artists' rights and young artists' rights, and in things I have done subsequently. But, when I was a young and single mother, it's terrible that I think that I was exploited a little bit. I'm talking about in terms of business dealings. Story_ID: 599204 Speaker 1: Looking back at what you've done to this point again, and you've still got a lot to do, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Two novels ['The Wind Done Gone' and 'Pushkin and the Queen of Spades,' Alice Randall] that go into the inside of a black woman's mind. And particularly two novels that address how black people experience reading. And there really is not anyone in those issues of experiencing of the intellectual mind and how black people experience education. There really are no--there're hardly any other writers who are dealing in those areas. I also like the fact that I have balanced, I would say the, the balancing motherhood with being an active literary figure. That--those would be, I would think mine. Story_ID: 599205 Speaker 1: Okay, now then on that--on that note, let me ask about, about your family, can you tell us something about your family? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I have one daughter, Caroline [Caroline Randall Williams], who's a freshman at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. She is the great-granddaughter of Arna Bontemps and the granddaughter of Avon N. Williams [Avon Williams, Jr.], big civil rights worker, and the daughter of Avon Williams [Avon Williams, III], who was counsel general of the [U.S.] Army when he was--shockingly died of an asthma attack two summers ago. And the stepdaughter of David S. Ewing [HistoryMaker David Ewing], an amazing attorney. So, I do think that she's a--she crosses--and of course a cousin of Thurgood Marshall. So, she is--I, I feel that has been my good fortune to be entrusted with some of the finest flowering of a part of the Harlem Renaissance and of that--what Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] thought of his Talented Tenth, coupled with all that street strong earnestness from my father's [George Randall] family from deep Alabama. So, I like that cross pollination. Caroline is obsessed with Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and is very much a sort of citizen of the world. She is--but also very involved with--she's on--some at Harvard on a board of Eleganza, a black fashion organization. She's a member of the--active member of the Association of Black Harvard Women. And I think she's well negotiating a world for herself in particular niches and in a larger world. And then, my husband David and I have been married a decade next, in April. And he's sort of the history and I'm sort of the literature. He's a little bit--he's younger than I am, so I think of us as a Janie [Janie Starks]-Tea Cake relationship. I fell in love with him when I was working on 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' the beginning of that script. I love my married life. I was match made by my first--you didn't ask me how we met, but I was match-made by my first husband's family to my second husband. My first husband's family, the Williamses, sided with me in the divorce. Grandma Bontemps [Alberta Johnson Bontemps] said, "Right is right and wrong is wrong, and we women have to stay together." And so when I told her I was gonna marry David Ewing, he--she said, "I know his mother, I know his grandmother," in fact the two grandmothers are in the same Links [The Links, Incorporated] group. And he's a--and God sent David to us. So, I literally, my--Paul [Paul Bontemps] and Sonia Bontemps, who are very close to David, and David will have a chance to tell you about that. They told David he should ask me out on a date 'cause I would make a great wife. That Avon wasn't a good husband for me, but I was a great wife. Yeah, and he was a good husband in his own way. And he gave me the most magnificent child that David and I have now raised. But I was match made by my first husband's family. And that to me speaks of--I try to be bridge builder and not to burn things, you know, in that we--and I was very loyal to Grandma Bontemps to the day she died and to Avon's mother. I mean, and Avon was too. I mean when she was dying, Joan Bontemps [Joan Bontemps Williams], who had given so much to the civil rights era in two different ways, first supporting her father, then supporting her husband. You know, David and I took her out for ice cream and that last day when she was not eating and fed it to her 'cause she had had--you know, sick and couldn't been able to have it, but then she was literally dying so she could. We were holding her hands and patting on her, and Avon is holding her. You know, everyone--and so I was wonderful. Every part of her world was around her bed when she di- and she died at home and that was wond- I mean, that was a great thing, she deserved that and she had that. I--so that's my family, but we're a little family. So now David and I are now a couple--we're sort of empty nesters with one out at college. And we're very excited about what the next, you know, part of the world brings. Unfortunately, my father [George Randall] and mother [Bettie Randall Reilly] are both dead now, and I really consider my best friend Mimi [Megumi Oka] and my second, Kimiko Jackson who is Afro Korean in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] who I met working on [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones--on that Britt Johnson movie ['Black Diamond Express']. Those are like my sisters and they come here a lot. So, and god mommy Lee, Lee McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] is my--she was Avon's godmother 'cause she grew up next door to Joan, Joan Williams, to Avon's mother, when her father was dean of this college and Joan's father was the librarian of his college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And so I inherited her in the divorce too, (laughter) and so she's been my godmother for these last twenty-five years, and now my daughter's great-godmother. So, god mommy Lee does a lot of hol- she did Christmas with us and do Easter, and so Lee. So, that's my family, it's a little family now. And, but it's a very happy family. Story_ID: 599206 Speaker 1: All right, now is there anything I have not asked you or covered that you think we have to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, I think you've done a good job of asking questions (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well. The last question is similar to leg- legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) I'd like to be remembered as compassionate. I would like to be remembered as someone who braided intellectualism to experience as a mommy, a wife and a novelist, who saw it--in that order. And I guess one thing, that a secret way in which I'd like to be remembered, I don't think I will be like--I don't think I will be remembered, but is interesting is that I think my greatest invention was my invention of motherhood. Because I had a very bad mother [Bettie Randall Reilly], who had a very hard time being a mother from, I think, a variety of psychosocial reasons, some of which were individual, some of which had to do with race. And that--and I write about mothers in both of my novels. That I love the fact that I had invented and I think I've expressed to you a passion and compassion for my black child [Caroline Randall Williams]. I've never wished her to be anything other than the person she is. And I feel her absolute beauty exactly as who and what she is. And I think that something that comes--I think being a good mother after having had a bad mother in the simplest sense is an active imagination. And I, I think I have written some wonderful books. I don't think I will ever have to imagine anything as vividly as imagining myself into motherhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 599207 Speaker 1: That is--looks May or June of 1981, and that is George S. Randall [George Randall] and his daughter, me, [HistoryMaker] Alice Randall beneath the statue of John Harvard in Harvard Yard [Cambridge, Massachusetts], that is not really a statue of John Harvard. Speaker 2: That is George S. Randall in 1985 at the Cosmos Club in Washington, D.C. at my wedding reception celebrating my marriage to Avon Williams, III. Speaker 1: This is Christmas Day approximately 1995. That is my daughter Caroline Randall Williams trying out her new bicycle on Christmas morning that Santa Claus brought. That's Mimi Oka, by best friend in from New York, Megumi Oka and me, Alice Randall. And we are wearing sweaters that Mimi and I got in Chile, in far southwestern Chile. Speaker 2: That is a picture of Avon, III and I at an engagement party for us at Cheekwood [Cheekwood Botanical Gardens and Museum of Art, Nashville, Tennessee]. That same dress I later wore in the Philippines the night of the People's Power Revolution [People Power Revolution]. Speaker 1: That is me receiving, Alice Randall, with Connie Bradley the president of Nashville ASCAP [American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers], receiving an ASCAP number one award for 'XXX's and OOO's (An American Girl).' The most played song award also. Speaker 2: This is a meeting I'm having with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte in Baltimore, Maryland to discuss making a miniseries of Taylor Branch's book, 'A Parting in the Waters' [sic. 'Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-1963']. Harry Belafonte was a producer on that series. Speaker 1: This is back in my traveling days in southwestern Chile near Tierra del Fuego. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in the era and the time when I was researching Britt Johnson the African American cowboy, frontiersman, who went out to rescue his family from the Comancheria. Speaker 1: That's me about two years ago in 2005, a Christmas Eve at the annual party at the J- Home of James [James H. Cheek III] and Sigourney Cheek [Sigourney Woods Cheek], an annual event that we go to, David [HistoryMaker David Ewing], I and Caroline every year. Christmas Eve finds us at the home of James and Sigo-- Speaker 2: This is me, Alice Randall, in Bohol, which is in southern Philippines, a sight of one of the important scene in my new novel during the time of the People's Revolution. It would be eighty--1985--'86 [1986], 1986. Speaker 1: The woman on the left in the red is Donna Hilley, the famous president of Sony Tree Publishing [Sony/ATV Music Publishing LLC] in Nashville [Tennessee]. The woman on the right is Connie Bradley, it's one of her closest friends, the head of the ASCAP office here. And I'm receiving an award from Donna Hilley. Speaker 2: That is a school picture from St. Philip's Lutheran school [St. Philip's Day School] in Detroit, Michigan of me in probably circa 1966. First grade, I believe. Speaker 1: Left is my father, George Randall, and that was while he was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: This is 1966, Saturday morning at the Ziggy Johnson School of Dance [Detroit, Michigan]. Ziggy [Joseph "Ziggy" Johnson] was a famous choreographer and musician in Detroit that was closely associated with Motown [Motown Records]. Speaker 1: This is me in 1959. Speaker 2: This is the home of Alberta [Alberta Johnson Bontemps] and Arna Bontemps. I am seated on the far right in the dress, I think heavily influenced by Imelda Marcos with the big sleeves and the white. To my immediate--no the other side-- Speaker 1: Other side, oh okay. On this side, oh okay. Speaker 2: I'm this person. Speaker 1: This one? Speaker 2: That's me. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: That is me, Alice Randall, and immediately in the dark, with the corsage is Sonia Bontemps and Alberta Bontemps is seated next to the bride near the center on the couch, and that is home of Alberta and Arna Bontemps. And that's the occasion of Wendy Williams', their granddaughter's marriage. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: This is late '50s [1950s]. This is my mother-in-law Florence Steele [Florence Steele Kidd] at that time at her debutante ball, dressed in her debutante dress. Speaker 1: Yes, this is 1961 in Detroit, my mother and father, Bettie Randall [Bettie Randall Reilly] and George Randall. Speaker 2: This is 1967. I'm eight years old. I'm on the front row and you can see I am one of two African American girls attending Camp O' the Hills in Michigan [Brooklyn, Michigan] in the beginning class Shadow Valley. It was the beginning of camp integration in Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay, this is opening night--this is the Copacabana in New York City [New York, New York], the year of the World's Fair [New York World's Fair, New York, New York] which was 1964 and the little girl on the right, that is me, that is my mother, Bettie Randall, that was my father, George Randall, and that is my babysitter, who I called Booie, Beverly Jasper who turned into a judge in Detroit. She's now deceased. And this is the opening night of The Supremes at the Copacabana in New York City. Speaker 2: (Unclear) and George Randall at a club in Detroit, circa about 1959. Speaker 1: --My father surrounded by his brother, starting on the left James [James Randall], known as Jimmie, his brother James and his sister Helen [Helen Randall]. Speaker 2: That is my grandmother, dear Georgia Minnie Randall [Georgia Litsey Randall], born in about 1897 and her oldest son, known as Bill, whose name was William Randall. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, any others? Speaker 2: That is my father approximately 1947 arriving back down south to Atlanta [Georgia] to attend Morris Brown College. Speaker 1: This one, is that what you got. That--or there. Here is a photograph of my grandfather Will Randall, William Randall, the descendant of Edmund Pettus with two of his sons. His oldest son, Bill and another that's hard to identify. Speaker 2: And let's just do that picture, that will be great. That is a picture of Will Randall and his wife, Georgia Minnie Randall, my grandmother, son and dear as they were known to us. Speaker 1: This is Booker T. Washington's house, The Oaks [Tuskegee, Alabama], and this is my grandmother-in-law, Dougie Steele [Corrine Perdue Steele]. Speaker 2: Steel. Speaker 1: And her husband-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Frank. Speaker 1: Frank Steele and they're being married at Booker--their wedding reception at Booker T. Washington's house. Frank was on the faculty of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama] and helped build some of the buildings and erect the statue to Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is the wedding photograph of my husband's mother and father, that is Florence Steele and Richard Albert Ewing [Richard Ewing, III]. Did you show them our wedding picture? Speaker 2: Was this 19- ? Speaker 1: Least, this is the night David and I got married. This is nine--April 20th, the early hours of April 20th, nineteen eighty--'97 [1997]. And that is David and I about midnight preparing to get married at two a.m. at the St. Augustine's Church [St. Augustine's Chapel], Episcopal church on the Vanderbilt campus [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee]..