 Story_ID: 665380 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Karen Eileen Slade, K-A-R-E-N, E-I-L-E-E-N, S-L-A-D-E [HistoryMaker Karen Slade]. Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, eighteen, fifty-five [October 18, 1955], Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am vice president, general manager of KJLH Radio [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date? Speaker 2: July 20--I'm not sure, 28th? Speaker 1: Twenty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventh-- Speaker 1: Eighth, yeah, 28th. Speaker 2: Twenty-eighth, okay, July 28, 2014. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in our newsroom within our broadcast facility. Speaker 1: All right, at, at KJ (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At KJLH Radio. Story_ID: 665381 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer. They're kind of a warm up. The first one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Chocolate, is chocolate a food group (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yes, (laughter) as far as I'm concerned. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anguilla. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do your best, be your best. Story_ID: 665382 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of your family and your father's [Charles Slade] side separately; and then we'll try to put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Violette Jean Edwards, hyphen, McCowan, Violet, V-I-O-L-E-T-T-E, Edwards, E-D-W-A-R-D-S, McCowan, M-C-C-O-W-A-N [Violette Edwards-McCowan]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Seven, thirty-one, thirty-three [July 31, 1933], Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can't go too far back. My mom had a brother, Gerald Edwards. They were about six or seven years apart. She was the first child born to Mildred [Mildred Brewer Edwards] and Eugene Edwards. Both were living in Cleveland at the time. My grandfather, Eugene Edwards was from Abbeville, South Carolina and my grandmother was born in Cleveland, but her family was from Alabama, I'm not sure what city. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what they did for a living? Speaker 2: My gram was a stay at home mom and my grandfather worked several jobs. He was with the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] for probably forty years. He worked at the Cleveland Orchestra as a coat check two or three nights a week. He did a host of things but his primary job was at, at the post office. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story, I mean did you grandparents have a chance to go to school or anything, or beyond the-- Speaker 2: No my, they both completed high school. My grandmother was one of five and my grandfather was one of thirteen and they, they were transplants pretty much. We knew my grandmother's family--my great-grandfather. He lived with one of the sisters until he was ninety-nine and then he passed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In, in Cleveland? Speaker 2: --in Cleveland, Ohio and Blanche [ph.] and Mildred, my grandmother was Mildred, lived in Cleveland. Sarah [ph.] lived in Chicago [Illinois], one of the sisters; Willa Dean [ph.] lived in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], one of the sisters, and the only son or brother was James Brewer [ph.] and he was in Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay, so were they, were your grandparents like first generation Clevelandites or-- Speaker 2: My great--yes, they were first generation in Cleveland. My great-grandfather came up from Alabama and his family was from Alabama. His--and I just don't know enough about their, their family. Speaker 1: So there are not any stories about, you know, how they got to Cleveland or why they moved to Cleveland, or? Speaker 2: You know, I don't have any stories. Story_ID: 665383 Speaker 1: I know we generalize it, you know, that it was better up north than down south, but, but there may be a specific story, that's what I'm trying to get at, but. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not sure. I, I know they, most of the family came north looking for work. On my, on my mother's [Violette Edwards-McCowan] side I know they came north looking for work. My grandfather's [Eugene Edwards] family was from South Carolina, Abbeville, and of the, of the thirteen of them most of them came north looking for work. My grandfather settled in Cleveland [Ohio], most of his siblings that came north settled in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Detroit [Michigan], I can't think of where else, but they, they remained, some of them remained in Abbeville and as a college student [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] I went down to visit, down on the family farm. Speaker 1: Okay, so the family owned land in Abbeville? Speaker 2: Yeah, we owned land and we still have land down in Abbeville. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said your grandfather worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] for years (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is back in the day, and even now I guess, it would be considered a good job. Speaker 2: It was a very good job. My grandfather raised his family working at the post office and his, his immediate family and his grandchildren. We all came up through his efforts at the post office. Speaker 1: He had benefits, government benefits (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he did. Speaker 1: --a government job in those days-- Speaker 2: It was--and he worked until he was sixty-nine and then I think they officially retired him about '72 [1972] 'cause he never took any time off, so all of the you know, accumulation of vacation time, so he, he was very proud of that. Speaker 1: Did, did he have any stories about black employees with the post office or what it was like for them in those days? Speaker 2: My grandfather wasn't, he wasn't very talkative and he wasn't very militant. He, he was proud to have his job. He'd get up every day at an ungodly hour and go to work and come home and that was pretty much his, his saving grace. He rarely took vacations. I think we got him to go to San Diego [California], my grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] got him to go to San Diego once and that was, that was his trip you know. Other than that he didn't go anywhere, he just went to work, came back home, went to the music hall [Severance Hall, Cleveland, Ohio], came back home. He had a garden. He did--behind the house he had a flower garden and a vegetable garden and he'd get all the kids in the neighborhood and teach them how to raise vegetables; and I think that came directly from Abbeville, South Carolina. Story_ID: 665384 Speaker 1: You said--and he worked in the coat checkroom for the Cleveland symphony orchestra [Cleveland Orchestra] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah he did for years and years. Speaker 1: Now this, I found out that, that back in the day, I mean it's still a, a leading symphony orchestra today, but back in the day it was the leading symphony orchestra in the United States-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --the Cleveland symphony was the standard, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, wow! I remember as a kid he would take us and we probably would end up asleep, but he would let us sit and listen while he was you know, checking the coats and he'd always have a pocket full of change and when he'd empty his change he'd give us a little bit if we went that night with him, you know. But I think he had a love of music and so did my grandmother and on the weekends they would--my grandmother had a piano and she would play and they would sing and you know, that, not what we heard at the symphony, but you know (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so they didn't play classical music? Speaker 2: No, not classical (laughter). Speaker 1: What kind of music did, did they play? Speaker 2: Let's see, Dinah Shore, not too much blues either. I just remember one song, something about a tree, 'Only God Can Make A Tree'? I don't know the song, I don't remember it, but I just remember them singing that song, you know, on Sunday, my grandmother playing and my grandfather singing, you know. All we wanted to do was get outside, but as a result I had to study piano. Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother could play? Speaker 2: My grandmother could play. Speaker 1: And did she, was she primarily a housewife? Speaker 2: She was primarily a housewife, raised her two children and then helped my mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] raise us and there were four of us. Speaker 1: Did I ask you your grandparents' names (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, my grandmother was Mildred Edwards, Mildred Brewer Edwards and my grandfather was Gerald, excuse me, Eugene Edwards, and my uncle was Gerald Edwards. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now, did your mother talk about growing up, what, what it was like to grow up in Cleveland [Ohio] and did she grow up on the east side of Cleveland? Speaker 2: Well they started off in the projects in Cleveland. When my grandfather and grandmother got married, mom came quickly and I think they were in the projects for maybe five years and before they bought their home and they stayed in the home that they bought. They paid like ten thousand dollars for it, on the east side on 146th [Street] in Cleveland. Speaker 1: That is, that's in the money of the day (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in the money. Speaker 1: --of the day, right. Speaker 2: They, they were very proud of that, yeah; three bedroom, one bath house. Speaker 1: Now, I was going to ask you, what was the name of the projects that they lived in? Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the projects but it was down like 22nd [Street] and Euclid [Avenue] and I don't think it's there anymore. I think Cleveland Clinic [sic.] has bought up all that land. Speaker 1: Is that the area that Hough [Cleveland, Ohio]--used to be, it used to be called Hough? Speaker 2: I think Hough was north of there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: This would have been south, Euclid was a little south. It's been a while since I've been back, but yeah, I think Cleveland Clinic has bought all that up from probably about 12th [Street] all the way to University Circle [Cleveland, Ohio], which may be around 55th [sic.]. Story_ID: 665385 Speaker 1: Where did your mother [Violette Edwards-McCowan] go to high school? Speaker 2: Mom went to Adams, John Adams [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. My uncle [Gerald Edwards] went to John Adams. They are about six or seven years apart; they're both deceased. Mom likes to say that she was the only child until he came along, meaning my uncle came alone. She was very bright, very attractive woman, had my older brothers at nineteen, married a military guy and the marriage was short lived and--Raymond Williams [ph.], and then I'm trying to think who was the second one. And then she married--she did not marry my father, Charles Slade and we were born, so she had two sets of twins and her last husband--well, then she married McCowan who she said was the love of her life and then subsequently she married Carl Gohagan [ph.], yeah, so she had four children, three boys and me. Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your mother and father didn't get married when they got together but--? Speaker 2: No, they never were married. He did remain a part of our life. He married another woman out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and they had no children; so he, Charles Slade--he actually resided in Cleveland [Ohio] and his wife resided in Philadelphia, yeah. Speaker 1: That's an interesting arrangement. Speaker 2: It could be why we're here (laughter), but anyway he was a good guy. He worked at a chemical company, I can't figure the name of it, in Cleveland until he passed and he passed at about the age of sixty-six, sixty-seven. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm going to ask about him specifically in a minute, but just in terms of your mother, did, did she have a chance to go to college, or--? Speaker 2: She did not go to college. She got married and had--started her family, but she was always taking classes and courses and she did some of everything. She didn't hold jobs long though. She worked at banks several times. She worked at a hair care company that made pomade for black hair care. She did the books for them, so she did a series of jobs. When she was about twenty-six, twenty-seven, she had a massive stroke so at that time we moved in with, with my [maternal] grandparents and they raised us from that point on, and mom regained most of her faculties and her abilities but never 100 percent, so I, when I speak of mom I usually am talking about my grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards], but, because my grandmother played and grandfather [Eugene Edwards] played the parental roles for us. Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother had the stroke and--? Speaker 2: (Pause) I may have been three or four and my memory of that, at that time I was sleeping with my mom in bed and I remember you know, how kids kick, they turn sideways and they use their feet and they kick and I kicked her and she rolled out of bed and so I was a kid, I didn't know. I thought I had kicked her out of bed and I went and got my grandmother and she went and got the neighbors to take the kids and then she got my grandfather to come home and they all you know--the ambulance came, but my grandfather came and they all took her to the hospital and she had had a massive stroke. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had to learn to read and write and speak all over again. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were basically raised by your grandparents and--? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, so did your mother ever fully recover? Speaker 2: Not fully, she was mobile. I think that because she was so young she had no physical limitations. Mentally she may have been impaired maybe 15, 20 percent, but she--so she had difficulty holding and retaining jobs, but she could get the job, but she had, had problems. Story_ID: 665386 Speaker 1: What was your biological father's name? Speaker 2: Charles Slade-- Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you. Speaker 1: Or kind of guess? Speaker 2: I believe he's born and raised in North Carolina and because we, you know--I met him, I knew he was a friend of the family, but I didn't know he was my father. My twin brother [Kirk Slade] and I--he took us to McDonald's when we were eleven or twelve and told us that he was our father, so that was how I was introduced him as my father, but before then he was Uncle Charles. So I don't know his history very well. I know he had sisters and brothers, they were from, I'm not sure what part of North Carolina, I want to say Sandy Point or Sandy Springs, somewhere around the Triangle [Research Triangle], but he had a twin brother in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that looked exactly like him. Speaker 1: So twins run in the family? Speaker 2: Yeah, twins run in the family, yeah. So he was a kind man, a gentle man and I think altogether he may have had four children outside of wedlock. Speaker 1: So he was married to a woman in Philadelphia. Was he married to the woman when he met your mother [Violette Edwards-McCowan]? Speaker 2: I think they were engaged and the engagement ended and he offered to marry my mom--rumor has it and mom declined because she said she didn't love him, but he could, as long as he was a parent to us, she was okay. So he had to, you know, court his fiance again and ultimately I believe she married him. Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't--so he was in your life but not, he wasn't a steady presence? Speaker 2: No he wasn't a parental figure in my life, but he was, he was in my life. Speaker 1: Did he contribute to the upkeep of you and your brother? Speaker 2: I believe financially he contributed, yeah, after mom took him to court (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, as is often the case in this world, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but he did, he stepped up. Speaker 1: So, so your [maternal] grandparents [Mildred Brewer Edwards and Eugene Edwards] basically--your home life growing up is, centers around your grandparents and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what they were doing. Story_ID: 665387 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Probably the encounter with my mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] is an early memory, but I also remember sleeping in the bed with my [maternal] grandfather [Eugene Edwards] and trying to kick him and he wouldn't budge (laughter) and I remember always trying to get change from him because he kept change stacked upon, on the bureau. So he would tell me, "Well you've got to work for it. I'm not going to give you money, you've just got to work for it." And I was like, "Well what can I do, I'm little, I can't do anything." So he would--I started dusting. I did a terrible job, but I would dust and then he'd give me a quarter, but he would come and inspect my work and it was horrible, a horrible chore. He'd say, "You're short, you can get under there," so I would just work hard, hard. So then I'd get a quarter, so that's probably my earliest working memory for sure, but--and brushing his hair. He was Indian [Native American] and black so he had this long hair and so I would always brush it and braid it and he'd say, "I can't go out looking like this," you know. "But you look beautiful." "No, Karen [HistoryMaker Karen Slade] I can't go out looking like this," so that was--those are early memories of him and then out in the garden he's trying to explain to me what he's planted and how he's caring for it and I just didn't have an interest, you know, but my grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] would shoo us out the house and say, "Go out there and help your grandfather, get out there and help him," so we'd go until he let us off the hook so we could go play. Speaker 1: Okay, you and your brother [Kirk Slade]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 665388 Speaker 1: Were you very close with your brother, I mean I, I know you're twins, but I mean you know--? Speaker 2: We were very close. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were very different but very close. Kirk [Kirk Slade] was a practical joker, comedian, always laughing and playing and I was kind of the serious one, you know, between the two of us, but he could get me going. One of--terrible memories, I--with my brothers, I was always the bossy one, little sister, so we had some chocolate ice cream and I messed mine up because I was experimenting so I put mustard in my ice cream, it was terrible and I, you know, it was horrible, I messed up my ice cream and my [maternal] grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] said, "You're playing in your food, if you mess it up you're going to have to eat it, you're not going to get anymore." I convinced my brother that it was delicious (laughter). He put mustard in his ice cream too and then we had to sit there and eat it. I know it was a terrible thing to do, but that's the kind of sister I was. I was just terrible. Speaker 1: That's an interesting story. I've never heard of that before. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know it was just terrible. I did all kinds of things, we--you know, like Halloween you'd dress up and I remember taking my mom's sheets out 'cause I wanted to be a ghost and I cut holes in her new sheets because I needed eyes and, and just kid stuff you know, and we usually wouldn't get a spanking, no we'd get a talking to. Speaker 1: So you were, when, when your family moved into the house, you were how old? Speaker 2: When, I wasn't there when they first moved in the house my mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] was maybe five to seven and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, so you, you remember the house, the same, was it the same house you lived in? Speaker 2: Yes it was the same house I grew up in, yes, it was the family home and then you know, my [maternal] uncle [Gerald Edwards] and we were all in the same house at one point. Speaker 1: And that's--where was, where was that house? Speaker 2: In Cleveland, Ohio between Kinsman [Road] and Harvard [Avenue] on 146th Street. Speaker 1: Okay now would that be considered--what, what part of town? Speaker 2: It's the east side, Harvard, Lee [Lee-Miles, Cleveland, Ohio] area, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, what, was there--what was the main-- Speaker 2: The main drag--? Speaker 1: --yeah, the main drag or (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's showing my age, right? Kinsman was the main strip and Harvard was the main strip, so most of the undergrad schools that--not undergrad, the schools I went to were all on Harvard. I went to Moses Cleaveland Elementary [Moses Cleaveland Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and then Jamison, Robert Jamison [Robert H. Jamison School, Cleveland, Ohio], which was on Harvard; and then I ended up at Kennedy, John Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] on Harvard. Story_ID: 665389 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: when you were growing up, just considering the neighborhood [Lee-Miles, Cleveland, Ohio] and what was going on in those days, what were some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Let's see, good question. Well because of my [maternal] grandfather's [Eugene Edwards] garden I think of roses and lilacs. I think of buttercups, you know, his flowers, he had all those fragrant flowers that would come in and we'd go out and get fresh mint and make ice tea, that kind of thing. That's big, I guess the flowers, so the smell of flowers. Sounds, city living, so you had a lot of traffic, not like today, but you'd hear traffic and horns, kids laughing you know, as soon as the street lights would come on everybody would have to go home, but until the street lights came on there would be kickball in the streets and bicycles and hide and go seek and it was kind of cool. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, sights, sounds, smells--smells? Speaker 2: Smells, flowers--not my grandmother's [Mildred Brewer Edwards] cooking. I loved her dearly but she wasn't a great cook (laughter). Speaker 1: This is one of the few stories where we've heard, heard like this where the cooking wasn't you know, it was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't her strong suit and she would always say, "You don't pay me enough." That was her--when my grandfather would say, "What did you do to this? How did you ruin this?" You know, "You don't pay me enough," so as, as a result my mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] did not cook well, but she did bake and subsequently I don't cook well, but I do bake (laughter), so I've got a few dishes I can make, but for the most part I don't come from a line of great cookers. Story_ID: 665390 Speaker 1: So what were you interested in growing up, I mean you know, in school or, or otherwise? Speaker 2: Well, I studied music, but I can't say I was really into music. My [maternal] grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] believed that all young ladies should play an instrument, all children should play an instrument, so all of us had an instrument. I had the piano, I think there was a clarinet--I can't remember all the instruments, but we all had instruments and my brother [Kirk Slade] wanted a guitar and drums, he didn't get a guitar and drums, so, but I got the piano and I studied it for a couple of years and then cheerleading came on the scene and the music had to go. I couldn't practice a piano and go out for cheerleaders, so that kind of took over my life from junior high through high school, through college. Speaker 1: So you were a cheerleader on all those levels? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I loved it. It was fun. It was teambuilding and exercise and you know, very positive. I still have the elements of it. It's hidden, can't see it, but it's there (laughter). Speaker 1: So it, it, it informs even your activities today? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know as a manager you have to be positive and you know kind of get people going and fired up and moving and you know, so it's--it doesn't sound like it but it does, there's elements of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so positive attitude and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --belief that you're going to win. Speaker 2: Yeah, just do you best every day, do your best, you've got to go for it, no regrets if you go for it. Speaker 1: Not what, what were the teams like that you cheered for in those days (laugher). I had to ask that after you (laughter) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, junior high [Robert H. Jamison School, Cleveland, Ohio], not so good, high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] we did pretty well. I think we went to a couple of champion, state championships, never made it all the way, we would be devastated, crushed and then at Kent where I cheered we were just an okay, okay group, but, but we loved it. We had so much fun. The guys would throw snowballs at us, but cheering was fun and all. It was a different, it was a different cheerleading squad and all from a black high school to you know Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], which is an integrated school. The cheerleading had lots of little hip action and you know, became a little more structured let's say. Story_ID: 665391 Speaker 1: We're talking about cheerleading, but let, let me just go back to the beginnings of school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now you started school at what, where? What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Moses Cleaveland [Moses Cleaveland Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Moses Cleveland-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. I loved--I still love to read. I started off and I, I guess I read a lot. My [maternal] grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] would take us to the library. We had to take books and we had to read the books and we had to do book reports in the summers (laughter) so it paid off by the time we were in school I was comfortable reading. I had good comprehension and she was trying to get us to increase our vocabulary. I don't know how good I did on that, but as a result when I went to elementary school I got in a, not an honors program, but there was an advanced program where they put you up and I did that and we studied French and I loved it and that was elementary school. I just thought it was great and then when I went on to middle school [Robert H. Jamison School, Cleveland, Ohio] that's when the cheerleading came in and you know, the French and the music kind, and all that kind of went by the wayside, even though I still studied French for a little while, but then I became more physically active with the cheerleading 'cause you'd have to do gymnastics and there was a whole routine that you had to do and I enjoyed that. And I enjoyed math which is different from reading but, I always enjoyed math and then when I went to high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio], chemistry and took trig [trigonometry] and all, I just--I didn't like science, but I loved math; and I had some really good teachers that were pretty hard, but now I appreciate 'em. Story_ID: 665392 Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers or, in, in high--in, in school? Speaker 2: The one I remember the most is Mrs. McBath [ph.], she was my math teacher. Speaker 1: Mrs. Mc--? Speaker 2: McBath. Speaker 1: McBath, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she actually lives out here now [in Los Angeles, California]. Her daughter's an engineer--one of her daughters is an engineer. She was so hard. She was just fierce, but fair and--and I like to say that story because when I went to college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] I was taking--I don't know if it was algebra, I want to say algebra, could have been calculus and there was an error in the book and so I told the teacher, I said, "You know, this is incorrect." And of course being a little black chick they were like, "What do you know," you know (gestures), but I was right and they came back and they were shocked. They wanted to know who told me. I said, "Nobody told me, I just calculated, it wasn't, it wasn't right. It didn't come up right." So I had the confidence in math because it's either right or it's wrong. I wish everything was so easy to discern, but so I, I give her all the credit. I wish I had loved science, I didn't. Had chemistry, I was not good. I had to have tutoring on Saturdays and was never good in science, science fiction, but (laughter)-- Speaker 1: What was it about science that you didn't, that you couldn't deal with because a lot of it is math, mathematically based, so you know? Speaker 2: It just, it just didn't--I couldn't grasp it, I mean for chemistry you had to learn the charts and the minerals and the--and I can memorize it for a test you know, I could get it in there, get it down, but I could never retain it so I couldn't build on it, on the base knowledge of chemistry, if that makes sense. Speaker 1: Yes, so you liked the math, the, the calculations-- Speaker 2: I liked the calculations (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) better than the applied, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --use, use of it (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I never thought of it that way, but I would have to say yeah; so going forward and, and I remember in college I had to take biology which, I couldn't get out of it and I was struggling so I asked for a tutor, that's what I knew to do, ask for a tutor and my teacher told me that maybe I wasn't supposed to know science. I wasn't able, you know, I wasn't capable of learning science. I hated to admit that he may be right, so I studied really hard. I think I, I eked through there. I think I got a C and a B but that was only because he got me so fired up about what I couldn't do and maybe I wasn't capable of doing it, just angered me so, I said let me see--so I got--someone helped me and I got through my, my requisites and then I was done with science. Story_ID: 665393 Speaker 1: How were your grades in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] when you, you know? Speaker 2: B's, A's and B's you know, I may have gotten a C here and there, but rarely because I, C was like a challenge. That was mediocre, had to at least get a B. Speaker 1: Did, did you take any drama or anything or-- Speaker 2: No drama (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in high school? Speaker 2: --I always wanted to take a class at Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio] but, you know my [maternal] grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] just said it wasn't, you know--I think my family was trying to make me be more--they allowed mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] to you know, be a girlie girl and with me I think they were really trying to refocus my energies on practical applications, practical things, so I might have fought it every now and then but pretty much I, I stayed true to the course. I remember coming home in middle school [Robert H. Jamison School, Cleveland, Ohio] and there was cooking, sewing, typing and shorthand, those were the course work for girls in middle school and I told my grandmother, I'm like, "I'm not going to learn to cook, you don't cook." She said, "I cook every day." Well, I said, "I'm not going to learn to sew, I'm not going to make my own clothes, I'm going to be able to shop," all these things that I was going to do, and I remember them very clearly 'cause when I got to type- typing and shorthand I said, "I don't need this. I'm not going to be a secretary, I'm not, I don't need it." My grandmother said, "You don't know what you're going to need. You don't know what life has in store for you. You'll take every course they want to give you and you will do well in it." Every time now when I'm typing faster than the secretaries here I think, grandma knew what she was talking about 'cause I, I do type very well. I still don't know shorthand still so well or cook well, but I type very well--that's courtesy of gram. Story_ID: 665394 Speaker 1: What did you project I guess in high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio]--now I assume you were very popular? Speaker 2: I was popular. Speaker 1: A cheerleader-- Speaker 2: I was cheerleader. Speaker 1: --a nice looking woman, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, athletic and everything and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you know, you, you know got decent grades-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so-- Speaker 2: Let's see, what, what did--high school I, I wanted to be homecoming queen and I didn't make it, which was fine. My archrival ended up being homecoming queen, but it was okay. I, in college I was homecoming queen (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really at Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], okay-- Speaker 2: So it was a little different, but at Kent they had, they had the black homecoming queen and the white homecoming queen, and the year that I made it I was the black homecoming queen, but they had no white homecoming queen so they always said I was homecoming queen for the school, if that makes any sense, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By default you were the whole-- Speaker 2: By default (laughter), that's right, by default I made it; but I was popular. Speaker 1: And were you involved in clubs and student government, that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No student government. Honor society. I was always in the library, worked part time as a librarian, always loved--still love books, but I was gregarious and outgoing when there was something to do. Other than that I was pretty studious. Story_ID: 665395 Speaker 1: How--did you--how much attention did you pay to popular culture, I mean music and that sort of thing, considering your, you know, you run a radio station now [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that is interesting. I-- Speaker 1: --what role did radio play in those days for you? Speaker 2: Well, one birthday, no, when I made honors society my brother [Kirk Slade] gave me a double disk set, disk being LP, not CD [compact disc] of 'The Supremes Greatest Hits' so that was--and then for the next birthday I got one of those little portable record players that had a radio, I know this is so old fashion, and it had a handle, you could carry it; so I would listen to WJMO [WJMO Radio; WERE Radio, Cleveland, Ohio], WABQ Cleveland [WPVL Radio; WABQ Radio, Painesville, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Were those the black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those were the black-- Speaker 1: --black radio stations? Speaker 2: --radio stations in Cleveland [Ohio] but I don't think they--I think they may have been day timers. I don't think they were on at night. Speaker 1: These were on AM? Speaker 2: AM, yeah this was, I'm thinking back, but I never thought about going into radio. I just, you know, liked to hear the music. I had a couple of CDs when I went away to college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] I think I had a total of six CDs, CDs, excuse me, LPs and they carried me through, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: --I've always enjoyed music. Now music is more like work, but I still enjoy some music. Speaker 1: Okay, you came out of high school [John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in what, '73, seventy- '73 [1973]? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], yeah. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], okay; those were the years that I guess, Diana Ross and The Supremes--it was, she was Diana Ross and The Supremes then? Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was, yeah, by then, but when I--first it was The Supremes and before she stepped out. Motown [Motown Records] was big, meaning Cleveland, Detroit [Michigan] was you know, the center of the universe, right? Let's see, and The Isley Brothers. I'm trying to think who else, Stevie Wonder-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Michael Jackson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Temptations [The Temptations]-- Speaker 1: --was there. Speaker 2: --Michael Jackson, we all had a crush on one of the Jacksons, Jermaine [Jermaine Jackson] was my crush. Let's see, who else, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson was my brother's favorite, so by the default I began to love Smokey Robinson 'cause he, you know, he would play him forever; so I, I had--I was introduced to Donny Hathaway, that kind of thing and I loved it, but I never thought I would be associated with it in this manner. Speaker 1: Now the--what about the movies that--these were the days of the what they, they have called I think (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the black exploitation films [blaxploitation]? Speaker 1: Right, exactly-- Speaker 2: I think my first film was, that I went to a theater to see was again, some reward for grades or something, I saw 'Mary Poppins,' that was my first big, big--and I got a 'Mary Poppins' book; that's my first theatrical (laughter) experience. Didn't see a lot of the black films until later. I didn't really see them in the theater and I don't know why. I was in college, I could have easily gone, but I was working my way through school so I'd go to school, you know, go to class at, in college; and then I would work, do homework and cheerleader practice of course. Story_ID: 665396 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, when you were a senior [at John F. Kennedy High School, Cleveland, Ohio] what did you project as a career? Did you have anything in mind? Speaker 2: That was really tough, I was so focused on going to college, I mean, I was focused. I was determined. I was in honor societies, all these things and everybody was going to college and I thought well, I'm going to college too. I didn't know how I was going to pay for it but I knew I was going, so I applied to four schools and of the four, Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] accepted me and gave me a scholarship and a work grant and some other stuff, so that's how I ended up at Kent. Speaker 1: Now did, (pause) the interest in--you were fifteen when the shootings took place at Kent State. Did, did that, I mean did that, I mean what did you think of Kent State after--I mean did you have any-- Speaker 2: I didn't--that was not a part of my consciousness at that time. I had an older cousin that went to Kent, Darla--Darlene Evans [ph.] and so she was there and then her sister went and they were like two years older than me, one year older than me, so then when I went I just added Kent State. I really wanted to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], that's where I really wanted to go, but I couldn't afford it. I didn't know anyone who had ever gone there. These were just schools that I researched myself and figured out, so I sent off the applications and ended up at Kent because they gave me the most money and they gave me the opportunity to get a work grant and a loan and, and but when I went there I was just so happy to get there--major, what was I going to major in, I didn't know, so I took all my electives the first two years before I had to declare a major. It was so hard to declare a major because I didn't know what I would be good at, I didn't know what my skill sets were and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you consider math? Speaker 2: I never thought about math, which is odd because I love math and I love reading. Speaker 1: Would you say, I mean looking back on it, would you say that, I mean that women were discouraged from being mathematicians in those days or, I mean I've, I've heard other people say that that there wasn't a lot of encouragement for women to, to, to pursue mathematics? Speaker 2: There was no encouragement for math or science. I understand why there was none in science, I wasn't that good at it, but math there should have been and there was not, there was not and I never focused on it. Story_ID: 665397 Speaker 1: Did you have any idea that you could make a living as a mathematician? Speaker 2: You know at that time I didn't, I thought you could either be a teacher or you could be a nurse. I mean I had a really limited scope on what I could do and I knew I wasn't ready for marriage and family and I wasn't going to college [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] to get a husband, I was going to figure out how--what I was going to do with the rest of my life; so I remember watching--I must have been home for a break and I saw Dorothy Fuldheim, that's a name of the past. She was a female news anchor in Cleveland [Ohio] and I said I can do that, all she's doing is talking, I can do that, I can talk (laugher), so that was, you know, in my mind's eye I could do that, so that's when I declared a major in journalism. Well at--even though it was broadcast journalism at the time it was called telecommunications, it was before the word broadcast journalism, but you studied television, radio, print, which were the only platforms then. And I joined the Family Tree, the Family Tree was a production company--college production company. It had a public access, cable access television program and you cycled through all the jobs, so you started with the, I believe you started with the lighting and then the audio for sound and as you, I guess matriculated at some point you did the interviewing of the guests and I was lucky enough to interview [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, which was big at the time and she came down with her brother who played for the Cleveland Browns, he was a good looking guy. Speaker 1: Ben Davis, right? Speaker 2: Ben Davis, oh, he was a good looking guy and subsequently I, I--Ben and I worked together at Xerox [Xerox Corporation], small world. Let's see, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, Angela Davis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know Fania Davis, the sister, the other sister? Speaker 2: No, I never met the other sister. Speaker 1: I know she spoke on her behalf when she was in, in prison, you know. Fania would go--she looked just like her pretty much, yeah. Speaker 2: No, well I met the other brother [Reginald Davis]. I can't think of the other brother's name. I think he may have been at Xerox too. But, so, but what I determined at that time was I could not be on camera. I was terrible. I got nervous. I talked with my hands, which you see I'm consciously trying to hold them, hold them down, but when I was in college and interviewing I would talk with my hands and I would make gestures and I was so demonstrative it was distracting, so when I looked back and even though you're college kids you're there to learn. When I looked back I wasn't comfortable with what I saw, or how I sounded, I was so critical, but then I cycled through and we produced some shows and I, I liked that, you directed some shows, I liked that even more, so I--there were so many other aspects that you could--if this was your field you could just find what field you were comfortable. So where I initially thought I wanted to be in front of the camera and be a news anchor, I determined that that was not for me (laughter). So I ended up, from there I ended up going to Xerox and, and got into sales. Story_ID: 665398 Speaker 1: Now I don't want to speed you too far ahead, too fast (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: --but, but let me--I didn't ask you about two fellas that you went to school with in Cleveland [Ohio] and then in Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], I believe Arsenio Hall and Steve (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Steve Harvey, yeah-- Speaker 1: Steve Harvey, right-- Speaker 2: I went to elementary school [Moses Cleaveland Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] with Arsenio. He lived around the corner from me. His father [Fred Hall] was a minister and we, you know, we don't encounter each other. I think we've both been out here over thirty years and I think I've seen him twice, but whenever I see him--I saw his mom [Anne Hall] and it was good. She remembered me for some reason and so whenever I see him I ask how is his mom. The last time I saw him was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. He was like "Slade [HistoryMaker Karen Slade]?" I was like, "Hey, Arsenio" (laughter). He was like, "We went to school together." He said, "But if you tell anybody how old I am we're going to have a problem." I said, "Okay, okay, it's no big deal" (laughter). I (unclear) it's Hollywood, it's important to him to keep his age so, and then Steve Harvey. Steve was younger, so he likes to tell the story about how he saw me cheerleading at Kent and I asked him if he was one of the ones that threw snowballs at us, and honestly I didn't really remember him well from Kent because, you know, I was an upper classmen, but he's reminded me, so yeah, we went to school together. Speaker 1: I know they both took drama at Kent State from Dr. Dorsey, Fran Dorsey, or, or I don't know if he's a doctor, but Francis Dorsey, but--so you never took drama at all, I'm surprised at that. Speaker 2: No, I never took drama. No, I-- Speaker 1: Or speech, did you ever take speech? Speaker 2: I, I had to take speech for the major, but it wasn't public speaking and it should have been public speaking, but I had to take speech and so that helped me with my writing, but I did all that I had to do and I, you know I have this personality, once I get into something I'm all in; so when I was cheerleading I was all in. Story_ID: 665399 Speaker 1: When I was with Family Tree I was all in. I didn't do a lot of extracurricular, but I guess that was sufficient. Plus it was what I thought I wanted to do and once I figured out you know, what I was comfortable at, then I went for it. I did an internship with NBC, WKYC [WKYC Radio] in Cleveland [Ohio] during my senior year [at Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and it was fascinating even though all I did was--I was a gopher, I ran and got this and did that (laughter) but it was a really good experience, tough experience because I ran into I guess what you'd call now sexual harassment, but at the time I didn't know that's what it was, it just you know, I was you know, excited, happy to be there you know, just in company with these people but doing what I wanted to do and a gentleman made an inappropriate pass at me and I didn't handle it well, just freaked me out, scared me and then I thought (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did he make a physical pass? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no just a-- Speaker 2: Just a verbal--? Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was too close for comfort, so rather than go back and you know, say hey, this is what happened, I just kind of finished my internship and went away, yeah, so that kind (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it made you too uncomfortable to pursue further work at that, at that station? Speaker 1: Well it was an internship so it was coming to an end, but-- Speaker 2: Did they offer you anything beyond--? Speaker 1: They didn't offer and I didn't pursue. I think probably my whole attitude and disposition changed after that. Speaker 2: In terms of focusing on broadcast television or, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well just, I was more conscious of who was in the room with me you know, I just was not as comfortable and casual and energetic and excited as I was. I was more cautious and tentative and, and I think that that changed my dynamic in that workplace, in that work situation, so I finished the internship and I got my you know, passing grade, but kind of scared me off 'cause I, I mean, just young and naive. I didn't know that I had alternatives. Story_ID: 665400 Speaker 1: You came out in '77 [1977] is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay and are there, were there any particular mentors in college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] or, or favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Not really, I think that the people that participated with the Family Tree, the older students kind of mentored the younger students, so Gerald Bryant [ph.] was a mentor. He was an older student in the program. He was, he was exceptional, actually he went to be a news anchor I think in Florida and--can't think of the other gentleman's name who really helped me. He took me under his wing--Naeem--Ibrahim Naeem [ph.]. He was in the program and he really helped, kind of just helped so you understood what was going on, what you were doing, why you were doing and what impact it would have, because the idea of the program was it culminated, at the end you'd know how to produce a show or a segment you know, from hosted it, to light it, to you know, do the sound, to produce it, you know the whole bit, so. Speaker 1: So the Family Tree was a student organization? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a student run cable show. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so it, you would interview celebrities that came to campus (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --or people to speak, who were brought there to speak? Speaker 2: Yeah and in the '70s [1970s] it was kind of a militant time so, and as you cycled through you didn't get to host all the shows, you got maybe five weeks on just sitting and five, you know, so you kind of circled so each year you'd go up to the next level and your senior year you would produce and direct so, yeah that was the epitome so you've done everything else. But it was, it was, it was a really good learning curve. The only other thing I did outside of that probably was pledging and I did that the first two years and then I wasn't very active after that. Speaker 1: So you were an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] right? Speaker 2: I pledged AKA my first year and I went from having dean's list grades to a- an academic wobble (laughter) and then I got my equilibrium back and got my grades back up, so, and I was active maybe the first two years; after that I focused on my, on my career. Story_ID: 665401 Speaker 1: How did you come to work for Xerox [Xerox Corporation]? I mean, what, what did, 'cause right now I'm not seeing where this, where your, your college activities are leading to Xerox? Speaker 2: It was not leading to Xerox. All I wanted to do was be in broadcasting. I got out of school [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] early because I did the internship I think April, May, June, June I graduated, no offers, so I worked in the mall for a store called Ups and Downs. Speaker 1: What, what mall was this? Speaker 2: Randall Mall [Randall Park Mall, North Randall, Ohio] and I went over to Severance Mall [Severance Center, Cleveland, Ohio], but, and they were trying to keep, get me into retail so I became assistant manager and made a little more money but I was like, "Oh no, I can't get stuck here." So a friend said, "Well you know Xerox is looking to hire if you can," you know--what I didn't know at the time was they were looking for minorities because of affirmative action. So I went in, I tested, I, I got the job and I had the personality for sales, but I got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This, this was a sales job? Speaker 2: It was a sales job, yeah. It was facsimile equipment and I didn't get all of the training that I needed and Xerox is notorious for training at that time, so I got the feeling that I was hired to fill a quota and languished there and so if I didn't perform I would be out, so once I understood what was going on, you know at twenty-one you don't know everything (laughter) so twenty-two, then I, I ended up coming to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I, I came on vacation, interviewed, got the job, went home packed up and drove across the country. Speaker 1: So this is in--how long were you in Cleveland [Ohio] at Xerox before you moved to L.A. Speaker 2: I was hired in '78 [1978] for Xerox and then in '79 [1979] I moved to L.A.-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I worked for a great guy, Chris Floyd and he couldn't believe I'd been with the company for a year and was not as well versed in sales as- I wasn't. Speaker 1: So it was the same job description? Speaker 2: Same job description, same division of the company, just a, a, a different perspective, so this sales manager-- Speaker 1: So what, what do you think was the problem in Cleveland, did they, did they take it lightly, I mean your employment lightly, like it was just to fulfill a quota and that's it, or was--? Speaker 2: That's my interpretation; that was never said to me, but I didn't get the training that Xerox is notorious for. At that time they were, you know--go to Xerox get trained and then go somewhere else, but (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I've interviewed some people who've done that. Speaker 2: They had excellent training. Speaker 1: They said it was like getting an M.B.A. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I didn't get it, you know when you're a new hire you have your studies and you study your products and your features and benefits, whatever and you're scripted, you become acquainted with the equipment and then you go to school and you practice your sales pitch. But I did get it when I moved, or I got another sales manager. Story_ID: 665402 Speaker 1: All right, so Xerox [Xerox Corporation], you're in Los Angeles [California] now, you, how did your, how did your parents [Slade's maternal grandparents, Mildred Brewer Edwards and Eugene Edwards] feel about you moving to Los Angeles? Speaker 2: Oh it was so sad. It was so sad. I was adventurous. I was going to move across country and pursue my dreams and so, my twin brother [Kirk Slade] had died the year before in '78 [1978] so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what, what, what happened? Speaker 2: He had a car accident. He was going back to the base and he had been home partying, enjoying his life. Speaker 1: Was he in the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Navy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Navy, okay-- Speaker 2: --so he was going back to Norfolk [Virginia] and he fell asleep at the wheel and ran into a tractor trailer truck and was killed, so when I left the year after it was, you know, it was like they had a house full, now the house was emptying out and I went back--I forget something and I turned around and went back to get something and they were in there boohooing and then I started boohooing, it was like--you know they just sent me off with smiles and you know, and then when I went back in they were broken down and I broke down, it was like all so--so it was very hard to leave, but you have to leave. You have to pursue your dreams; so I, I was off to L.A. My mother was here by then and I lived with her for about two weeks and I got my own place and I started selling, and the difference in training and development I experienced here was night and day. I think my first month in my territory I got an award for hammering out the orders (laughter) you know 'cause I did well and once I learned then I you know did, I made President's Clubs which was when you over achieved your budget, so I, I, I did well, but it was all about training and the person taking their time to develop and train. Story_ID: 665403 Speaker 1: Was there any particular, special mentors at Xerox [Xerox Corporation] that you, you remember? Speaker 2: Well, Chris Floyd, I give him all the credit 'cause he's the one that hired me out of Cleveland [Ohio]. He's the one that realized what I didn't know and what I needed to know and helped me gain the knowledge and the expertise, but I also joined the--they had a black organization, what was it called, was it Los Angeles Black Employees [Los Angeles Black Employees of Xerox], was it LABE, I think, I want to say LABE, I could be incorrect, but within that organization they did a lot of mentoring and coaching and helping and they would pair up with you and would help you to make sales calls, especially the new kids on the block, with the more seasoned. So if you were new you did a lot of retail, just knocking on doors, then you became, you got accounts assigned to you and then you managed accounts and so you kind of went up the sales ladder, so it was a very good organization. Speaker 1: Okay, so I was going to ask you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's why [HistoryMaker] Bernard Kinsey and, and Kent Amos [HistoryMaker Kent B. Amos] and they were, they were a part of that. Speaker 1: Of the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] group LABE--? Speaker 2: Yeah, well Kent, I met him at a conference, but Bernard and [HistoryMaker] Shirley Kinsey were instrumental in helping develop the LABE organization on the West Coast-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and not them, there were just more than them, but those are the ones that just stick out in my mind. Speaker 1: Okay, that's something--so were there any blacks in top management positions in Xerox in those days? Speaker 2: Not top management positions, but they had sales managers and I think we did get a regional manager, Gil, Gil Scott, the name Gill Scott is--I think he was maybe the first black regional manager for the western region and that was during my tenure so, after sales I went into project management, product development. I did a lot of training and worked out of Leesburg, Virginia, well, I worked out of El Segundo [California], but all the training courses were in Leesburg, Virginia, which was where Xerox trained, so I would go through products and, and take the manuals and, and develop curriculum to train people on the use of it and the features and benefits and that kind of stuff, so I got to use a little bit of video. I would video (laughter), video the trainings. Story_ID: 665404 Speaker 1: In the middle of your doing this, Mr. Stevland Morrison [sic. Stevland Morris, Stevie Wonder] purchases KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Well, I was--I think he bought it in '79 [1979] and I was here in '79 [1979] but in--when, when did I go back--in '88 [1988] I took a job with Xerox [Xerox Corporation] in Atlanta [Georgia]. I was a regional sales manager for a small division of Xerox, office products division, and I was there about a year, about a year and Steve came to town and he was performing and we were in the same group and he was talking--I guess at that time his general manager of this station had left, so the station was operating with a cooperative--he had his sales manager, his program director and I think his marketing director they were working as a team to carry on, but he was looking for a manager, so we're talking and laughing and, and he says, "Well you need to come run my radio station," you know, sounds like--I didn't believe that offer (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: Had you known him very long? Speaker 2: Yep I knew him but I just, it didn't, you know I'm going to leave Xerox but then I thought, radio. Speaker 1: Now how did you meet Stevie Wonder, I mean (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, I met him years--here, I met him at a Laker [Los Angeles Lakers] game, so I mean we were friends, I knew him, but the offer, I was like wow, I could get back into broadcasting, I mean, get back into, I'd never been in broadcasting. I was at Xerox, so, but I wasn't quite sure the offer was genuine. Speaker 1: Well I mean, now I don't know now, most people, I mean were you excited about meeting Stevie Wonder (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, over the years, but I'd known him, so you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but you know-- Speaker 2: --but it was a concert, it was fun, it was exciting. It wasn't--in my mind's eye it wasn't the job offer it was--but then he had his-- Speaker 1: So he was a friend of yours? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Before--you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --just a-- Speaker 2: But then he had his business manager call me up and say, "No, Steve was serious, he wants you to consider coming to manage his station." So I said, "Okay, he's serious," I said, "He'll sign a contract?" He said, "Yeah, he'll sign a contract," so that was like my little (air quotes) test to see if he would do that. So probably five, six months later I left Xerox and came to work here. Speaker 1: So, so this is '89 [1989], about, this is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, so I went to Atlanta in '88 [1988] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what position did you hold in Xerox before you took? Speaker 2: I was regional sales manager-- Speaker 1: In, in-- Speaker 2: --in Atlanta Speaker 1: --Atlanta, okay. Speaker 2: --and then I came back, I, I got Xerox to transfer me back and then I left the company and came to work here and they made me repay my relocation (laughter), but it was all good and that was twenty-five years ago. Speaker 1: So, I mean you come full circle back to broadcast as a-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --as a-- Speaker 2: --it's funny though 'cause I never thought about radio, I mean radio was just you know, television was glamorous and exciting and you know, but guess what? I love radio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It gives you a degree of flexibility and spontaneity that television doesn't have. Television still has the, for me, the glamor and the prestige, but radio if you're a working broadcaster it gives you the opportunity to do something that you love and make a difference. Story_ID: 665405 Speaker 1: Well what were the, what was the, what were things like at KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California]--well first of all, what does KJLH, I mean, stand for, or had, what has it come to stand for? Speaker 2: Well, it originally stood for the original owner, John Lamar Hill, so you get the JLH from John Lamar Hill. And Steve's [Stevie Wonder], I think his first business manager or general manager would have been Rod McGrew and I think Rod came up with this slogan, "Kindness, joy, love and happiness," so that was a way to always remember the call letters, even to this day people go, "I know KJLH; kindness, joy, love and happiness," so that was the original branding of the station under Steve and it still holds true. Speaker 1: Okay, it was positive branding. Speaker 2: Yeah and it sounds like Steve, you know and you'll always remember, when you say KJLH people can't get the call letters, kindness, joy, love, happiness, they get the call letters. Story_ID: 665406 Speaker 1: So this is 1989 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]-- Speaker 1: And what was, I guess, what was the condition of the station when you, when you came on board? Speaker 2: It was a bit of a culture shock for me because I was used to Corporate America and KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] was kind of run like a radio--like a record company to me, not that I'd ever been in a record company but, it just was very loose and very casual and it was not consistent, congruent with what I thought a business, how a business should be run, so-- Speaker 1: So who conformed? You or, or the station? Speaker 2: Probably a little of both, I'm not the same person I was, but nor is the company. I think I started trying to put some infrastructure in place from job descriptions and employee manuals to 401K, I mean I put all this stuff into the company to make it run like I thought it should run and I was given the freedom and the flexibility to do it by the owner, so, he wanted it to run better and not being the creative being, he liked, I think the idea that I wasn't trying to tell him what music to play. I was just focused on the business and the sales and the revenue of the company, so, so we got along pretty good. Every now and then I would poke my nose in the music and, and he'd punch it (gestures), not, not really, but you know. I remember once I heard a song playing and it was, it was horrible, I mean the words were bad, I was like, we can't play this, this is inconsistent with, we can't do this, so I went in there and I took--this is how long ago, it was a (unclear), you know they don't do carts anymore, it's like an eight tra-- Speaker 1: Right, it's a tape cart, yeah. Speaker 2: --and it took it out and the jock called Steve [Stevie Wonder], "She's in here, she took the music out." And Steve said, "You don't take music out, you talk about it, you just don't go in there--." I said, "I'm the general manager, I'm supposed to be allowed to take the music out if I find it offensive," so sometime later Steve heard the song, he's like, "Why are we playing this?" I said, "That's the song I took out. We should not be playing it but you reprimanded me so, hands off," you know, so we ultimately began to talk about what the perimeters were and how, because everything else was okay, but the music, and even to this day he loves the music and the music is what keeps it exciting for him. So we still have to manage expectations with our listeners and our audience, and the owner has final say. Story_ID: 665407 Speaker 1: Now what is the format [of KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], and has it been the same format since 1989? Speaker 2: It's evolved little. It's an R and B station. We play R and B, as R and B changes we modify it with new artists, contemporary artists, and the genre changes just a little depending on the artist, where you may have a new wave you know, from the old school Motown [Motown Records] to a Jill Scott now, to you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We saw [HistoryMaker] KEM out there, you know, his, his music (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah KEM is a good blend. He has, still has an old sound but he's a very contemporary artist. So you try to find that blend, but now the industry is so different. We haven't changed that much, but the industry has, I mean we're basically a music delivery system, a free music delivery system and now you have paid music delivery systems. You have satellite, you have Pandora [Pandora Media, Inc.], you have so many different methods and platforms to access music, so it's--competition is, is still steep, I mean it was just, you know, with consolidation you had competition and now you have other platforms competing. Story_ID: 665408 Speaker 1: Yeah I've, I have a note here that in '86 [1986] I guess, KPWR [KPWR Radio, Los Angeles, California], or K Power or, you know, was a big rival to KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], so how, you know, did they, I mean how, how many, well, was that, was that the only rival when you came on? Speaker 2: No, Power was, Power was really, they were R and B, they were coming at us hard and then they made a turn towards hip hop, so when they adjusted their format towards hip hop, we stayed R and B, so we got a reprieve. In '90 [1990] Rock With a Beat came in, which was, which ended up being The Beat [KKBT Radio; KRRL Radio, Los Angeles, California] and they flipped their format to R and B. And then I think my honeymoon with KJLH lasted maybe nine months (laughter) before I had another direct competitor come at me and that was The Beat. I think it was owned by Evergreen [Evergreen Media Corporation] then and they had a bigger signal, more market coverage, better penetration and they us two black eyes. They took my morning man and my program director, which happened to be the same and then they took my afternoon drive. You know, putting all the infrastructure in I didn't time my jocks up with contracts. I was so busy trying to make my organization tight my biggest lesson came when I didn't have my jocks on contract because they wiped me out. They took my morning man, my afternoon drive, my PD [program director], that's, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you learned (unclear)? Speaker 2: --when I really learned, began to learn radio (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So it-- Speaker 2: --not just the business of radio, but the competitive landscape of radio. Speaker 1: Now The Beat is owned by Radio One [Urban One, Inc.], correct? Speaker 2: It was owned by Evergreen and then Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] bought Evergreen and then it was bought by Radio One. Speaker 1: Okay, it's had three different-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and then when Radio One owned it, it was, it was well, if I can say this about a competitor without stuttering, it was a well performing asset in the market. They had a, a third Hispanic, a third black, a third white. It was a well diversed, tight, competitor, which I wasn't happy about, (laughter) but anyway, but they were cooking and then Radio One bought them, paid a premium for them, and rather than leave it as it was, they made a left turn and went R and B, straight R and B. It was R and B before, but it had a, a flavor, you know, it wasn't hardcore ethnic. It had a flavor of the market. It had Hispanic flair. It had pop flair, I mean it was just a good blend and they came directly at us, R and B and they gave us the blues and that's another time you just, every day you get up and do the best you can that day. It's a big station, it's a big stick, big market, they have money to, you know, they're publicly traded. They've got resources we didn't have, but at the end of the day, I'd like to say that we did so well that they left the market, but it probably had little to do with us (unclear). Speaker 1: What's, what's the--oh, go ahead. Speaker 2: I was just going to say I think they overpaid and the debt service was probably insurmountable so, and we had been owned since '79 [1979] so we didn't have the same financial setup. Speaker 1: Now what is the radio demographic? What's the demographic like in the L.A. area [Los Angeles, California], I mean how many black folks are actually here and how many of them would be, you know, I guess the target audience for KJLH? Speaker 2: Well, its, its diminishing. It use, we use to be about 10 percent, which would be maybe a million three [1.3 million], something like that and now we're down to probably eight hundred thousand. Speaker 1: So, so this area, I mean the Southern California area right around L.A. (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In L.A. County [Los Angeles County, California]-- Speaker 1: --L.A. County? Speaker 2: --but now if you go out and pick up Orange County [California] and, and Riverside [California], San Bernardino [California], then you get back up to about a million, but our signal doesn't cover all of that, we just cover the Basin [Los Angeles Basin]. So, we're about 8 percent, maybe 9 percent of the total population. Story_ID: 665409 Speaker 1: Have you had to upgrade the signal over the years [at KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], or, or can you, I mean how, how do you--? Speaker 2: I did get one upgrade. I put in for a signal upgrade in maybe '80 [1980], no excuse me, maybe '90 [1990], around '90 [1990] I put in for a signal upgrade. It came through in '97 [1997], '98 [1998], so it took a long time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven years-- Speaker 2: But the only reason it got through was because the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had a change in the regulations and the rules, so we're close to (unclear), meaning we are grandfathered in. We've been here for a long time, but we kind of wiggled and we were originally licensed to Long Beach [California] and we moved into Compton [California], licensed to Compton now, so we're close based on our frequency, so, which couldn't cause interference, so they did not want us to go up on our power because it, the idea would be it would cause more interference with our competitors, with our close adjacents, second adjacents. But the rule changed and we had already had the paperwork, the application, the engineering on the desk, when it changed it slipped through (laughter), it closed back down, we got through. So, that came through about '97 [1997], '98 [1998]. In 2000 we went up, about, I could have my dates a little off, but it took us a long time to, roughly ten years from application to completion, so we have had a, a power increase. We went from 2.25 to 5.6 watts and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did that basically double the area that you--? Speaker 2: No, unfortunately it doesn't really double the area. It did, because of our, our terrain we're a terrestrial signal, so we go line of sight, directly, so we go right into Hollywood Hills [California], so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then its stops at the Hills? Speaker 2: Yeah, so what we're working on now is seeing how we can increase or fill in the natural circumference of the signal which would be beyond Hollywood Hills, so that's another FCC challenge we're working through, with a booster, translator, whatever we can get, get done. Speaker 1: And what about your competitors, are they, were they able, do they have a bigger signal, are they (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They all have bigger signals and they're all--they all have higher elevation. Most of them are on Mount Olsen, which is roughly two thousand feet above sea level and we're on Baldwin Hill [sic. Baldwin Hills] which is about, our height I think is about 103, so yeah, they have--the higher up you go your elevation is over the mountains so your signal goes farther. We kind of dead-end into the mountains. We're pretty decent off the coast, so. Story_ID: 665410 Speaker 1: How are your ratings determined [at KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], I mean how, I think its Arbitron, right, now? Speaker 2: Well, now Arbitron was bought by Nielsen Audio-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we are struggling. They changed methodology. Arbitron actually changed methodology prior to Nielsen Audio buying it. They went from a diary recollection method to a PPM, which is a people meter, portable people meter. I looks like a-- Speaker 1: So it went from people actually writing down what they listen to. Speaker 2: Which is like a, you know, a favorite. Speaker 1: If they can remember what-- Speaker 2: Exactly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right-- Speaker 2: --to now your signals are encoded and you have your purple- excuse me, portable people meter--that's tough, and when it comes in contact with an encoded signal it captures it, so that's how they now tell how many people are listening, so they may have (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So do they, do they give a device to an individual or certain individuals or? Speaker 2: They give them to families. Speaker 1: To families, okay-- Speaker 2: So there may be thirty eight hundred to four thousand meters in the market to represent, what, ten to eleven million people, and so if you have maybe 288 allocated towards African Americans and then (background noise)--I'm sorry, do you need-- Speaker 1: They're probably going to move on. I think it's all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Keep going. Speaker 2: --so, but maybe 288 are allocated towards African American and then you--they try to get four per household and then they--so each meter--and it starts at the age of six and goes up, so they try to get male, female, youth, adult, elder. So they try to get all that in a household and then they carry the people meter and, and whatever signal they come in contact with is encoded. Encoded (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they carry it on their person? Speaker 2: They carry it on their person. Speaker 1: Okay, that, that makes sense because (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they are compensated because they get to carry it for I think, a maximum of two years. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I'm thinking that a lot of people, you know, a lot of radio is listened to in the car (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah that's still--the dashboard is still the last landscape where we've manage to hold on, but now, even now they're doing--you can download your, your I--what is that, iPhone, you can plug it in and-- Speaker 1: So you have a phone for a radio (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so-- Speaker 1: --for information-- Speaker 2: --yeah and then you have Sirius [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.] satellite and then you have Pandora [Pandora Media, Inc.], they're giving you access to Internet radio, so, it's, it's splintering, but I still think content is king. If you can provide the listener with what they want, the experience they want, they'll listen. Story_ID: 665411 Speaker 1: Things have changed since you started I guess in '89 [1989] in terms of the number of actual disc jockeys and radio personalities that are at the station [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], right? Speaker 2: Well in most stations, yes, they do voice tracking and they do syndication. We just got syndicated--since I've been here our first syndicated talent was Steve Harvey. We put him on in 2008 I think, I don't remember, 2009--2009 I think it was and because with the new PPM [portable people meter] we were really struggling to get some ratings and Steve Harvey came in and he was a known talent. He had market--he had been in the market so people were familiar with him. He had television shows, so we didn't have to do an extensive branding or marketing campaign with him and as soon as he came on we started showing up, we started getting ratings, other than that we have live and local and that's pretty much how we stand. We've always had deejays in the booth, air talent, and we'll continue to do that and we hire locally. We're very community oriented. Speaker 1: So other then the Steve Harvey show ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'] there are local disk jockeys on? Speaker 2: Yeah, and Steve Harvey was the first time in, in, since the entire time that Steve's [Stevie Wonder] owned it, I don't think he's ever had a syndicated show on for every day, like they may have done a weekend countdown or something like that. Speaker 1: Now, what, what about Tom Joyner and [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks, did they--? Speaker 2: We've never had Tom Joyner but he has been in the market. He was on, I think he was on KACE [KACE Radio; KRCD Radio, Inglewood, California], which was owned by Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], the old Green Bay Packer. So I think Tom was there and we never--I don't think Doug Banks has been in the market at all. So-- Speaker 1: That's interesting it's just right there in Dallas [Texas], well anyway, that's-- Speaker 2: Well, you know a lot, like most of our jocks are tenured. They've been with us a long time and they have a loyal following. If we can translate that following into a strong database of listeners then we can still you know, take the on air, put it online, put it on an app and then still have marketing abilities. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, Steve Harvey and of course Tom Joyner, they, from the national perch that they have or, or spot that they have, they're able to talk about you know, supporting the black colleges [HBCUs] and doing other things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but I think that, I think it probably really helps to have a local disc jockey you know, in town when there is a community issue or some community (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It really does help. We don't do as much news as we use to, but we do public affairs five days a week and L.A.'s [Los Angeles, California] a big town and we have a lot of issues unfortunately and our audience trusts us. We've got a degree of credibility it's taken you know, decades to achieve, so they count on us to tell them what's going on, why it's going on and have some input and it's a very interactive public affairs show so, it's called the 'Front Page,' so we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So is this a daily show? Speaker 2: Monday through Friday, 4:30 to 6:00 A.M. and people do get up and listen to it believe it or not; so even though we're a music station, predominately music, we still try to keep our community footprint alive and well--not just by having local talent, but having a forum for community issues. Story_ID: 665412 Speaker 1: Los Angeles [California] seems to be one of the places geographically that the black community nationwide looks to for, I guess for guidance in terms of how to handle problems, you know it's one of the cities where things go down with police (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're, we're pretty radical-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --believe it or not, but we've got really good representation. I think [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters had done an, an excellent job for us on the national scale and Mark Ridley-Thomas has done a fine job as a supervisor and we've gotten good representation. I don't know if I always agree with all the, the decisions they make, but I'm not here to be a politician, I'm here to be a businesswoman but I also advocate for my community interests. Right now we're having some issues with the MTA [Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transit Authority] and the Crenshaw line [Crenshaw/LAX Line] because it's affecting some of the small minority businesses. They're being adversely affected because of the construction, so I had a chance to meet with the mayor, Garcetti [Eric Garcetti], and I also had a chance to meet with the director of communications for the MTA and the mayor's going to come on and talk to my audience about it and they've also come up with some ideas before they get on air to talk about some programs and plans for small minority businesses that are adversely affected and while we're not doing it, we're affecting positive change in our business community because our economic climate is still fragile in our community. Story_ID: 665413 Speaker 1: Tell me about the Peabody Award [George Foster Peabody Award] in 1992, now you're only here like three years I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah that was (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Speaker 2: --that was an interesting time. I, we, I came in '89 [1989], we'd just done the big battle with The Beat [KKBT Radio; KRRL Radio, Los Angeles, California] in '90 [1990] and had a personality shift and then and, but we still had two full time news people and this is about the time we started 'Front Page'--believe it or not, 'Front Page' started in '91 [1991], so I had a public affairs program, I had two full time news reporters and we were following the Rodney King trial. I had one of my news reporters, Jackie Stephens, was in the courtroom during the trial and Carl Nelson who was our news director was, they were working in tandem to get the information out of the courtroom on air, getting actualities, it was pretty exciting and when the decision, the verdict was coming down, we knew, well we didn't know it was going to be a civil unrest, but we knew there was gonna to be, it was gonna to be volatile, so we come up with a plan of how we were going to cover it, you know, two news people were going to cover this, we're, you know, we're in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], we can do this. The decision came down, I sent my news director out with my security in the station van. They went to--I can't think of the street now--Florence [Avenue] and--I can't think of the street and they happen to come across--I can't think of his name--the beating, I can't think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rodney -- Speaker 2: I can't think of the gentleman's name. There was a gentleman [Reginald Denny] that was pulled out of the truck. Speaker 1: Oh, right, right. Speaker 2: And beat and-- Speaker 1: The white man who, yeah. Speaker 2: --and ironically, I mean my guys are just going to get you know, actualities, to get peoples' responses to the verdict, what they thought, and they come across this, so they're panicked I mean, so they, they say they tried to stop the guy and you know, get the crowd away, but a minister came (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is when they pulled the, the white guy-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --out of the truck and beat him? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't think of his name now, it skips me, but a minister came and shielded the guy and, and you know, got everyone to back up off of him, so my guys see this, so they come running back to the station [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] saying, "I think we saw somebody get killed." I said, "Uh-oh, uh-oh," so then I start seeing this city--it wasn't handled the way I thought, so I panicked, I said, "Okay everybody, I'm going to send you home. You've got to go home, I can't guarantee your safety," I think Barry White was in the studio that day and I said, "Mr. White, I, I can't guarantee your safety. The city looks like it's gonna to explode, please" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this, the location of the, of-- Speaker 2: We were on Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California] then-- Speaker 1: You're, you're on Crenshaw, right-- Speaker 2: So we were right in-- Speaker 1: --right in the middle of it-- Speaker 2: --right in the middle of it and I'll never forget, I was trying to get him to go and be safe and he was like, "I'm from Watts [Los Angeles, California], do you know where I'm from?" In that deep Barry White voice. "I'm not scared of--," you know, I'm like, oh gosh okay, (laughter) you know, so I send my staff home, all of them didn't go, some stayed to help and we worked that first twenty-six hours, we worked straight because everything just blew up, I mean it was really, we weren't--it didn't go according to plan, but luckily we, my news director, exceptional, Jackie, exceptional. At that time we started taking calls. I, I manned the phone, they were calling us saying, there's a fire, there's smoke, there's a senior citizens home that is on fire and the police aren't here yet and the fire--so you know they're pulling people out, I'm like I'll try to get help to you, so we really became a conduit for help and people were calling in and venting and so while we were doing this, I mean, we went at least twenty-six hours straight talk, we pulled the music, just talking to people trying to get--we got lawyers and we got you know, everyone that we could think to get in we got in and maybe after three years, three years, give me three days, everything started to lift, but in the process I think I came away with maybe eighty thousand dollars 'cause people were just coming by saying I don't know what to do, I want to help, here's some money for your community, you know, including Denzel Washington, I mean some people, they just came by and brought--so I'm like what am I gonna to do with this, some of the local churches, so I setup a, a micro loan program at one of the banks for some of the businesses that were adversely affected, but unsolicited it just happened. I didn't ask for funds, you know, 'cause I didn't want to comingle funds. I wanted to keep them separate. Story_ID: 665414 Speaker 1: The people saw you as a, as a, as a community center (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Resource-- Speaker 1: --resource. Speaker 2: --and we were, and we tried to live up to it [at KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], I mean, thank god we had some really good, professional people 'cause honestly I wrote, I typed up a letter, now we're under martial law, I don't know martial law, so I type up a memo saying, "Please allow my news reporter out to--," and they've taken this memo that I write--that doesn't work, but luckily no one got harmed, no, no one, none of my staff got injured and they were out and about trying to get actualities and stories. Speaker 1: So did it work on some level, it, level--level, I guess, I mean it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean no one got arrested. Speaker 1: Right, so, so did they, did they have a, a, a story where they showed it and they were given access, or? Speaker 2: I think one person had to show it and they were like "This is not valid, you know, go back to your station," you know, but they didn't arrest them, they didn't cause any harm, but what I remember most that morning, it may have been three or four in the morning and the, the whole city smelled like what I imagine a war zone smells like, I'd never smelled this before, I guess it was concrete and rubber and all the smell, it was so horrible, it just permeated the entire building and I was like, guys, you know, "I think you need to go home, you know, this is not good, you know, we can just play music, you should go home," and no one would leave and I was really afraid for their safety, so it just so happened someone was in the market and heard our coverage and submitted us for a Peabody [George Foster Peabody Award]. It was, I mean, I'm glad they did, but we just thought we were doing what we needed to do to keep people to calm down and we've got some audio I think of some, some of the calls for--oh, they were so angry, they were so angry, they were you know, but it was very powerful 'cause you're talking about people that are completely pissed off and trying to talk them down and talk 'em down and talk 'em down so that they can you know, release, but get on with it. Story_ID: 665415 Speaker 1: And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is, just for those who are watching this in the future who don't have any idea what happened, Rodney King was arrested-- Speaker 1: Rodney King was a pedestrian--excuse me, a traffic violation and he was pulled out of his car and beaten-- Speaker 2: By the Los Angeles Police [Los Angeles Police Department]-- Speaker 1: --by the LAPD and the video showed what appeared to be sixteen, eighteen cops standing around watching this man get beat, I mean he was really beat, now, and if you probably, it's probably still on YouTube and when the verdict was read they couldn't believe, you know, these guys are guilty, these, everyone saw that they were guilty and it's probably very similar to some of the things we see now except it, it's so easy to take your phone and videotape something. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, well, ironically-- Speaker 1: Ironically, we just had a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) recently a woman-- Speaker 1: --we just had a-- Speaker 2: --was walking down an expressway, down the 405 [Interstate 405] or something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was what, within the last thirty days, a woman went up the ramp, she was walking on the freeway and a police tries to get her to stop, she wouldn't stop and he jumps on her and beats her and someone has a phone and he captured it. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's sitting on top of her punching her in the face (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just punching her-- Speaker 2: --over and over again. Speaker 1: --like she's, you know, and but and that--this was--now go back to '92 [1992] it wasn't that easy, I don't know how he had a camera, but he had a camcorder or whatever it was and he taped. Speaker 2: Yeah, some civilian shot the-- Speaker 1: And that's what we saw and everyone was so irate, how can this--and L.A.'s [Los Angeles, California] had a history over the years of minorities being viciously attacked by, under the color of authority for LAPD, being incarcerated and then end up dead, or they hung themselves by their belt, really, don't you take a belt when you're arrest- you know, just, all these stories and that's why Johnnie Cochran came into such prominence because he would, he was an advocate, he really would take on the cases and fight the fight and he used to come down here all the time too 'cause we tried to get people to understand what's happening, what are your rights, what does martial law mean, what can you do, what can't you do, so while we're talking we're trying to disseminate information, so three days later we start getting back to music and subsequently we got the nomination for the Peabody Award [George Foster Peabody Award] and we also got a, a NAACP Image Award for our coverage, which was a highlight, sorry for the circumstance, but it told us that even though we're not the wealthiest company, we're not the biggest company, we're not a consolidated entity, we are truly a community company, we care about our community and they recognized us and that was appreciated; and it--everybody, it wasn't just one person, it was a lot of people working. Story_ID: 665416 Speaker 1: So does this, does the radio station's, I guess, community stance mirror the, the, the, I guess the, the outlook of Stevie Wonder, the, the owner? Speaker 2: I'd say yes. I don't know anyone else that would commit the level of resources to their community that Steve does. I like to tell people I'm a capitalist and I usually say that right before people ask me for something (laughter) because I want them to understand that I'm really here you know, to run a business and it has to be successful, I've got to meet payroll, I've got to cover my expenses. It's got to be a profitable asset or there's no reason for the owner to keep it. Of course the owner is Steve and he is a philanthropist and he is a really good guy, so he would give, give away stuff and I'm trying to say, no, no. I remember we got into a discussion with Don Cornelius of 'Soul Train,' they were changing channels or something, changing stations and he's like, "Well you should just tell the people what station they can find it on," and da, da, da, da, da. And I said, "I will if you pay for advertising, right, you pay for advertising I'll tell you" (laughter). "Do you know I'm friends with Stevie," and da, da, da, da, da. And I was like, "Stevie's a good guy, I'm sure you are his friend, but this is his business and if you truly care about him you won't take advantage, you'll pay for advertisement." The next thing I know he gets Steve on the phone, I'm like--my boss is on the phone (laughter) and Don Cornelius is on the phone and I'm fighting to get money for the station so I held my own, so I said, "Steve he's got to spend money, that's how we make a living." "Well give him a break Karen [HistoryMaker Karen Slade]." "Okay, Mr. Cornelius I'll give you a break, what's your budget?" Now this is, I'm a little nervous because I'm playing hardball, right, but I want them to understand that this is a business and you can't just take advantage because it's owned by a fabulous philanthropist, this is his asset and it's got to make money for him to do with as he pleases, so I think I got two thousand dollars out of him. It wasn't a lot but it was a victory you know, 'cause Steve allowed me to do what I needed to do, and Don you know, he accepted it, so that's just one of the stories that I've had over the years. But I always try to put the business in the best light, so KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], I don't think it's run like most companies, or especially most radio stations because it's a profit and loss, it's a commercial business, but we have an owner that has a heart that is sympathetic and has empathy for the community, so in that light we try to do worthwhile things and make good business sense. Like we do feeding for the homeless, we do all kinds of community related events, so we're very attached to the community and I think that is good business to support those that support you. The line you have to draw is, is the economics of it; what's the true value, what's the cost and can you afford it and what's the return. Story_ID: 665417 Speaker 1: I know that, that Stevie Wonder was, if not the primary person, the most visible person, supporting the celebration of the Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday, in the '80s [1980s], I guess. I don't know if that had been accomplished before you came on, or-- Speaker 2: Yes that was accomplished before I came on (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that was--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I-- Speaker 1: Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], Reagan was the president when, when that was (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I understand that he sacrificed a large period of his, I guess earning potential you know, during those years when he could have been very productive and he you know, he really was committed to making Martin Luther King's birthday holiday [Martin Luther King, Jr. Day] and he was successful, so we're all benefiting. Speaker 1: Does the--what does the KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California], KJLH do for the, the holiday? Do they, they do anything special over here for that holiday? Speaker 2: We, we run a program, or we have, I think last year was the first year we didn't run it in twenty years, it's a--[HistoryMaker] Lee Bailey puts together a program I think 'From King to the Mountaintop' [sic. 'The View from The Mountaintop']. We run that, we participate in the Kingdom Day Parade, which is one of the largest MLK parades. So we do on air, we do a parade in Long Beach [California], a parade in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], we do a prayer vigil in Inglewood [California], (laughter) we do a lot for, for the King birthday celebration, yeah. Speaker 1: I figured you know, the station had to be prominent (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're, we, we're very, we're very into it. Speaker 1: Okay, now there has been some trouble here. There was a lawsuit filed by a guy named--a disc jockey named Frankie Ross (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --in 2003 and do you want to talk about that? Speaker 2: Frankie, I don't remember the exact reason for the lawsuit and I probably couldn't speak to it under arbitration, but he's a very talented jock and he's now on air with a competitor on The Wave [KTWV Radio, Los Angeles, California], he's on in the evenings, so, that will happen though you know, people are never happy to lose employment. Story_ID: 665418 Speaker 1: One of your competitors in 2006 changed their format completely right, and that's The Beat [KKBT Radio; KRRL Radio, Los Angeles, California], right, they, they--did you talk about that before? Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit, when The Beat, when Radio One [Urban One, Inc.] bought it they took it, they bought it from Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] and it was a very diverse program offering catering to Hispanics, blacks and whites and when Radio One bought it they geared it towards blacks. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so they didn't go from, they didn't go from hip hop to adult R and B, they went from--? Speaker 2: No, they went from R and B to R and B but it was a more diverse R and B, it wasn't quite so narrow and the talent too, they, they had I think John London may have been the morning show host I believe, and think, I think they did John Salley and then they did Steve Harvey ['The Steve Harvey Morning Show'], so they put more of a black presentation on the selection of music than, than prior. Speaker 1: Had, have, has, have, have many of your competitors tried to, have they tried to, to mirror your community associations or activities? Speaker 2: To a degree, to a degree they do but I know this sounds harsh, but I always say, "They can never out black us." They can pretend to be black for the day, but they can't out black us because we are black. One of our sayings is, "We are you," meaning we hire from the community. We hire people that look like us. We train you, we develop you and you know, everyone's not going to do that, they may play black music but when you go into the company and you open the door you don't see a black face and that's one thing you, one thing I really applaud, black ownership because they tend to hire and develop black talent and on air, off air, behind the scenes. They give you an opportunity to be in this business and it's very difficult to be in this business especially with consolidation. Speaker 1: KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] is not the only black station in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is it? Speaker 2: No, the, we're the only black owned station in L.A (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Owned, that's what I mean, that's what I mean. Speaker 2: Yes, we are the only one. In fact San Francisco [California] had Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation], black owned and they sold to Entercom [Entercom Communications Corporation]. There's a couple of small black owned stations. They're not in L.A. County [Los Angeles County, California], I think Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] still owns a couple stations in Riverside [California], but there are black formatted stations. Clear Channel has HOT [ph.], CBS has The Wave [KTWV Radio, Los Angeles, California], Emmis [Emmis Communications] has Power [KPWR Radio, Los Angeles, California]. Story_ID: 665419 Speaker 1: Now, in 2005 the staff here really got involved with the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] disaster, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we have a foundation called the We Are You Foundation. We've been using that slogan for years as part of our community outreach. What we ultimately did was made it a foundation and we used it as a part of our community outreach whenever there is going to be a donation, so we do an annual toy drive called House Full of Toys and Stevie Wonder does a concert to fund rise- to fundraise to buy toys, so it's Stevie Wonders 17th Annual House Full of Toys Benefit Concert. The funds and proceeds will go to the We Are You Foundation and I don't know what number of concert it was, but we had funds in the Foundation and we chose to use some of those funds to help with the Katrina. We sent, we collected from our listeners and then we bought, we did, not gift cards, but the little like debit cards where you put cash on cards, so we sent three trucks down loaded to the brim and we did it not just by ourselves we joined with others. I think we may have sent one and then we did something with the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel], sent trucks down full of toiletries, things of that nature and then we had the cards with cash, cash cards, I don't know what you call them and we took some funds just so the people could buy toiletries and could buy some of the necessities. Speaker 1: It was sort of a debit card with a limited (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like a debit card-- Speaker 1: --with a fixed amount. Speaker 2: --with a fixed amount, so we tried to do as much as we could to try to help out. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay so you, you doubled the wattage in 2008. It took that long for the wattage to double you were saying, that's, that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was actually like, that, '98 [1998], '97 [1997], '98 [1998] that, and I think it went through in 2000. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so I guess it's in the wrong place here, but one of your competitors now is, is KTWV [KTWV Radio, Los Angeles, California] right? Speaker 2: The Wave, yeah. Speaker 1: The Wave, yeah, right-- Speaker 2: They're a CBS company and they sound really good and Frankie Ross is their evening, night jock there. Speaker 1: Okay, he's the one that use to be with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, he use to be with us and he sounds good. He's got a big voice. Speaker 1: Okay, but once again this station does not, I mean it's not a black owned station, it's a Jewish station. Speaker 2: No, it's not a black owned station. They sound black but they are, they, their presentation is not black; and when I say presentation I mean that their promotions, their promos, their talent, you know it's more diverse. Of course they have, I think Pat Prescott in the morning. Story_ID: 665420 Speaker 1: What's the future of the station [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California]? Is it, has Stevie Wonder thought about purchasing other stations or, or? Speaker 2: That is always the perpetual question. I would love to see him buy more or improve the signal that we have. It's a great market to be in even when our audience is diminishing and our signal is not fully covered, it's still a healthy market so you can carve out a living, but if we could expand our coverage and get into other areas like in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California] or perhaps east, I think we could be more profitable, but that would take a sizable investment. I don't know if he's willing to do that. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have like a working relationship with the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] or the other black newspapers? Speaker 2: Yeah, we worked well with Danny Bakewell [HistoryMaker Danny Bakewell, Sr.] and the Sentinel. We've worked some with The Wave [KTWV Radio, Los Angeles, California], some with, I think it's Our Weekly, so we try to keep each other in the loop, yeah, so you know, it's important. Speaker 1: Now you've been doing this since 1989? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 665421 Speaker 1: What's your, your future outlook, I mean what--what do you want, do, have you found the, the job that you, you know, going to retire from? Speaker 2: Well there was a time when I thought I would retire from here [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] and when others would, you know, see if I was interested in coming to work for them I always discouraged it because I was very content and there was always something to do here, so you, you know just when you think, well I've got to do this and I've got to do that, but now as I see retirement looming ahead I think I've got one more job in me and I don't know if that's ownership, I don't know if that's working for a larger group or, or staying here and trying to grow this, but I think I've got one more opportunity in me. Speaker 1: Do you have, do you think that you--I, I can see that this is not just a job for you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --so, but do you have other staff in place that you think can step up into your role (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: --at this point? Speaker 2: --oh yeah, we have a station manager who was promoted maybe three years ago and she really has stepped up and she does a lot of the day to day work that I used to do. I used to do everything, and now we kind of balance it out; so yeah, I think my successor has been trained. Story_ID: 665422 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: For the company? Speaker 1: Um-hm or for yourself? Speaker 2: It's been a good run. I can't really complain. If anything I probably would have tried to buy a station myself when the, the you know, the funds were there and the opportunities were there, but I didn't pursue it and I was aware of it, so I--at that time I made a conscious decision to stay because I believe in KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] so much, but now as you get a little older your perspective changes. The station will survive, what are you going to do for yourself, you know, how are you going to survive. How are you going to prepare for retirement, so that's why you have to start opening up and thinking out of the box, find out what you're willing to do. Story_ID: 665423 Speaker 1: I've heard you say this now about three times I guess, but I think that just, just to emphasize the point, there's a difference between a, a black owned station and--I mean one that really is committed to the community and one that just plays black music, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, there really is--in my mind's eye there's a big difference. You play the popular music. There was a time when black ownership, you know, ownership always dictates all the rules, let's just be clear, regardless who owns it, black, Hispanic, white, ownership dictates policy, culture and how you're going to play the game. When you're owned by blacks and you play black music you're kind of catering to yourself, if that makes sense. Your listeners look like you, the music that you love you know, the artists and songs that you know, I mean it's, it's very comfortable and you can get like in a relationship, when you step outside of that it becomes more of a business relationship, so you play the music that will garner the largest audience share, the audience share will deliver you revenue and profits to ownership and as long as those things work you're guaranteed to keep your job, so it's a little different. Outside of that all promotions, activities have to cater back to one of the first two, you know, ratings or revenue. Story_ID: 665424 Speaker 1: Looking back again at everything you've done to this point in your career, what to- what, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: That's a good question, I, I don't know that I put it in thought. I'm--radio to me is a means to communicate to my community. I think it's important that its black owned and operated because my community is black. If I had any legacy it would be that during my tenure I made sure that accurate information was communicated in a timely fashion. I also entertained and enlightened and made people think about what they were going to do, so it wasn't just music, but trying to make a difference because I really believe it's important to give back to the community that you came out of, that you benefitted from, there's a reciprocity that should take place and I think the community is damaged when you continue to take and don't replenish, so I, I guess that's what I would like to be thought of, that while I was here [at KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] I did, I played a very active role in benefitting the community, the health of the community--not just the music, but you know, the community at large. Story_ID: 665425 Speaker 1: You mentioned early on that being, having experience as a cheerleader has helped)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know rally staff. Speaker 2: Did that sound like a cheerleader (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it helped to rally the staff and I, what, what I'm trying to ask you now is like who are some of the other staff members here that have been important in, you know, maintaining the success of KJLH [KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Some are here still and some are gone on. I mentioned Carl Nelson, our news director, pivotal, strong. I think he's on Sirius [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.]. I think he's got a satellite show ['The Carl Nelson Show'] out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] but he lives in Miami [Florida]. He left to pursue his dream of ownership. Jackie Stephens my other newsperson is also gone, retired, went home to Chicago [Illinois] to take care of her family. We've had some really great guys come through. Cliff Winston was the program director when I first came in and Frankie Ross was the afternoon drive guy and they went over to The Beat [KKBT Radio; KRRL Radio, Los Angeles, California], but I learned a lot from them. They're genuine radio heads. They love the, all aspects of the music and music placement. Cheryl Womack retired, was a local sales manager. She helped me to understand the differences and the nuances in a radio sale versus a Xerox [Xerox Corporation] sale, so in Xerox you're selling a tangible product that has benefits and features that will enhance your productivity and radio sales is not that, and the argument is always, well what are you really selling? Are you selling space, air, sixty seconds, or are you selling access to a demographic group, so what is your product, 'cause I would always say, well what's my product? My product is not air. My product is my consumer group that's twenty-five to fifty-four [years old] with disposable income, you know, so this was always a debate with Cheryl and she's retired but she, she taught me a lot about radio sales. Let's see, and I've got some newer people that are very good, Zellie Hudson [Zellie D. Hudson, III] is my controller, he's here, he's a CPA [certified public accountant], M.B.A., first time we've had a CPA, M.B.A. in that seat and he sees things well, I mean he's got a really good business mind, so strategically it helps you know, to go through audits with him and to understand that we're--so we get on the same page, so it--he helps me to freshen up some of those tools I lost, not to mention I still love the math. I've had some good, some--the pleasure of working with some really good people over the years. Speaker 1: Do you offer any internships to young people here at the station? Speaker 2: Yeah, we offer, we have an internship program, I just had a young man come out from Reston, Virginia, he stayed with me for eight weeks and he did an internship here at the station and we got him an internship with Colby, so he worked at Colby's camp [Colby Ranch, Palmdale, California ] for, I guess four or five days, so he was over the moon elated, so we, we do internships because I think who else is going to train our, our folks. They need to get their--it's like the Family Tree you know, going back and giving forward, helping them to understand all the aspects of the business. You may not have the voice for radio, but maybe you have the personality for sales; you just never know until you try it. Story_ID: 665426 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, I have a lot. I'm concerned just--the family unit as a whole used to be so nurturing and supportive and I'm sure in some aspects it still is, but the extended family, I came up with my [maternal] grandmother [Mildred Brewer Edwards] looking after my mom [Violette Edwards-McCowan] and my siblings, we seemed to have gotten away from I guess, the extended family. And then the focus on education, I mean I knew I had to go to college. I didn't know how I was going to get there. I didn't have a road map or a role model to follow, but I knew I had to get there. Education is available and they don't all seem and I don't want to make a you know, a gross exaggeration of it, but I wish they realized the significance of education, especially in this 21st century in technology and engineering and science and math, I mean how do you articulate it to students or kids that have everything at their disposal. They have to be better equipped and better prepared and as adults we have to make sure that they get that opportunity, but you can't make them want it, fight for it, crave it, you just can't, if it's not engrained how do you install it--how do you instill it, so that, that would be my concern. Economic, the haves versus the have nots, caring about one another. I know it sounds pretty soft being a capitalist, but I'd like to see us do more you know, where the role the church use to play in the community about gathering us all and keeping us focused doesn't seem to always play the same role especially not for the younger generation, so we have work to do you know, from education and economics to family and--we have work to do, but a lot has been done. We've made such progress. I just don't want to see us falter. I'd like to see us keep it moving forward. Speaker 1: In a way that is thought--I have never thought about this before, but I guess in, in some ways the media is some kind of a ministry now in a lot of communities because that's the, the one medium that reaches every (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know the broad, broad segment of the community. Speaker 2: All the more reason that we should own some, media plays such a significant role, it influences, it informs, it can agitate, it can console, it can be your buddy, your partner, I mean it plays a significant role and if you have no other influences and that's your only influence, you've got to be sure that you're doing the right thing as a business owner, as a broadcaster. You've got to take some responsibility. Now we still have to make money, but we have a license that we don't own you know, it's granted every so many years. So we have an obligation to do what's in the best interest of the, the comp- the community that we serve. Story_ID: 665427 Speaker 1: We always ask people about their current nuclear family, but you were telling me before we started that everyone in your family is gone-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents [Violette Edwards-McCowan and Charles Slade] are gone. My [maternal] grandparents [Mildred Brewer Edwards and Eugene Edwards] are gone. My uncle's [Slade's maternal uncle, Gerlad Edwards] gone. I have a niece and a nephew, so my siblings are gone and I've never married and never had children, so. Speaker 1: So would you consider your family the community here or, or the, or the radio staff [at KJLH Radio, Los Angeles, California] the, the extended--'cause everybody has some kind of family so. Speaker 2: I think the extended, my extended family is pretty much my coworkers and my tennis partners too, I play tennis, so you know, I, I--they give me a break. They'll let me hit and hit and hit until I come back cool, calm and collected, so yeah, I would consider my co-workers often my friends, past and present, and a few high school friends and college friends scattered about. Story_ID: 665428 Speaker 1: Is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. Speaker 1: Well okay, there'll be something we'll think of after we leave (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Afterwards, okay. Speaker 1: But the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person of empathy, a person of intellect and candor, honest. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you..