 Story_ID: 79997 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --I am interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Sterns. Mam, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Melody Spann-Cooper. Melody, M-E-L-O-D-Y, Spann-Cooper, S-P-A-N-N dash C-O-O-P-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: 8-4-64 [1964]. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois], Provident Hospital. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 4, 2003. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --Which would make me thirty-eight years old. (Laughter). Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at WVON, 3350 S. Kedzie; here in Chicago. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm the president and general manager. Speaker 1: Of WVON? Speaker 2: Of WVON. Story_ID: 79998 Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions we are we always ask. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer--you know. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Soul food. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably in the green family Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, Christmas. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have favorite phrase or saying? I got it from Oprah Winfrey. "When people show you who they are, believe them." (Laughter) So true. Speaker 1: I got it. I like that one too. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 79999 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your, your family's origins, or your family tree. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you tell us--how far back can you go and what, what do you know about the origins of your family? Speaker 2: Not very much--I know my parents are from Itta Bena, Mississippi, which is right outside of Greenwood [Mississippi]. Both of my parents are from there, but incidentally, they didn't know each other when they were there--migrated South [sic]. My mom [Lovie Spann] came first, when she was about six years old. And my dad [Pervis Spann, HM] came when he was about--I guess in his teen years. I don't know if he shared this during his taping of The HistoryMakers. One of the reasons why dad moved South [sic]--he loves the South--he still goes there was because dad has always been a very smart--very--a workaholic. And he was picking cotton and saved about $500.00 in--had it in the bank down there. And at that time, that was a lot of money for a black teenager. And my--his parents thought it best that he move north because when some of the white folks in the area found out that this little black boy had that kind of money in the bank, they kind of feared for his life. He, he rarely tells that story, but I think it's such a powerful story, so I always share it. And that's what prompted him to move north. Speaker 1: Now, that $500.00 represented a lot of work in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I supposed he earned that in the '40s [1940s] or the (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s]. Yeah, he was picking cotton. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. He was just always smart. He's a workaholic, he's always been. I think that's where I got it from, just a guy that worked hard. And you know that was back in the days when, you know, what was going on with them--what happened to Emmett Till. It was just an uncertain time in the South. And for someone to be that aggressive, and progressive, they just thought it best that he, he come North. Story_ID: 80000 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories from your family that, that, that talk about what life was like during slavery, or during reconstruction? Speaker 2: You know, interestingly enough, my--I grew up in the house with my grandfather. My grandfather lived with us from the time that I was born until 19...--'til he died. And he died in 1974. And there was very little talk about those past days. But I do remember that when people would come to our house, my grandfather would always refer--he was a Republican--and he would always--when whites would come to our house, he would always refer to them as "yes ma'am" and "yes sir." And that bothered my mother [Lovie Spann] so bad. I mean, I remember her yelling at him about this. This is my paternal grandfather, now. But that was ingrained in him from the South. And that is the only thing that I can recollect. He never told any stories. My father [Pervis Spann, HM] never told any stories, other than, you know, the picking cotton type things. But--and my grandfather was born in 1892, so, you know, slavery was officially over. And he stayed South for a very long time after that, but he never really talked about that; never really shared anything about that time, other than, you know, when people would come to the house, and, and my mother--that would just disturb her so much. And that was the only residue that I could see left over from that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 80001 Speaker 1: Now, were they--basically, did they live in the town-Itta Bena [Mississippi]; or were they in--on the outskirts? Were they farming or were they basically in the town? Speaker 2: You know if you want to call Itta Bena a town (laughter). I've been down there twice, and I'm like, "What, what is this!" But, they lived in the town of Itta Bena. It looked like a country place--it was really a town. And if--of course Mississippi Valley [State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] is there, the college, is there. And so, that's what everybody hangs their hat on--what Itta Bena is known for. But, it was the "wild, wild South." It looked like the "wild, wild West" to me, but it was, you know, it was very rural to me. That's the only thing I can really recall about it. Dad [Pervis Spann, HM] holds on to the memories of it much more than my mom [Lovie Spann], cause of course, she was only six when she left from there--coming here. Speaker 1: Oh, can you confirm what Itta Bena means? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Somebody else--we interviewed someone else that told us what they thought (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know what it means. What does it mean--itty, bitty town? (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's what they said--James Bevel [HM], you know. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: He's from there. Speaker 2: That's right. And he's supposedly some kin to us. I don't know how clear--I don't know if that is, in fact, the case, because everybody from Itta Bena is related to everybody. I tell you who else is from Itta Bena, Rollins Burris' [HM] wife is from Itta Bena, Mississippi. So, you find a lot of people that know of Itta Bena, who've come from Itta Bena, or, from around the area. But there's so many nooks and crannies in Mississippi. It's just an amazing story of migration for African Americans from Mississippi. Story_ID: 80002 Speaker 1: Now, now your father [Pervis Spann, HM] came up when he was a teenager? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: About what year was it that he came to (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure. I guess it might have been 195--he, he and my mom [Lovie Spann] got married in 1954, so, it was early '50s [1950s]--'52 [1952], somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: Okay. And just for the record, what's your father's full name and can you give us his birthdate? Speaker 2: Sure, Pervis Julian Spann [HM]--he probably doesn't even remember his middle name; and his birthdate is 8-16-32 [1932]. Speaker 1: And did he come directly to Chicago when he came (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think he came directly to Chicago, and from Chicago he went to the Army; because I remember my mom saying that she went--I think he was in Colorado. And she cause she went there for a little while and stayed with him--they were married. They got married--my mom was still in high school when they got married. I do recall that, because I never understood how another guy took her to prom and she was married. My dad was in the Army (laughter)--and you know, when I got old enough to compute the times. Speaker 1: Now, do they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: If they do, I don't recall it. It was--my mom lived in this place called the "big house." It was on 44th and Vincennes. Everybody knew the big house! And I don't know if dad lived in the big house, or he just hung out around the big house; but I do believe that it was somewhere in that proximity that they met. Story_ID: 80003 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you tell us something about your father [Pervis Spann, HM], you know, cause we're going to ignore the fact that we already have him on-- Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: --but, what are your memories of your father and what's he like, and you know, what kind of things do you remember about him (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh okay. I remember--when I was born, which is in 1964, my dad was in the prime of his good guy days, as being on the--a radio personality in the City of Chicago (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --at WVON, um-hm. And WVON was the voice of the Negro. It was the number one black oriented station in Chicago, and oftentimes number one station overall in Chicago. So all of them were really popular. And, my dad came on at midnight, so I couldn't hear him very often 'cause of course, I'd be in the bed. But, I just remember always that some kind of way my dad was in the entertainment business, because we knew a lot of famous people. We had access to a lot of famous people. Famous people would call the house often. And, I remember that my dad was never at home. As a matter of fact, people often thought that my mom [Lovie Spann] and dad were divorced. My dad was not a very family-oriented man. We did very few things, we didn't camp, we didn't do family trips--we've never been out of town as a family unless it was to a funeral or something. But just, you know, vacation time--he never took vacations with us. And that was my mom's role, was to just take care of the kids. He always provided for us, I mean, we, we had an abundance of things. But--and I don't fault him for that, cause I think he was doing what he thought a man was supposed to do; which was to take care of his family. But, not a lot of, of parental guidance, or, or involvement with dad. And it was special when he came home, whenever he would come home. He might come home to eat. And I felt special when I would go hang out with him at the Burning Spear. But he, he-- Speaker 1: Now, what was the Burning Spear? Speaker 2: The Burning Spear was a club on 55th and State that my dad owned; and that's where all the entertainers would come. And I just remember running through the Burning Spear--always a lot of people there, to get on the stage. They had a stage that raised--it was a raised stage. And I, I always would go turn the switch so I could see the stage come up and down. He used to do talent shows, and I would go down and watch some talent shows with him. I'll never forget one night the show--I was with him, and the club was about to open--he had forgotten that I was there. And my Uncle Everett, my dad's brother, lived in the club in the basement. He was the bartender. He was the head bar master. And I was behind the stage--behind the bar, the front bar, washing dishes, washing glasses, 'cause people were drinking. And I just remember people coming in. And I was like, "Oh wow, I get to stay tonight," you know, cause I would see my mom get dressed sometimes and go down to the club to see B. B. King [HM] or Johnny Taylor. I mean, all the big people would come to the Burning Spear. And he looked over at me like, as to say, "You still here?" And he had somebody take me home. But I wanted to stay there, 'cause you would hear so much about it. I know I wasn't old enough and--but, I mean, that's what he did. And I, I recall when I was little--I'm not kidding, every drawer in the house that we went in was stacked with money. It was just stacked with money! I don't know if he wouldn't take it to the bank, or if he didn't know (unclear), he didn't want anybody to know he had it, but (laughter) I just remember every drawer you'd go in to get something, and it was just money; 'cause he was making a lot of money at that time. I think that was--the Regal had come before, but the Burning Spear, I mean, if you get four or five hundred people at night, or whatever, you know, but, that's, that's what I remember about the early days of my father. My father only whipped me twice in my life. My mother was the disciplinarian, but when it got out of control, she, she could always use this, "You wait 'til your daddy gets home." The, the great part about it, we didn't know when daddy was coming home (laughter), or if daddy was coming home; you know, so, that gave us a little break from that. But, I remember those times. He was--I remember my brother graduating from 8th grade, daddy never would be able to stay at any graduation; he'd come, he'd wave and let you know he was there, and then he was out the door. So, he wasn't very--he wasn't a full-time father, at all. I don't think we suffered much from it, but--and I think he was doing the best he could. But, we didn't really have a lot of, you know, we didn't spend a lot of time together when we were younger. I have an older brother, I think, who probably suffered the most from that. But that's what I remember about my younger years with dad. Story_ID: 80004 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were keenly aware of WVON, I guess, as coming up (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. I--it was a station that we listened to. I knew my dad [Pervis Spann, HM] worked there, but the impact he was having, I was unaware of it. As a matter of fact, the day I was born, daddy and The Good Guys were doing something they called a "sleepless sit-in." They were raising the money for the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And they had a trailer here at 31th and King Drive. And the contest was, which one of the Good Guys could stay awake the longest. And they raised $30,000.00, which was 1964, was a whole bunch of money, and daddy won. He stayed up 84 hours. Of course, you know, being the all-night-long blues man that should be easy to do. But, that was the day I was born. So, he even missed my birth, (laughter) working. But, yeah, so that I remember about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about him back then-- Story_ID: 80005 Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother [Lovie Spann]? Can you give us her name and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and date of birth? Speaker 2: Sure. Her name is Lovie Spann, and she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How do you spell Lovie? Speaker 2: L-O-V-I-E, Spann, maiden name-Robertson. Mom was born 12-29-36 [1936]. Speaker 1: And what was your mother like, or what is she like? Speaker 2: My mother is--I think she's all of our rocks. My mother only worked until my brother was born, and she was a stay at home mom. And my mom was just always there. My mother had a child for every generation. She had a son in '50s [1950s], in the '50s [1950s]. I came in the '60s [1960s], and I have a sister that came in the '70s [1970s]. So she's been a different mom for all of us. But, I think I got the best of her, cause she was a teenage mom for my brother. When I came along mom was twenty-eight; my dad [Pervis Spann, HM] had money; I was a girl, and we had fun. We shopped and we--I was just--I slept with my mother 'til I was thirteen years old; 'til, actually 'til Latrice (ph.) came; I think 'til the baby came. But we were, and remain, thick as thieves. I mean, I just, I adore her, I really do. My mom only went to high school. She, she never had any, you know, college education, or anything. But she's got more common sense than anybody I knows, I know. She, she works from her soul. She, she, she gives you advice from her soul; and its--nine times out of ten, its right. The things that I've gone through just running [W]VON--court cases, and just, I mean, so many things, that I wouldn't have gotten through them, if it was not for my mother; never understanding business, but just, just a bright person. Just a--my mother always told me that no matter what happens to you in life, you just do the right thing, and that's-that's what she's engrained in all of us. I think we all use it differently, but--just a special bond with her. Oh, I just tear up even kinda talkin' about her, you know. But she, she's, she's been a good mom. She's, you know, she was there all the time. She wanted us to be able to do anything and all things. And at that time when I came alone, she just wanted me--I mean, I've been to--when I was nine years old, my mother enrolled me in typing. And when I--by the time I was eleven, I was typing eighty-five words a minute. And I was typing term papers for college students and, you know, like most kids get play typewriters and sewing machines. They bought me the real things, cause my mother put me in sewing, and it was just--she just wanted me to be able to do a little bit of it all. I was never really a, an athletic child, so, you know, I didn't do much of the sports thing. I tried to be a cheerleader and I--it was just political how I got on, and I never was a good cheerleader. (Laughter). I was Pervis Spann's daughter, so I could do anything. But, she just always pushed us, you know, to, to do things that she didn't get a chance to do. And, you know, back then, I guess--she always told me, "If you know how to type, Melody, you can always get you a job." you know, so, just that kinda things, thing. I remember her taking me to typing school at night, and it would be zero below. And my sister was a baby. And she'd stuff her down in this, in this blanket, just to make sure I--and there were all, there were all adults here. I didn't want to go, but she just always pushed, and she, she's just an awesome lady, awesome lady, really. Story_ID: 80006 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in and tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here? Speaker 2: I grew up in the Gresham-Auburn area, and my parents still live there. And it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: ...in the same house? Speaker 2: --same house. It was a great neighborhood. We moved there in '67 [1967]. And it was a time when blacks were probably kinda breaking out of the black belt. White flight was taking place in a lot of the areas south of where we lived. When I first was born we lived on Marquette Road, which my grandmother still lives there now--and we moved there. It was a beautiful house. I remember it was on a corner. Its still is on--like its not there anymore. It was a corner lot, and it had trees where in the summer, you couldn't even see the house. And it had beautiful flowerbeds. And it had a swinging tree, you know, made out of--it wasn't like the steel--it was like a tree in a fairy tale, almost like. And of course we tore it up. I mean, you know how we do it (laughter). But, it was a beautiful home. We always had people living with us--cousins. Just, we never, you know we've never lived in that house with just the family--just the three of us and our mom [Lovie Spann] and our father [Pervis Spann, HM]. We, we always had relatives living with us, and it was a great area. And I think one thing that was so special about my parents too, my mother, was that, we went to private school all of our lives, but a lot of the kids in the neighborhood didn't. But mother never tried to make any difference between us and the kids. It was, it was nobody we couldn't play with; you know what I mean? She would let us be exposed to so many different things. And people always comment on both me and my sister, that, you know, we've got such an outgoing personalities, [sic] and we--you know, there's no stuffiness with us; and I think that's be, because of, because of that. My mom never made us--there was no "big mes and little yous." There were no situations where I couldn't play with this kid because, whatever. Everybody was welcomed in our home. She let us pick our own children, I mean, our own friends. And, I think when I got to be a teenager; I started hanging with a crowd that she wasn't real comfortable with. But how she countered that, she invited them in. She got in their heads. She wanted to figure out, you know, where, who they were, and what they were about. And they still weren't the best of kids, but, she allowed us to--she was comfortable that, you know, she had instilled in us right from wrong. So, even if I was with them in a bad situation, I would know the right thing to do, you know. She gave us just enough rope to hang ourselves knowing that, "they won't hang themselves", you know. So, I remember that from, from the neighborhood. And, you know, just hanging out, my mom was kinda strict. At 10:00 we had to be in--know when it got dark. When I got about sixteen it was 10:00, and everybody in the neighbor knew it. She'd flash the porch light. It was so embarrassing. But, I know now why she did it. I know why she did it. And that's what I remember from growing up. Story_ID: 80007 Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--you lived at like, 83rd Street, west (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --west of, west of the Dan Ryan [Expressway] (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right, yep. Um-hum. Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sure did. Speaker 1: And, I--did you go to Catholic school? Speaker 2: All my life; from kindergarten to the time I graduated from college; Saint Kilian [School, Chicago, Illinois] from K through 8th; Mother McAuley [Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois] from--for high school; and Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for my undergraduate studies. Speaker 1: Now, were you Catholic at that time, or were your parents Catholic? Speaker 2: No, dig this, I wasn't. My parents were Protestants. When I made the decision to go to Mother McAuley, Mother McAuley--out of my graduating class of 476 people, there was twenty-five blacks. And Sister Lorena (ph.), which is my Godmother, which was my 8th grade teacher, told my mother that she thought I stood a better chance of getting in Mother McAuley if I became Catholic. And so, in 8th grade--I went through the entire grammar school without being baptized, in 8th grade I was baptized Catholic. And, that's not the reason I got accepted in Mother McAuley, but it didn't hurt that I was Catholic; and that's why I got baptized. Story_ID: 80008 Speaker 1: Now, now you do--do you remain a Catholic? Speaker 2: Yeah. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: --still go to Catholic Church. I go--I mean, I go to a lot of churches, but that's my home base--Saint Ambrose. I go to Saint Ambrose. So I remain in the Catholic Church, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what denomination were your parents? Speaker 2: They're Baptist. Speaker 1: Baptist, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: But dig this, my mom [Lovie Spann] got baptized Catholic. I'm her Godmother (laughter). Mom got baptized Catholic in 198.... Latrice was graduating from grammar school. It was in the 80s [1980s]. She got baptized Catholic. And, so, I think that came out of--after a revelation in her life, you know. And she was lookin' to, to reestablish her relationship with her maker. And, so, all of her kids--Latrice was baptized Catholic at that time. Darrell (ph.) had been baptized Catholic. And, so, she made the decision to do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there any particular reason why that he [Pervis Spann, father, HM] sent you to Catholic school--I mean, that your parents sent you to Catholic school, except (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: You know, I think, when I was coming up, they considered it to be a place for better education. I think you'll find most people in my generation who went to Catholic schools, went there because of that, because it was an alternative to public schools. And they were considered to have a better curriculum. So I think that's why we, we went to private school; just for better education--they thought it was better education; and it was; it instilled certain disciplines in us. And also, the--it was a Christian education. I think they wanted us to have, you know, God around us. I mean, He's around us anyway, but they wanted us to know--they wanted it to be part of our studies, and so, that was another reason. In Catholic [sic] schools they didn't teach that. Story_ID: 80009 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what kind of a student were you in school? Speaker 2: I was not a very good student. Well, let me not say that. I was a "B" student. And, I worked on the "B." I'm not gonna to sit here and tell you anything different, because it got progressively worse (laughter). When I--I was a bad test taker. When I went to high school [Mother McAuley Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois] I was in mostly fundamental classes. In algebra--I didn't go to algebra as a freshman. I went to fundamentals of algebra. So I was not a, a--I studied, you know, but I was not a [sic] "A" student, at all. Yeah, I was not the brightest bulb on the Christmas tree. But, I was not--I was a little above average; just--that's safe to say, a little above average. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, did you like school? Speaker 2: I liked it until my sophomore year in college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And I think one reason why I stopped liking it, I had been in it so long. Between grammar school and typing and shorthand school, and sewing class, and--we just went to school all the time. And, I just kinda lost interest. And I was working here, at the station, at the time. And I just got to a point where I didn't want be in school. You know what was so interesting, I--this is when I realized I was sick of school. I'm in night classes, cause I'm not a morning person; so I took night classes, right. And I'm sitting in here and all these people are working all day, and they come to school and their getting As in the class. You know, their workin' nine to five. These are people going to school part time. It got so bad that my closest friends in school actually took classes in my major, so that they could help me get out of school (laughter). You know, they were through, you know, with all of their courses they had to take to get their degree. And they had some courses that they could just elect to take, and they took mine to help me. But I was often--I often wondered how to you go to work every day, and then come in here and get excited about this stuff. I was just completely burned out. To the point where, I used to tell people, "I don't know if it's good to go to college right out of high school." You might need that break until, you know, you can get somewhere and decide what you want to do. Story_ID: 80010 Speaker 1: But, we were talking about school. And in grade school [St. Kiliam School, Chicago, Illinois], now, you had a mentor in grade school? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Now, tell us about her? Speaker 2: You know what, I actually had a couple of them. One was--I was very close to my 3rd grade teacher, Mrs. Rowe (ph.), and Sister Lorena, Sister Lorena Williams was a catholic nun. And... Speaker 1: Is she black? Speaker 2: She's black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, probably the best teacher I've ever had. She was a really good fundamental teacher. She instilled discipline in us. She was just--but she took an extra liking to me, for some reason. As a matter-of-fact, she was my, my Godmother when I, when I became catholic in 8th grade, she stood up with me. And I never forget, Sister Lorena was always sharp. I mean, she dressed to the nines. And she bought me a dress for my gradua...--mother's day ceremony. And she brought it to school and she snuck it to me and said, "Don't tell anybody about this." you know. So she, she was really cool. I don't know--I think Sister Lorena may be at Holy Angels now. I've lost contact with her. But, I'm gonna reconnect with her, cause I need to. But, she probably was the best teacher I've ever had, really, really good teacher. Story_ID: 80011 Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects in grade school? Speaker 2: English, reading, I was not mathematical at all (laughter); hated numbers, was not good at math, science, yuck! I got that from my Godson--yuck (laughter). But, I was just always on the reading end of it. Reading and English, I think were my fav... and spelling--I was always a good speller. Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. What kinds of things did you really like doing when you were grade school age--when you, when you got the chance? Speaker 2: I think I've always been an entertainer at heart. You know, we always had a lot of records and music. And I could get in the basement and, you know, sing, act like I was Chaka Khan, or somebody. I always wanted to form a singing group; loved to dance, always wanted to be the leader of something. No matter what it was, I wanted to be the leader. My friends that I grew up with will tease me about that all the time now. I was going to be the principal of the school. Whatever it was, I was in charge of it. That's the first time I remembered that. But I, I was always heading up something. No matter what we played, I was going to be the leader of it. So, but, just things that kids, you know did. I, I, I, I was just an ordinary kid. I was--always remember though, my mother [Lovie Spann] never made us go to church, but I would all, I would go to church every Sunday. I would walk to church by myself. That's when kids could walk by themselves; and I remember doing that. But, just an ordinary kid, you know, mischievous, sweet, you know, nice, just hung out. Had a girlfriend--my best girlfriend lived across the street from me--Loretta Malease (ph.). And I remember Loretta's mom would have a baby every year. And I wanted my mother so bad to have a child, that when my mother got pregnant, I didn't believe it, cause I'd been asking her for so long and when Latrice (ph.) came along I always felt like I had my own baby doll. So, I'm sure I was a lot of help to my mother in that. You know, I, I was, you know, always kinda mature for my age though; always hung out with a [sic] older set--people. But, that's what I recall about that. Speaker 1: So, you're about thirteen when your younger sister was (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I was actually eleven (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Eleven? Speaker 2: --when she was born, yeah. Story_ID: 80012 Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school. Now, you went to Mother McAuley [Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: I went to Mother McAuley. Speaker 1: That is an all-girls (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All girls (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --catholic school? Speaker 2: --Yep. Speaker 1: And where is it in relationship to the neighborhood you (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's near Oak Lawn. So, I couldn't walk there, you know, I had to drive there and go through another neighborhood. Speaker 1: That's like further west and further south (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Southwest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and southwest (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. 99 and--99th Street, as a matter of fact; close to Pulaski; between Kedzie and Pulaski. And Mother McAuley was another world for me, cause I'd gone to school all African Americans. Mother McAuley would be my first exposure into, if I can say, general market. Again, I went there (simultaneous) Speaker 1: General market (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, general market. I went there in '79, [1979], '78 [1978], end of '78 [1978]. And I never participated in any curricular activities at Mother McAuley. I just, went to school there. But when I graduated from college--from high school, I was voted the most popular African American. They call it the most colorful. I knew that's what the girls--I knew that's what they thought the word was--who was your favorite black friend (laughter); and it was me. But, I never joined any extra-curricular activities there--just went to school. And it was a great experience. I'm glad I went. It taught me a lot about life, even at that young age, because I had, like I said, I had never been exposed to, to you know, whites and I went to school with predom...--it was--as I said, it was twenty-five African Americans in my graduating class. So it was a different, it was a different experience for me. I would go to some of their homes after school. And they too, got exposed to me, because they had never had exposure to African Americans, and they would come over my house. And they'd see a different life. I don't know where they thought we might have lived, or what we lived in, but it was always--when their parents would come pick them up, it was like, "wow", you know. And so it was, it was a good experience, it really was. And it helped me, helped me when I got to college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. I'm glad I experienced it in, in high school, so that when I got to college I was prepared for it. Because, see, you must remember, my parents--my dad, you know, worked at his own--worked his own business, for the most part; promotions at night, down here, so I stayed in a complete black world. I never had the exposure of mom and dad going to corporate America, or to some job where other people worked. My mom [Lovie Spann] was a homemaker. So it was a different kind of experience for me; that was. But, it was a good experience. Story_ID: 80013 Speaker 1: Your father is like a legendary figure in Chicago [Illinois]. And he is Pervis Spann [HM], the blues man. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he's someone that-- Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION] Speaker 1: --Someone that has a reputation for being one of the sharpest business minds in the black community, even though he comes across as a country, kinda Mississippi guy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He makes a lot of--I think he makes a--he throws people off with that. Speaker 2: Right, he does. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: But that's part of his charm. His charm is none.... I mean, he's, he's a non-threatening character, but one of the smartest people you will ever meet in the world. You know what is amazing about dad? Dad never had any formal education. I mean he went to electronics school, but nothing--no degrees, or anything like that. But, there is nothing, absolutely nothing he doesn't think he can do. He, he goes to the moon, you know. He doesn't think of the stars. He thinks he can be anything. He thinks he can do anything. And what nerve for an uneducated man from the South to have. And I always say that if my dad was an educated man, boy, he'd, he'd be hell to take. Because, you know, back in the days when dad was doing business, '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you could do it on a handshake and a promise. As he--as Chicago became a more sophisticated town, and especially black Chicago became more sophisticated, he never really, he never really got to that point. And I think that has been some of his downfall. I mean, you know, Dad is an enigma that way. He, he'd been more successful if he had business acumen to him. He never had business acumen. It was just Pervis; just--he is what he is, you know. And-- Story_ID: 80014 Speaker 1: Now did you see yourself as someone who was interested in business when you were (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, I wanted to be, I wanted to be a television anchor. I wanted to be Carole Simpson. I mean I wanted to be Carole Simpson! (Laughter). Not like Carole Simpson, I really wanted to be Carole Simpson, and I'll tell you why (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: ...just cause the contrast (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: I remember your father doing the news on late, late at night. And it was, it was funny. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: People always talk about that all the time. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --That's right. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that's right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --talks of Chicago. Speaker 2: --that's right. Speaker 1: And Carole Simpson almost over pronounces everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She's very--so (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --(unclear). It's almost (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. But dig, you want to know why I wanted to go into news, really? My [paternal] grandfather--I adored him; and he adored me. I mean, he made no qualms about me being his favorite grandchild, cause, you know, we came up in the house together. He was there when I was born. I mean, you know, we just had a special bond. And my grandfather loved Michelle Clark (ph.). Do you remember Michelle Clark? Michelle Clark was an anchor here in Chicago. She got killed in an airplane crash near Midway Airport. And he would stare at Michelle Clark and just would--she would take all of his attention away from me. And that--so even when I was like eight years old that's what I wanted to do, because I couldn't understand, you know, the power of this woman. So as I've gotten older and had a better appreciation for news it was--I translated my admiration for her to Carole Simpson [HM]; but that's what I really wanted to do. Boy, and dad and I had the biggest fights about that. Oh my God, he wanted me to be a lawyer. And I was like, "I don't wanna be a lawyer, I wanna be...." And he just thought that was the worse job you could ever have. You know, "you just read--that's--you don't have any power" and--oh, we went back and forth like that. He had me so confused when I, I went to college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--I, I told you, I wasn't a good mathematician, nothing in math. I started majoring in business. It was terrible. I'd sit in finance classes, econ, and I was so bad, I would drop them before--I mean, it was some (unclear), it was some semesters I had nine hours. Cause--but that was me trying to live out his dream for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got involved in business courses because your father was interested (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah. He--yeah. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --That's what he wanted me to do. Speaker 1: Cause when you graduated from high school you wanted, you still wanted to be an anchor (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to, I wanted to go to Medill [School of Journalism, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]--to journalism school. Story_ID: 80015 Speaker 1: Now, did you know Bernadette C. Washington at [W]VON when (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I remember Bernadine [sic]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: She, she had that real, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, she was awesome. Speaker 1: --pronunciation (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, and she had class. And she had style. But I was, I was not of Bern's generation, so, you know, I don't remember her, other than coming down here and seeing her and hearing them talk about her. I remember going over her house that night that her mom died, but I never really a lot of contact with Bernadine. Speaker 1: I just wonder, because she's--her pronunciation is a lot like Carole Simpson's [HM]. Speaker 2: Yes. But all of them--look at Wanda Wells. I think those people that came out of that generation--look at Merri Dee [HM], you know, they're different personalities, voices, than what you typically hear today. Speaker 1: Today--well, I mean, well what do you typically hear today (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Conversation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Conversation. You know, nothing special. They might have a special kinda voice, but its, its delivered in a, a relatively everyday kinda way, you know; casual, very casual, that's it. Um-hum. Speaker 1: Where it was more formal (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Absolutely, more authoritative; more pronunciation--almost to the point where they were saying, "I'm black, and I am going to talk special, cause I'm black." You know, that's oftentimes when I hear them speak, what I think about. And dad [Pervis Spann, HM] was the exact antithesis of it all (laughter). I mean he, he made his living being "country." I mean, you know, he didn't fix it up for anybody; and he was accepted for it. People would talk about it, but it was not--you're not--it was--he proved them different from his--with his business acumen. His ability to really, you know, be successful in, in his business, and make money doing it. Speaker 1: He surprised a lot of people. Speaker 2: Yes. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --but he certainly was, was the businessman in that group. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That [W]VON group. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 80016 Speaker 1: So, so you went to college at Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, and like, what year are we now when you started college? Speaker 2: I was '82 [1982]. I started in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: And before we leave high school life, was your, was your social life hampered any by going to Mother McAuley [Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --on the other side of town (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I had a boyfriend when I was fifteen years old who was five years older than I did, than I was, who gave my father [Pervis Spann, HM] the "hebegeebees". He just--oh he couldn't stand it. And, and my boyfriend at that time didn't go to college. I was getting him back in school. I, I was motivating him to do it. But, that bothered him because he was older; and, but, a good guy, just a really nice guy. And so, you know, I just hung out--I went to school, and, and--near Oak Lawn and came home to my community and hung out with my community folks, you know; and there was no conflict there. I didn't have to choose. I was comfortable with whatever setting it is. And again, I, I give credit to my mother [Lovie Smith] for that. Incidentally, I had a friend who--very dear friend--still close with him, who got involved in some gang activity when I was in high school. And he end up going to prison. And, my parents allowed me to maintain relationship with him and he stayed there for many years. And I would go see him every year. They'd allow me to go see him. And I always tell people I can get along with presidents and prisoners and that's because of it; and we remain friends 'til this day; cause he was--he's--he was a good kid, he just got caught up, and that--any of us could have done that. And my parents-- cause my mother allowed herself to get into my world and get to know them--all of my friends. She felt it ok for me to be able to do that; and that's, that's the beauty of her, you know, that, that goes such a long way for me even now, you know. I get just as much joy out of going to the president of a company and talking to his assistant--talking to his secretary. And so, that was my social part of, of high school. Story_ID: 80017 Speaker 1: When I went to college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] I carried my boyfriend there, but I really outgrew him. You could see the difference. You could see me being pulled away from him, and he felt it too. And it got to the part of the relationship where we needed to part ways because it was starting to get physical; and not because he was a physical kind of mean guy, but he felt me just being moved in another direction. I was growing and, and a lot of my friends that I grew up with--very few of them went on to college. You know, they all turned out ok and got jobs and families, and stuff, but just a different path than I was. And they also started isolating me. I wanna believe it was them and not me. They felt I was different. So for awhile there, 'til we became adults, we had a little tension, because I had been friends with them for so long; went to college met another gentleman who, I--who was at Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and we dated for awhile. And, you know, you often wonder why people come in your life, but everybody that comes in your life comes for a reason. This guy really took me from Auburn-Gresham--from my neighborhood, and made me want to be a more intellectual kind of person. He made me want to leave the lingo behind and to be more collegiate. He made me aspire to, to, to talk better; not that I couldn't talk, but, you know, I was still, you know, "Southside", you know (laughter). He made me want to be a better student; made me wanna be of college material. And so I got into that in college. Story_ID: 80018 Speaker 1: College was not an adjustment for me, as it was for a lot of the African-American students who came to Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], because I had gone to Mother McAuley; so I knew what it was about. Interestingly though enough, I went to college and my first year I moved into the dorm--while I lived--while I was at Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I still stayed on campus. And I moved in with two white seniors and another girl who was a freshman, who was, who was white. She was actually Greek. And I think it was more of an experience for them than me, cause I just showed up. I mean, I had been to Mother McAuley [Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois]; I was use to it. But this was their first time ever being around an African-American. So, I spent my first year getting adjusted to that--having them get adjusted to it. And it turned out to be beautiful relationships. Had a bad first year, my mom [Lovie Spann] was--had gone into the hospital suffering from alcoholism--dealing with her personal issues, and I had gotten raped, my freshman year of, of college. And, so, that was probably--that was--it was a bad--it was a rough year, cause Latrice was young (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Sounds like it was a traumatic year. Speaker 1: It was a very traumatic year, but a year of growth. Because you wonder everyday, you know, how do you go on dealing with all of this. But it, it was for a reason, I was, I was just being made. I was, you know, I'm not bitter because of it, or.... I tell you that because I want people to understand that I was not exempt from tragedy, or you know, traumatic things. I haven't lived this fairytale type life. Bad things have happened to me too, you know, bad ordinary things. Speaker 2: Now, this is about 1982 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Three (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: '83 [1983] (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --1983, yeah. So, I went through all of that. It was probably the worst year--that probably was the worse year of my life, really. In 19...--sophomore year, okay, I'm getting myself back together. My junior year, going into my senior year, I got stricken with rheumatoid arthritis, and couldn't move, I mean, from jaw bones to my toes, just--you know, my dad [Pervis Spann, HM] and them, sent me to every doctor imaginable trying to figure out what was going on and it was rheumatoid arthritis. Speaker 2: You could move your, your (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Nothing. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: --I couldn't go to the bathroom by myself. But, amazingly enough, I got stricken the end of my junior year. And do you know when it was time for me to go back to college, it was like, I woke up one day--and I was, I was being medicated. I mean I was being treated for it, but it was like it was gone. It was almost like God wanted me to calm down for one summer, like one summer I might've gotten into something I shouldn't have, so he needed me to chill out. I--that's how I rationalize it (laughter). But, I went back to school. I had a great roommate who helped me a lot, cause I still wasn't at myself physically, you know, things I couldn't do. And I still suffer from arthritis--on medicine everyday for it. It's in remission, but it, you know, it flared back up when I turned about thirty. But, I graduated--it took me--my husband reminds me of this all the time. It took me, it took me six years to get out of college (laughter), but I was working down here too. So I would, I would go to college and then took night courses, early morning courses and come down to [W]VON and work, you know. So, I've been here since I was fourteen years old. So, you know, it's been in every stage of my life. That's what I most remember about college, not a great student in college, did not want to be there. If I could do it over, I would, because I know I'd be a better student. But college was--I tell people this all the time. I don't know how much book sense you take away from college. College makes you an adult. It prepares you for the real world. It's a socialization era for you, in your life. I really believe that. So, it was important, it really was important, now that I look back on it. It told me how to react--it taught me how to react in different situations as an adult, you know. So it's big people's school. That's how I describe it to kids when I go to speak to them. But, I know why I was there, but to take 'away something from the major in criminal justice, for what, I don't know. Because I think I was still listening to my dad, "I want you to go to law school." And I felt, well, this is a good segway. But never planned to use it, never have, but that's how I got out of there. I don't wanna say, get out of there, like I was running', like it was so devastating, but just not, just not a good student--not wanting to be there. That's what I remember the most about it. Speaker 2: You were a criminal justice major (unclear). Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And did, did you stay the full four years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I stayed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --in Rogers Park? Speaker 1: Yeah, I did. I came home one semester--my junior year, cause I'd bought a car, and I was like, well you know, I can drive my car, what difference does it make. And that wore out real quick. And I went back to campus. And so I stayed up there the remainder of the time for the four years. When my friends left, because they, they buckled down and got out of school. But, I told you I stayed a year and a half extra, so I was at home during that time. And I was working full time, so, you know, I just had a couple of courses to make up. Story_ID: 80019 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you, you were a freshman in '83 [1983]. I'm thinking that you, you told (unclear). Speaker 2: Freshman in college in '82 [1982], '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: '82 [1982], '83 [1983]. Do you remember the Harold Washington campaign (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, my God! (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: What perspective, as a young person, you know, as a freshman, what (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That is when I feel in love with politics. And I'm not real political. I just love politics. I think it's so exciting, it's just, it's amazing. But, I think that's what got me, was the first time I ever got to vote. My first vote was cast for Harold Washington. And what an exciting time in Chicago cause being at [W]VON it was talk radio. So, it was, it was the gauge of what was going on in the African American community. And it was major because in the black community, we knew that Harold Washington was going to win this race. I mean, we were excited, but it crept up on the general market. It really did. And to be a part of that and to witness--I'll never forget this, it was a young lady who went to, who went to Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] with me. She lived in, I want to say, Lisle. And do you know her parents had her register to vote in Chicago so that she could.... Speaker 1: ...vote against Harold Washington. Speaker 2: Yes, not really vote against him, but let's say that she put it like she needed to vote for [Mayor] Jane Byrne (laughter). Now here is a young lady who is just in Chicago to go to college, right (laughter). She didn't live here; had never voted in her life. But it was amazing to watch how the dynamics were breaking out for this election. You know, just at Loyola, I mean, you--people were taking your buttons off--snatching your buttons off your coat. It, it got ugly. And like, we all had bumper stickers--those blue and white Washington bumper stickers on our folders. And they would, you know, it was bad. It was bad, but what an introduction into world politics in Chicago. But, it was a great feeling when he won. We were all proud. We all had on our hats and stuff up there. It was a good time. I remember that. I remember I lived in this dorm called Lakefront. And when Walter Jacobson announced that he had won the race--it had to be one or two o'clock in the morning. I remember opening--it was called Lakefront because it was on the lake. I remember opening my window, and I just screamed to the top of my lungs, I really did. And that was-that was an exciting time; haven't had that much time politically--had that much fun politically since. Maybe the election with Al Gore and George Bush was pretty--that was a ringer. But, that was, that was politics at its best. Story_ID: 80020 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I suppose in--so as a criminal justice major, I mean, were there any teachers at Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago Illinois], or not just in criminal justice, I guess, but what--were there any mentor types at Loyola; anybody that took a particular interest in (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes, somebody who is still very important to me--Dr. Carol Adams [HM]. Dr. Carol Adams, but you something, we were just talking about this, me and Dr. Adams, she was never my teacher. She taught me in the lunchroom cafeteria table. There was always a black table at Loyola, you know, where every--all the black folks hung out in different periods for lunch. And Dr. Adams wouldn't go in the teachers lounge. She sat down with her students. And we built a relationship there. But, there was something so dynamic about Dr. Adams. She was always a pillar of strength to me. She looked strong. She--from her hair, just her statute is strong. And I always admired her for that. And she'd give--she'd listen to you and she'd give advice in a very passive way. Where you--she wouldn't lecture to you. She'd listen to you and let you make your own decisions. But, she'd throw in the important stuff that you'd needed to get, and it was--it was non-threatening, cause she was Dr. Adams. She was cool. She sat at the lunchroom table with us. You know, she kicked it with us. And so, to this day, when I get in situations and I can't understand them, whatever they may be, for some reason, Dr. Adams will call me. It's like I think she's sometimes my guardian angel, for my soul, you know, just for my inner workings. What's going on here? That came up last year when we were dealing with the station, and I was going through some things and she called. And I was like, "Dr. Adams", and whatever she tells me it seems like it mellows me out, you know, it makes it okay. So, she's really cool that way. She is my mentor, really. She is my mentor. I have a great deal of respect for her. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's a person in college that really stands out for me. Speaker 1: Now, when, at Loyola she was the--what was Dr. Adams (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: She was head of the African American Studies Department--I believe she was. I know she taught it. But, I think she also, at some point, was head of that department. Speaker 1: I think at the present time she's the Director of Human Services for the State of Illinois. Speaker 2: Yeah, she just got appointed that. What an awesome selection. Governor [Rod] Blagojevich did a great--he picked a great person, he really did. For a role--for a department that has so many problems--layers of problems with DCFS [Department of Children and Family Services] and so on and so forth. She's the right person for the job. Story_ID: 79905 Speaker 1: Now, all right, so when you, you left school [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] did you seek employment some place else, or did you just, just segue right into (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I've only had one other job. I worked part time at Northwestern Hospital for a gentleman named Dr. Louis Keith. And I know why I was there. I'm telling you, wherever you are, there's a reason. Dr. Keith--my girlfriend, who I've gone to high school and college with, her mother has worked for Dr. Keith for now, over 30 years, they've been together. And, so they had a part time clerical position and I took it, just to earn a little extra money. And I learned organization. And to be a successful businessperson, organization is really about 30 percent of your success. And I learned that from a clerical position at Northwestern Hospital, I really did. That's the only other job I've ever had. Story_ID: 79906 Speaker 1: I've been at [W]VON since I was fourteen, in different capacities; full time, part time, overtime (laughter), all of it has been here. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, you stated that earlier WVON at one time was one of the top radio stations in Chicago. Becoming--I think its, its on its way (unclear). In the black community it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, thank you. Speaker 2: --it may be the top. Speaker 1: That's right (laughter). I wish. (Laughter). Speaker 2: But then the (simultaneous) Speaker 1: It is the most important; I'll tell you that, it really is. I don't say that cause I'm here, at it. I mean, what we do for our community is second to none, bar none. I mean it really is. When you devote your entire few hours of broadcasting that you have as a service for information, for education, for a community of people in Chicago, it says a lot about you. It's much cheaper for us to play music. But we found a way to make money educating black folks. That is just masterful. Speaker 2: Can you give us a sense of the history of 'VON's evolution in terms of this (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: -- cause at one time it was a music station (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --playing the top black hits. Speaker 1: Sure. I'll tell you, 'VON, as a matter of fact, we're celebrating a 40th anniversary this year. 'VON went on the air April 1st, 1963. It was the brain thrust of Leonard, really, Fieldcrest, Leonard and Phil Chess, no Leonard, and they owned Chess Records. These were visionaries, like no other. These were some gentlemen who had migrated from Poland, come to Chicago and had, I think it was a liquor store, or a nightclub on the Southside; had much success when they formed their record label, Chess Records. They had signed up people like Muddy Waters, Little Howling Wolf, who had put them on the map. And they thought that it would be ideal to get a radio station where they could play their music. Well, low and behold the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had some kinda rules and regulations where this couldn't just be an institution that promoted their business. But they realized that there was not one radio station that reached--that covered all of Chicago, that had all of Chicago listening to it. You had brokered time; Mel Benson and some of the other guys were doing some brokered radio. My dad [Pervis Spann] was on [W]OPA, Herb Kent [HM] was out at [W]BEE, but not one station that could service the entire City of Chicago with its format; and they did it. They went on the air with some great personalities: E. Rodney Jones, Herb Kent, Pervis Spann, Wesley South [HM], all under one shop; and called them The Good Guys. And these guys ran this market, from the music industry part of it, to the Civil Rights era with "Hotline", and Roy Wood. They had their hands on the pulse of the black community. And everything that went on in Chicago emanated, or was promoted through this little, one thousand watt radio station, who so often was in the top five of, of radio stations when they were rated. And even sometimes, number one; with one thousand watts serving the millions of African Americans, or Negroes, at that time. That's when 'VON stood for the voice of the Negro. So it was a dynamic station. Speaker 2: Just, just a word on that: most people don't believe, nowadays that it really stood for the voice of the Negro (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Right. Well, because Negro now, is, is, you know, not looked on as a favorite-type word. I mean, you know, coming out of the black power movement, we've been black, we've been, you know, African American, we've been so many different things. So, Negro now, describes somebody who is not doing what they should do to be down for their community. So much so, that I've, I've tried to change--you can never change its meaning cause I mean, you know, V-O-N is so powerful. But I wanted to move it to a voice of the Nation; cause collectively in the country, African Americans would probably be the sixth or seventh largest nation. And so, so I don't offend people, you know, we refer to it, we say, "from the voice of the Negro to the voice of a Nation." But that's, that's what they did. 'VON is synonymous with WGN and WLS in, in the--being institutionalized as a radio station. And it's always been for black people. It's always been the voice of the black community, through it's various format changes. And it's got a very loyal listening base, very loyal. It's just a special, special radio station, it really is. Story_ID: 79907 Speaker 1: Now, what happened when--now, at one time, wasn't [W]VON on twenty-four hours a day? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'll tell you what happened there. Interestingly enough, 'VON--this is not the original 'VON. Dad [Pervis Spann, HM] and the Good Guys--some of them did change, but they kinda had a tenure till about 1975. In 1969, Leonard Chess, who was really the person who ran 'VON-Phil [Chess] probably dealt with the radio station more. But Leonard had a heart attack right down the street here, in 1969, coming to the station. And his family sold the station in 1971, to Potter Palmer, from the Palmer House, and George Gillette, from the shaving creme company. They had formed Globetrotter Communications. And Globetrotter purchased 'VON. Now, Leonard had bought the station for a million dollars. In 1971 he sold it for 9 million. Isn't that unbelievable. And, so, the Globetrotter took over and at that point, back in the mid '70s [1970s] FM started to pick up. AM kind of lost its luster. Because, see, when 'VON first went on the air, FM was a bad word. I mean, people was like, "what is this--oh, this is awful." People won't listen to it. Speaker 1: They played the symphony on FM. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Very few receivers had FM. Speaker 2: That's right. And interestingly enough, dad tells the story that he had an opportunity to buy what is now [W]GCI for $20,000.00, can you believe that. That station is probably worth near $200 million now, so, in today's market place. But, so that went on until about 1975. Then some other owners came in. I can't remember what company it was prior to Gannett owning it. But anyway, Globetrotter had moved 'VON from 1450, which is 1,000 watts, which we are now to 1390, which is 5,000 watts, for more power. They could reach more households--reach out to the suburbs, up close to Wisconsin. And so it was a good move. They considered it a good move. Well, 'VON, 1450, 1450 had gone dark. Nobody was on the signal. It was just dark. Story_ID: 79908 Speaker 1: And, so, when they fired all of the Good Guys, Daddy, Pervis [Spann, HM], got with Wesley South [HM], who he felt had the political connections in order to pull it off. And they decided to file for the 1450 frequency. Speaker 2: Now Wesley South, now in the late '70s [1970s] was the host of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Hotline. Speaker 2: --Hotline, (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A political talk show at night. Speaker 1: Yes. All the way up until the '60s [1960s] from the time 'VON went on the air until, you know, '70s [1970s] and when it ended, that era, the Good Guys, Wesley was doing Hotline, very powerful show. He interviewed the likes of Martin Luther King, Robert F. Kennedy, Medgar Evers--I mean anybody that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Malcolm X. Speaker 1: --Malcolm X, Elijah Muhammad--all of them, Martin Luther King [Jr.]. They often speak about the time Martin Luther King (unclear) came down to the studio. It used to be a bridge out here--you know, a covering over the bridge, like there are so many bridges right out here, and how the people lined the streets just to see Dr. King when he left the station here--it's so much history. But, so, Wesley [South, HM] had those kind of connections. Wesley had run for political office himself, for alderman; I even think congressman--he'd run for. So, Dad [Pervis Spann, HM] thought with Wesley's political connections and he, he had the money to, to put behind him, that they would file and get a radio station; and they did. Four of the parties had filed. By the time it--everything had wrangled out, it was [W]VON--it was the McGallis (ph.), which owned WCEB, whom we shared a signal with them, and 'VON, and they decided to share the frequency. And they divided the hours like this because morning drive and afternoon drive are the most important time slots; and so that each one would get one of them. That's why we are in this sickened stage of 10 p.m. to 1 p.m. broadcast time. So, they filed for the station, and how 'VON got back to--we came on the air as WXOL. How 'VON got back to 1450, interestingly enough, is that [W]GCI, Gannett owned 'GCI FM, which is 107.5. And they owned 1390. They had purchased WVON, okay. Their FM signal was doing so well, and continues to do well, that Marv Dyson [HM] decided--"you know, why don't we drop the 'VON call letters and change our AM station to the same call letters as our FM station." And what did he do that for. And he often refers to it as his biggest mistake he's ever made in radio. And I'm so glad you made that mistake, Marv. But (laughter) and we picked them up the next day. We filed for remedially, and that's how 'VON got back to 1450. And, we won't be changing it, you know. Those are important call letters in Chicago, really are, known all over. 'VON back in its hay day--Berry Gordy [HM] would send his music to 'VON before it hit any other radio station. Cause he knew that it had the power to take it to--to make it--if they were playing it on 'VON in Chicago, that meant that [W]LRB was going to be playing it in New York. And it was just, a trickle-down effect. It had that much power--the station did. Story_ID: 79909 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the station had a--since it's become, it became mostly talk, when it became [W]XOL (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, it started off as a music station, but you know, you really can't compete with music in this market. And then it moved to a gospel format--we played gospel music. Then it moved to news and talk. Talk news in 1986. [Mayor] Harold Washington kinda helped us with that. It was such a great time politically, so much going on, so much to talk about. He had opened the City up; and so, [W]VON was right there. And there was--no one was really--JJD was the only--WLS wasn't even talking then. JJD was talking in the market. So 'VON hit the airway (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Unclear) with Gary Meyer and (simultaneous) Speaker 2: But that didn't come along 'til--they were all in the loop, I think it was. But 'LS didn't switch to talk until maybe '89 [1989] or '90 [1990], it was a while, maybe '88 [1988]. Yeah. Yeah. So it was the only city--only station in Chicago talking, so much going on. People were listening, you know. Speaker 1: Well, you know, it, what the, what the talk was then, was that, you know, Lu Palmer's [HM] show had something to do with the election of Harold Washington. His--Lu's Notebook, you know, was taken off the air (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: --by Illinois Bell. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And then the--but, but he stayed on the radio (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. (Simultaneous) Speaker 1: --on.... Then I guess it was, what was it, was it 'VON then when he (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was on 'VON. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous), okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. [W]JPC, he was on JPC, which was [John H.] Johnson's [HM] station. Speaker 1: That late night show was on here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The one that really (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, on target. Speaker 1: Yeah. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's the one that really--people would talk about the election (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and strategize. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: They, they called up or warned you about the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: That's right. Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, you know, that continued--he continued that show. The '86 [1986] election, by that time, when, when 'VO, when 'VON was being mentioned in the papers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum Speaker 1: --as a factor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --in that, that election. Speaker 2: That's right, so much going on. Hasn't always been good, I think that after Mayor Washington died, the fallout of the Tim Evans, Gene Sawyer fight, I think the station, sorry to say, but, we didn't do it very well, you know. I don't care what anybody says, the station does have some kind of leadership position. And for us to let the conversation go on in a way that it did, I think we did more harm than good to the community. You can only say that though, looking back. Hindsight is always 20-20. But we should have kept, I think, a little more control over that, but, you know, things play out the way they're supposed to, I guess. Story_ID: 79910 Speaker 1: Well, how did you--now, how did your career build here, you know (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I was--Wesley South [HM]--I was the program director under him. Mr. South-dad [Pervis Spann, HM] knew the on-air side of it. Mr. South really taught me the business side of it, as much as he could, cause, mind you, he had never been a businessman himself. I mean, you know, he'd been on the air--an intelligent man. But, he gave me what he knew. He taught me what he knew. And I had to take it to another level. But he really trusted me and we worked well together. And he knew that I could do it. So, he, he taught me a lot about running the business of WVON. And that's how I learned. And I worked side-by-side with him from 1989 to 1994. And he really allowed me to kinda get in here, roll up my sleeves, and learn every aspect of the business side of this radio station. So, I owe that to him. He did, he taught me that. Dad knew programming, but he didn't know the business side of a radio station. And being able to work with Mr. South through so many things--back taxes and; I mean, it was rough. We were--we--financially, we were--it was disastrous. But, I was able to, to figure out how to dig myself out of it, once I came--got in control and-- Story_ID: 79911 Speaker 1: What happened, truth be told, Dad [Pervis Spann, HM] and Mr. [Wesley] South [HM] had been at each other's throats, probably since the inception of their partnership. They started off both as equal partners and then Mr. South would get more stock and get more stock, and daddy felt betrayed. And Wesley felt that Pervis did things to hurt the company. And, so they didn't have a good relationship. And it culminated into lawsuits after lawsuits and changes of the guard for years. And this last time in 1994, daddy got in control of the station because he had entered into an agreement to buy the stock of the minority shareholders, which were comprised of Vernon Jarrett [HM], a lady named Gwendolyn Hayes, who had used a bit to add on businesses on the Westside of Chicago--and Caesar Collins, the famed Collins brothers. And they had the minority shares. And their vote would swing the pendulum of, of control between Wesley and Pervis. Pervis had struck a deal with them and Mr. South gone, had gone home. He sent Mr. South home. And it was then that I came in and began to run the radio station. I don't know if my dad really wanted me to, I think he wanted me to assume a role like Bernadine [sic, Bernadette] C. Washington did. You know, just--I was the PR [public relations] wing of it. But I, I wasn't having it, cause I had been--you know, running this--working with Mr. South and knew how to run the station. The station didn't need that. [W]VON was a different station than when Bern was here. Business had changed since the '60s [1960s] when 'VON was running. It was a different animal. And he wasn't aware of that. But because I was in here working with Wesley, I knew how to redo this, you know. And so I just, basically, told him I wasn't going to be the person that took orders from him. I wanted to do this. And it took years for him to believe that I could, but we got there. Story_ID: 79912 Speaker 1: We got there and, that's what happened. After that, Wesley [South, HM] continued to sue dad [Pervis Spann, HM], after that. The, the station was in receivership of the court. Wesley knew that I would protect it. And Pervis [Spann, HM] had faith in me. And they agreed to allow me to be the receiver. And I didn't want what was going on at [W]VON to turn out like the [Chicago] Defender. I didn't want to play this out in the media. Nobody even knew we were in here fighting like we were, that the station was in receivership, because that hurts business. So my thing was always to make it look good. You know, whatever was going on I hid it from the public, and hid it from the--our clients, you know, who support us financially--the advertisers. So they didn't know the internal fight that was going on. It wasn't played out in the media, like the Defender, thank god. And so we were able to build on just, you know, family owned, doing a good job, here for the community, that, that was always what I wanted to put out there. And that's what I was able to do. It remained that way until nineteen ninety--wow, these years get away so fast. Nineteen--what year is this, 2003? In 1999--had it been 1999, maybe 1999, the court decided that--might have been 2000 one of them--the court decided that they were not going to continue to hold on to this corporation, and that either Wesley had to buy it, Pervis had to buy it, or they were going to sell it. I mean, I sat in this courtroom--I might have had on this same suit--I was devastated. I'm not lying, I just got numb. I didn't sleep for like three days. So, the courts decided that it was up to the minority shareholders to decide who they would sell it to. And they choose Wesley. And I love Mr. South, don't get me wrong, but, VON had changed since he had been here in '94 [1994]. It was a different station. I had taken it to another level. And my biggest fear was that he wouldn't understand where it was. And he would take it back to where it was. But I sat patiently and waited. He had like, thirty days to, to do the deal. And I sat back and I waited patiently, and he didn't do it. He, he just didn't come up with what he needed to come up with to get the job--the deal done. And, earlier in this court proceeding, the judge had even said, "You know, Melody had done such a great job. Everybody seems to respect her job. Why don't you sell it to her?" And they kind of washed over that because both of them wanted control of it, of course. But the bottom line is the judge ended up awarding it to me, if I could come up with the necessary financial obligation, and I could have the station, and I did. And so I got it. But, Wesley is here, Pervis is here and I'm here. I always wanted it to be like that. No one--I didn't want anybody to be out of the equation, because no one ever had to be. Their fight was over control; mine was to make it work. I don't mind sharing, I really don't. I just want it to work, I wanted to be here for the community. And if Mr. South wants to take credit for it, he can. If Pervis wants to take credit for it, he can. If people want to give me credit for it, they can. It doesn't make any difference, just as long as it's here. Speaker 2: So Wesley South is still associated with (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. He's the chairman emeritus. He's on the board. He comes down here often. He helps me with any project I ask him to help me with. We have a great relationship. It's, its sustained damage, cause if he's fighting for control and I purchased it, of course, he might feel like I undermined him. But our--I just did what I thought was best for me, and for the company. But we've since repaired that. Dad's fine, he's here as president emeritus. So they both--we've got an open door policy. Whatever they want to do they can do. We all get along. I make the final decision, I make them part of it though. I make--I want them to be part of it, you know, 'cause it's theirs too. Story_ID: 79913 Speaker 1: Well that's remarkable; I mean the story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --the story, I mean, like, you know, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Things usually don't turn out (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to actually be functional and work with (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --conflict. Cause I, I, I do remember the lawsuits (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --coming forth and I don't know all the details (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right. We never let anybody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: I wanted it to, I wanted--I didn't want people to know, because it, it reeks of unstableness. Speaker 1: Yeah, and really, to tell the truth, only those in a certain political circle knew the (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, the dynamics (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --what was going on. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --yet along the details. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's how it kinda played out. And its good, its ok, you know, they've both have gotten to the point where they trust me--my judgment of things. And I, I've had some growing up--I've had to learn how to include them. Because, see, when I was receiver, I was making these decisions. I didn't need any input. I didn't have to get any input. I could put everybody in their place, but in order to keep the stability, and this harmonious relationship I've got going now, I really do include them, you know, and let them make some decisions, unless I'm just so adamantly opposed to it. I want them to be part of it. Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. It seemed to work out fairly well. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 79914 Speaker 1: Has that been like the biggest challenge that you've faced. Trying to just--trying to get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --it stabilized? (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: The financial woes. I had an IRS [Internal Revenue Service] agent come in here and flash his badge, flash his badge and tell me that he was closing me down on Tuesday. I mean, I've gone through things, financially here. I mean, just unbelievable things. But, I've managed to work my way out. But the most amazing thing is I've found a way to make this work financially, you know. I tell people all the time, I'm not selling--'VON is more than a radio station. I'm not selling advertising. I don't sell advertisement. I sell concept. If I was selling advertising, I'd be off the air. Clearly people can find other stations to put their dollars on with larger audiences. I mean, what are we a point, nine, or one point O (zero) consistently, that--you don't make any money on that. But, I've found a way to, to have people believe in, in the mission of the station. Through Homebuyers Club--I start off doing something good for the community first, and then the money is always added. My mother always taught me that. "Do what you love and the money will come." She used to tell me that all the time. "Do what you love, Melody, and the money will come." And that is just what has happened here, through just great things for the community, you know, Homebuyers Club, financial seminar. We did a business practice here just a couple of days ago, so many worthwhile things where, where the community benefits from. Just with our Homebuyers Club, 300 people have bought homes. Because black folks don't believe they can afford a home. They can afford a home. They'll pay $1200.00 rent and don't think they qualify for a home. I wanna teach them. I want to break down those kinds of barriers, just so many worthwhile things--women's retreat. I'm putting a men's retreat together for the first time, this year. And these corporations start believing in the mission, cause I show them. I show them that this audience, they can't get it anywhere else, that they're worthy. And the audience never lets me down. They support my advertisers. And so, its just a good marriage, you know, it's a good relationship. But most importantly, the people are able to get something out of it, you know. I think about this Charles Schwab thing that we do this, this money thing every Wednesday, the information that we disseminate, and I get paid to do it. Story_ID: 79915 Speaker 1: I mean, that's great, I mean, that's just--oh, that's powerful, you know, so, I'm able to employ about twenty-five people, you know, and to stay afloat, and to, to aspire to do other things, because we are, you know, financially stable now, in a way we've never been. So.... Speaker 2: Now, you actually pay these people benefits too. I mean, a substantial number in, in employee benefits (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, they get health benefits. They, you know what, I always tell my--they, I have the most, probably the most loyal staff than any radio station in the City. They give over and beyond, you know, what they're supposed to give, and it's because I allow of them to make money. Some of them have started companies right here, you know. I think of Wayne, he does The House of DJs, not many people know that. He probably makes just as much on that venture, as he does at this radio station. He's doing what he loves, and I allow him to promote it here, you know. Mo has a PR [public relations] firm, you know. People call here and they buy advertising and they might be having an event you want PR wing, here's Monique Caradine, with her company. Speaker 2: You don't try to cutoff what they do (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, hell no. I want them to (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --If you don't do your work, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --is there some (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I'm not the only one should get rich here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I want everybody to get rich. And when you give that freely, people are willing to stay here, you know, they'll be--they are not paid for their talent--I, mean, I've got some talented people here. You know, Cliff, in his engagements, his speaking engagements, and you know, he's able to make money on the side. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Cliff Kelley (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --Yeah, Cliff Kelley. And I want, I want people to benefit from being here. That's why they stay so long. I have such a low turnover. And when they leave, oftentimes they leave on their own terms. They couldn't--they just couldn't turn it down, you know what I mean. And I've had them now--I'm getting to the point where they stay, even when people offer them the money, they're like, "No, I'm staying right where I'm at." You know, that's such a great feeling. You know, to know that people believe in you and your mission and what you're doing, to the point where they're willing--Keisha's been here twelve years, she's thirty-five, you know what I mean, so. When they believe in you like that and they feel like they've got a stake in the company, that's what I want them to do. Story_ID: 79916 Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, we were talking about some of the on air personalities (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --that have been here. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: I've worked with some dynamic people. But, I love this combination I have going right now, Cliff Kelley and Monique Caradine. Speaker 1: Yeah, Cliff's been around now for ten years. Speaker 2: Cliff's been here for ten years. Isn't that amazing, that's the longest that anybody--any morning host has been at 'VON. And, I mean, and when you think of, what's the gentleman that died at WGN, Collins; remember he got killed in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --airplane accident. That's the stuff that real talk hosts are made of, is that tenure, that ability to stay there, that staying power. Cliff's got it. Cliff has got to be one of the most brilliant people I've ever met. Sometimes I, I'm so opposed to his views on things, and we fight about them. But I have got to allow people to have their positions. What I don't want Cliff to do, and we fall out about it all the time, is to be so profound that there is not room for people who may be a little less intelligent as he is; for them to feel isolated or that they can't call in. And I think that's one of the things that we've, have been fighting about since he's been here. Not really fighting, but, that's one of things that I try to find balance with him on. But, I mean, a brilliant man, brilliant man. What I'm most pleased about is Monique Caradine. Monique is starting to do just what I hired her to do, and that was to bring a younger audience to talk radio, and it's taken awhile. I think she's been in there about four years; started when she was about 28 years old. Went through some great growing pains, and the community accepting her. Cause one thing about 'VON audience, they want you to know, you've got to know that you know. And the only way that you know, is that you lived through it. And if you haven't lived through it, then you've got to sit down and let us tell you about it. She's gained her respect in that regard. And I just marvel at the young people when they call and say, "Yeah, I'm twenty-eight, I'm thirty-four." This was never heard of on 'VON before, in this current format. And that is my goal, to bring a conscientious mind, from the hip-hopper to the civil rights person, to the Jim Crow people, to just, all genres of black folks who lived through history, and who have a level of consciousness, to 'VON. And she's helping me break down those barriers and do that. I just--I love her show. I love it. She's able to branch out a little more than Cliff. Sometimes it's hard to get Cliff to get out of the box. And, he doesn't want to get out of the box, you know. Speaker 1: He's older and settled now. Speaker 2: There you go. There you go. But in my attempt to, to introduce this format to a younger demographic of people, he, he has to do that; and he's doing it. He's, he's getting a little better at it. But Monique keeps you right there. She, she hits that 40 something. And it's--I just love her show. I'm really feeling her show (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 79917 Speaker 1: --You raise some interesting points, just from what you just said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that [W]VON does have a diverse audience. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: It's all black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and yet it's diverse. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You have a wide range of education (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in terms of audience (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there are those who have had no school and those who've had a whole lot of school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and there, and the, the wide range of political acumen. Speaker 2: That's right Speaker 1: Those who really know how the city works, better than any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --alderman that's sitting in an office (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and those who know nothing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --about it, don't have a clue (laughter). Speaker 2: There are those who are republican and support [President] George [W.] Bush, and they don't call in, they email me; and those who are staunch democrats, those who are independents. African Americans are not monolithic. You get a Ph.D. in blackness over here. We are not monolithic. You're gonna get a little bit of everything. Speaker 1: Is it difficult to strike, strike that common denominator? Speaker 2: You know what, one thing to my credit, I I don't make decisions by myself. I don't sit here like I'm the queen and I got all the answers. Every decision I make, nine times out of 10, it's been to three or four ears, sometimes it's internal, sometimes it's outside. I bounce ideas off. So, when I'm gonna, you know, get on the edge a little bit, try something edgy, I bounce it off somebody who, who might have a more objective view, or be able to say, "no, don't do that." You know, I might call Conrad and say, "Hey, Conrad, what do you think about this?" I'll call Hermene Hartman [HM], "What do you think about this?" Speaker 1: Conrad is another host that (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, he was on here. That's right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Bob Starks [HM] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Bob Starks. Speaker 2: --Yeah, from the grassroots to the more conservative-type host, you know, I've been through all of that. But, I don't ever want to be predictable with this format. I don't want anybody to say, "Well I can't listen to it. There's never anything there to serve me." I wanna--I'm not expecting to be the end-all, you know, nobody is everything. But I wanna be enough of a lot of things where nobody is isolated; and if you are, it's because you're insecure in yourself. You just don't want to hear it. That's, that's what I'm trying to build here. Story_ID: 79918 Speaker 1: Now, there's a, there's a core of listeners that have been referred to the "WVON family" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --that call all the time. (Laughter) Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And you know their names on the radio (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's right. Speaker 1: --when they call in, and you know, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's right. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your experiences with the "WVON family" (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, this is their station. It's the same, the same, I guess, the same prototype that I'm building within the station, I wanna build on the outside. I've got a listening base who will support me no matter what. And that's why [W]VON is also--you know, I don't--I know my power, and I don't flex it very often. You've got to do something really devastating for me to flex my entire power. I am confident that I can probably amass the biggest rally of anything that I think I want to in the City of Chicago. I've got the marchers here. I've got the protesters. I've got people I can call to for money. I've got the financial backing for it. I don't think it's my role to do that. I'm not trying to be the savior of black people. I'm trying to influence as many people in the right type of way as I can. And so, that listening audience, they are just--they're family, they really are. We come to their rescue. They come to our rescue. They need us; I need them. And that's how I wanna keep it. And you've got that--where you know, in your listening audience, only fifteen to twenty percent of your listening audience will actually call. They've become celebrities. Mellow Sim (ph.) will go somewhere and they say, "That's that man on the radio." Roof Stout is a celebrity. I mean they make themselves known for calling WVON. Rickey Hendon [HM], during--when he won his first election it--he probably won it as a result of him being on 'VON as a caller. He doesn't call anymore, but Rickey would call this station everyday. I shouldn't call him Rickey, I'm--it's Senator Hendon now (laughter), you know what I mean. But there're some real personalities that have been made here, you know. And we support them. I mean, you know, we've lost a lot of family members--we call them family members. Some of them have gone on. I've got subscribers, they--someone had moved to New Mexico. They sent their subscription this year. They can't even hear us--South Carolina, its that connectedness, it's the family. That's the type of support we want--want to keep it that way. And it's their station. They feel a stake here. They ring the doorbell just cause they're in the area; they don't have an appointment. Any given day you might see a listener walking around here. It's the type of environment that I wanna keep and create for our listeners. Speaker 1: This is unusual for commercial radio. Speaker 2: Um-hum, it is. Speaker 1: You know, I think that--and have you--well, it is remarkable that you, you can sustain this with commercial radio with just, other than public radio. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's hard to image this for, for free radio. In other cities talk shows are on--board of education sponsored (unclear) radio. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Or some other public (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --radio format (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I know that's the way it is in Detroit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and St. Louis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --or some other places. But, you know, this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: --the only city I know of that has this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: And probably the most successful talk formatted station that catered specifically to the African American community in the country. Probably the most successful, cause we just know--we, we've got a niche, and a concept, and we know how to do it. Story_ID: 79919 Speaker 1: Are other--is this concept spreading to other cities? Speaker 2: Well, it was, and then you know, with this consolidation, the Telecommunications Act, a lot of people lost their footing. But, Cathy Hughes [HM] does it in D.C., LIB in New York, there was one in Detroit, I'm not sure if it's still on the air. But there were several huge markets that were doing it. But again, with the consolidation of, of all these stations being owned by a couple of owners, you kinda lost a lot of them. Of course, they're going to change your format. This is a very threatening format. I don't know too many big conglomerates that would want to do a format like this. It's political. Its, you know, it's--they don't--you know, don't, its too, its revolutionary. Not many people want to do it. Speaker 1: It's been a, it's been a change in the FCC regulations too that seems to, seems to me now, that, that, that there isn't as much talk on the, the radio (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, it's so controversial. And they want you to shut-up and play the music and the play spots. You're not supposed to have a position. You know, they, they're not--they want to entertain. And we--I think it was Oscar Brown's [Jr., HM] daughter, Maggie, who coined it, "we edutain (ph.)." We want to entertain, but we want to educate you. Most people don't have that mission. They want to entertain. They want you to dance and, and be kind of dumb or ignorant. I, I couldn't, I couldn't sleep at night if I, if that was all I could bring to my audience. Story_ID: 79920 Speaker 1: And that's, you know, you've had a long history that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. That's right. Speaker 1: --you know. So, is it difficult to maintain this kind of a pace with the community? Do you do a lot of remotes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and a lot of people coming in and out? Speaker 2: No, it's not. You know, cause I don't have a job. I tell people all the time, I just realize I don't have a job. This is not a job. This is a way of life for me. I think if I considered it a job, I'd burn out much faster. Of course I get tired. You know, I have to go rejuvenate, but I don't come to work everyday. You know, I don't. And I think a lot of people around here feel the same way. We're working on something. You know, it's a mission. And so, it's not hard. I'm always looking for the next thing to do. I told my mother [Lovie Spann]--my mother said, "Melody, if you didn't live in a constant state of crisis in your business, you couldn't exist. You don't know how to stop. You don't know how to slow down, cause there's always something to do for our community. It's always something else to do. I come off the business breakfast--we're celebrating our 40th anniversary, come off the 40th anniversary and then the Homebuyers Club takes off. And, so you're in this constant state (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Juneteenth (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Juneteenth, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --You do (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that's something I'm trying (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --the African Festival every year. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Juneteenth is something I'm trying to get the City to recognize. I want the City of Chicago to celebrate Juneteenth. And it's like, it's like Kwanzaa, you know, what is that? Oh my God, the slaves were freed. Oh, this--can we get involved in this? So, it's a fight. It won't be done overnight. But we'll get to it. I'm committed to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And not just for, for the corporations to know, but for black people to know. We don't even understand Juneteenth; it's sad; we don't. Story_ID: 79921 Speaker 1: Now what's been the--has there been a time--and you mentioned, I guess, the, the aftermath of the [Mayor] Harold Washington--of the death of Harold Washington. And the aftermath of the political fight between the Sawyer faction and the Tim Evans faction, as being kind of a (unclear) for WVON in terms of its influence, and being able to--taking out a course, you know. Has it been any, any other real tough positions that you found that the station (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Wondering if I'm doing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Wanting to be--you know, where it's going to fall (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --which way I should go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Which way, which way you should go, yeah? Speaker 2: No. Oh, maybe one. It would have had to be the gubernatorial race that just passed. Here is why, Roland Burris [HM] clearly should be the governor of the State of Illinois. Roland Burris wasn't going to win this race, he just wasn't. This city, this state is not made up that way. And I, I fear that my people in their wanting the right thing to happen, lose sight of reality, what really can happen. And how do we leverage ourselves to get the best bang out of the buck. Not cause it's the right thing to do, but because we can leverage some things. And so I found myself caught between supporting Roland Burris, because we should, or supporting Paul Vallas because we could benefit, just based on the strength of a relationship that was formed. We were very supportive of Paul Vallas and I tell Cliff this all the time. Cliff Kelley made Paul Vallas acceptable in the African American community. Because when he first got that position, the black community, Conrad, many of the activists were not feeling him. Cliff made Paul Vallas palatable. I mean, of course he influenced a lot of students, but there's no love fest between parents and the person who heads the public school system. Cliff made Paul Vallas a cool guy, a good superintendent; not that he wasn't, but he made him likeable. Paul was for our people. I had a problem with that early on (simultaneous) Speaker 1: He needed to be accessible. He (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, he made him accessible. Right, he put him out there, he really did. So then he gets ready to run for governor. We know both of these individuals. We can do well with both of these individuals. But who could really win this race. And I just wish, you know, in hindsight--and I think Roland Burris is a dynamic guy; should he be governor of City--of the State of Illinois, of course he should. Was he the most qualified, of course he was. It has nothing to do with his race. He was clearly the most qualified of those candidates. But Illinois doesn't vote that way. We don't live in that kind of world. So what do we do as a people to leverage ourselves? That's deep. That's deep. And Roland Burris carried the city; a large part of that is because of [W]VON. And I often think, not that I don't have, or relate--well, I don't have a relationship with Blagojevich, I'm sure I'll build one. You know, he seems like a nice guy. He's not adverse to 'VON. I'm sure he want 'VON to be on his side. But just imagine with that already established relationship, what we would have been able to do, if Paul Vallas was the governor. That's deep. Story_ID: 79922 Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned [Rod] Blagojevich, you know, would, would probably welcome the support of [W]VON. I'm sure a lot of people, people would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in politics (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Absolutely. Speaker 1: --would try to court the black community. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Have you had to reject the overtures of some who tried to (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know, yeah, I have. You know and then, you know what, you get to the point where you realize the power that you wield and you've got to do what's best for the community. For instance, Paul Jakes--I like Paul Jakes as a man. Realistically, could Paul Jakes be the mayor of the City of Chicago? I doubt it. Was I supposed to support, go all out and support Paul Jakes' candidacy? I couldn't, I just couldn't. That's a change for [W]VON. There was a time when we would support anybody that was African American. Not that I was not supporting Paul Jakes, but I couldn't go and swing the pendulum like we did for Roland Burris [HM]. That's unfair to the community. Just because he's African American, that's, that's not enough; we're too sophisticated, too intelligent, too strong a community to just say--to throw anybody out here. We've got to get away from that. I'm sensing that with this Carol Moseley Braun [HM] run for president, for what? Am I just suppose to tell my community, or my listening audience we need to support Carol because she comes from us, she's smart, she's bright. What is she really running for, you know what I mean? We've got to start having that kind of dialog. We've got to lift the consciousness to that. Where it ain't just cause you're black, you support me. You know, support me cause I'm black, that's smart, but when you got an Al Sharpton [HM] and a Carol Moseley Braun, what's makes the better sense; and be ok with that; so I'm trying to get my community to. Am I scared? Yeah, a little bit, cause that's deep. I mean, that's deep, I mean, I'm coming 180 degrees from where I was, you know, in, in our thinking, in our being able to move. And I never said any--I never told anybody about that Roland Burris, Paul Vallas thing. But, that bothers me, it does. Story_ID: 79923 Speaker 1: Do you think that most of the time WVON's ahead of the community, or behind the community, or slightly, you know, ahead, or slightly behind, or just on (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think 'VON can move the community. I think like I said, I think [Roland] Burris [HM] carried Chicago because of 'VON. Ninety-eight percent of our listeners vote; that's huge. No other radio station probably can--these people vote. So why wouldn't you listen to the station during the political season. It is, it's ridiculous. It's--the amount of political commercials that are on, you know. So, yeah, we can basically move people. Is it our job, probably not. Do I do it, yeah, because that's always been the makeup of the African American community. That we rally behind something together, collectively. That's why it's so--with this situation at this nightclub. It's been amazing to see this community come together. And people haven't done a story on this. This community has come together behind that. And you know there's a lot of finger pointing: oh, well, the police should have done it, or the owners. The community hasn't heard that. They want to raise money. They want to take care of these children who are left behind because their parents are no longer here. They buried these people. They sent flowers. They--we came together behind this. That's what the African American community does. And, and if I can at all use this station to do it, of course I'm going to do it. Of course, I don't want us to just be out there. Now, if we're just out there, you're gonna know it. You gonna be able to listen to us and tell, but I, I hope to move with a mission. Story_ID: 79924 Speaker 1: Well it sounds like, that--it sounds to me like, that [W]VON is not just, it's not just charged with making a commitment to one position, or another, but by the very nature of what you are, you find yourself in the process of cutting issues, you know, and, and making a position (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you do. Speaker 1: --cause (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: You have to. I mean people have always relied on us to do that. And without me coming out and endorsing somebody--I'm not gonna do that. But I'm--and its subtle. But you can feel it. People knew we were supporting Roland Burris [HM] for that governor's race. I never endorsed him. I would never endorse a candidate. It's subtle. People knew that we had not gone all out for Jakes for this mayoral race. I didn't support [Richard M.] Daley. But I sure as hell didn't take the station and use it as a bully pulpit for Paul Jakes, so. And it very well could have been taken over that way. I mean, clearly, we got callers who do that. Speaker 1: Well, what would be the upshot of such a thing, if you would have taken a cause of somebody who decided that they--they decide, you know, without much popular opinion, that they are ought to, to run for office and they think that 'VON should support (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, they do it all the time. What you talking about. They done... (Laughter). Speaker 1: --What, what would be the upshot for the station if you took somebody's cause that did that just because they're a black candidate? Running for mayor, we, we had like I think, two with, two black candidates running for mayor and neither one of them really had a, much of a chance (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And one sued me, one sued me, I mean, you know. But, I'm not understanding your question. What would be the upshot--say that--explain it (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Meaning for the station, what would be the--if, if the station took up the cause of some person that (simultaneous) Speaker 2: And they won? Speaker 1: No, and they (simultaneous) Speaker 2: They lost? Speaker 1: Yeah, they, as predicted didn't win (laughter), but they (unclear)(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Like Roland Burris? (Laughter) What would be the what? (Laughter) Speaker 1: The upshot. What, what--I mean, what would you think--if the station would lose prestige if it took (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I think you lose, I think you lose credibility, you know. I think you lose credibility. Not with the Roland Burris piece. I mean, clearly that was the luck of the draw. That could have went either way. I knew which way it was going, but clearly he's, he was a qualified candidate. I mean, why not support a Roland Burris. Other than the fact that you knew in your hearts of hearts that he wasn't going to win. Paul Jakes brings another dynamic to it. I tell you, I, I always say I'm not very political and it, it should be--it's probably good that I'm not, because you probably could raise some real hell here, more than Cliff--I let Cliff [Kelley] raise. Cliff raises hell. But, I'm very excited about [President] Barack Obama [HM]. Will he win, I don't know. But I think he's got the makings of a great U.S. senator. Will the station support him? Um-hum. Yep. And I'm not supporting him cause he's the only African American candidate running for U.S. senator. I'm excited about Barack Obama. This is a dynamic young man. And, I looked at the political landscape of the State of Illinois. I've said this before, and every time I've say it, people raise their eyebrows, but it's very true. We have gotten a second generation of a democratic machine here. And Dan Hines, the controller, and [Rod] Blagojevich for mayor, and Lisa Madigan, all these are second-generation democratic machine. And the only body that we have to show is a, is a great guy, is Jesse White [HM] and a John Stroger [HM], both of them up in age. We don't see anybody coming out of that generation now that's standing in place--in that second generation. Barack is it. He's not the only one, but he, he puts us right there. And we've got to start supporting and passing the baton to a younger generation of folk. And stop letting these people just dying in these position cause they're scared to let them go. You know, where's the next Emil Jones [HM]? Where's the next, oh wow, John Stroger. I mean, Todd's there. But let's get these people trained and let's get them moving. That's why Barack excites me. That's why I'm willing to put my resources behind him. And I think we have got to stop being a reactionary people and become more proactive, proactive. And that's what I, I want to move 'VON to do. You know, stop voting because somebody called you a nigger. Come on, you know, vote because you got the power to make a change, and you believe that. That's what I want to do. Story_ID: 79925 Speaker 1: Do your staff meetings here have the tone of editorial meetings in a newspaper? Speaker 2: We meet twice a week. I was just coming out of a meeting right before we met. And then we meet every Thursday with the entire staff. I meet with the producers on Tuesdays. And I really just got back into that cause I had kinda gotten away from it. But I also saw the station getting away from some real conversation. You know, like I said, not that I'm the end all, but, I, I, I'm a good water cooler kind of person. I can talk about anything they're talking about around the water cooler. So I bring that element back in the programming. And, so, we meet often. And we decide what position we're going to take. How we want this to come out to the listening audience. Now, if you listen it don't always come out like that, cause you gotta tie in the callers. And who knows where they're going with it. But our presentation of it is it's developed right in here, from the guests, what the guests' position, who we--you know, what we're trying to put out there, all of that. Yeah, we spend some time on that. Story_ID: 79926 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me, like at this point, what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I want us to become more proactive. I want us to understand our, our economic strength. We, we really are a wealthy community. We don't know that. We act poor. We act needy. And we, we don't act independent financially. And I think that we, we need to exert more power, exert more power in that vein. I can't say anything about voting; my audience votes. So, they're going to do that. I would love to see them do more financially. And I'd love them to become less crab in the barrellish--if I can create a barrellish word. I think so often people come out of our community, and if they feel like they're going away from them, that they want to pull them back, you know. I want us to adopt a mentally of support for those of us that move on and that go bigger. I often fear that [W]VON, 'VON is in the process of moving. We're going to be moving over the next two years. Speaker 1: From this (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: From this facility. And we've relied so on our listeners for support financially, whatever. And I often wonder what their reaction is going to be to it. Oh, you know, 'VON--I'm moving actually from what they consider the West Side to the South Side. I wonder about what my West Side listeners will think, cause its always been that schism, you know what I mean. It's that type of thing. I, I don't want them to get caught down in the smallness of it. I want them to appreciate the bigger vision of whatever we are, whatever we are to become. Not that she's moving because she don't want to be on the West Side anymore, but she's moving because she's building a multi-multimedia complex, you know. That's what I want our people, to look at the bigger picture. We are a great community, a strong community. And, and I'm, I'm glad we're here, doing what we're doing. Story_ID: 79850 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you, what--since you've been around, you know, what do you think has been the greatest triumph of the [W]VON format in the black political world? Not just electoral politics, but just in terms of, you know, the dynamics of the community. Speaker 2: Oh, there are so many and all of them aren't big, I mean, they're small. I'd have to think about that. I mean, I think we triumph everyday just (unclear). We turn it on. But, I, you know, I get so many calls. We had somebody on from the Social Security, and this older lady called and she was crying on the phone about, you know, because of the show she was able to get her social security restored, and she'd been having problems. Those kinda small triumphs are just, you know, they make me feel so good. And so many of them--we helped this one gentleman, he was having problems with his kidney and, you know, it's just, it's so many of them, it really is, away from the big ones. The little small ones that you help just everyday; John Q. Public, get something done. It's just a great feeling to do that. Story_ID: 79851 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently, if you had to do it over again, you know, from, I mean, this point. Now, I know you're, you're still new (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --even though you've been around this all your life (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --In some ways you're, you're (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I want [W]VON to be a 24 hour station. I'm committed to that. That's my ultimate goal. Then after that I can retire (laughter), and let my sister take over. But that, that's my goal, just to see that happen. Cause the community wants it so bad and we should be. You know we're the only station in the country that shares a frequency with another station, in the country. I mean in the whole United States of America and all these 50 states (laughter)--sick. That's sick. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought about it and it's an odd experience when you've got WVON on in the morning and then all of a sudden it's a foreign language station, too. They, (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Good God, they're speaking in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They speak everything. It depends on what time you turn them on. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's Czech (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. I can always tell when I get a new listener too, a lot of times I can tell. Because they'll call me and say, "excuse me, I was wondering if--I had the radio on this morning and when I got back in the car (laughter). It's so funny, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --the story of my life. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --programming primarily (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --It's ethnic. It's Polish (simultaneous) Speaker 1: It's Polish. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. It's Polish, so. Something will work out for us. Speaker 1: Yeah, the signal too, sometimes its difficult to get if you're not in a car. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At home at night, sometimes I've tried to even listen to broadcast of my friends who are on and you can't get it very well. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, 'VON had a much stronger signal when there were less stations here. Now with the influx of college stations, it's just, its difficult. I--that's my other big complaint. The 24 hours, and "God, its so hard to reach you." That's the great thing about the Internet is that you'll be able to, be able to access us in, in a much better sound you don't have, don't have those problems. But, (simultaneous) Speaker 1: So that's in the works now? Speaker 2: Yeah, well it is on the Internet. We're just going through a different provider soon. So it's off because we're dealing with some legal aspects of it. But, yeah, it's been up on there for a while. But that's just one of my limitations, you know. I'm glad to reach the African Americans. I, I cover Chicago pretty good. I wish I had a stronger signal, of course, I do. Speaker 1: You're broadcasting out of Gary [Indiana] too right (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, I was, on WCFJ, I was simulcasting. But I pulled back in for the move, so once the move is complete, I'll revisit that. Cause I got so many calls--I didn't realize that I was wondering what our impact really was out there. And I saw it thereafter, because I got so many emails and calls, "hey, I can't hear you, what's the problem?" Well, you know, "what do we need to do?" that kind of thing. And I did that for two years. And it was a great relationship and I would like to see it, you know, reestablished, but, in budget cuts, you know, its one of the things that I decided to cut. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, what are some of the future plans? You mentioned the, the move. Speaker 2: Yeah. We're in the process of moving to East 87th Street in the Eighth Ward. We've acquired the old Soft Sheen building. People always say we have jingles that say 'VON is more than just a radio station, and it really is. I would like to see a multimedia complex come out of, of our, of our move there. It's a great location. You're looking at 55,000 square feet of office and warehouse space, and how apropos for 'VON to have, maybe a television studio, maybe. Some more broadcast facilities for community purposes, for people to come in and access. I got, I got big plans for over there. I don't wanna reveal them all to you guys but (laughter) I do. It's going to be something that people can look at and be proud of. Story_ID: 79852 Speaker 1: Now, we, we ask this question of everybody. You're so young its hard to, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --But, what do you consider as your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: I guess another chapter in the 'VON story would probably my legacy. Cause I don't think 'VON is here by chance. I think 'VON, you know how they say some things are meant to be. I think this station is meant to be. And I think God put me here to continue His mission for this station. Cause it really shouldn't be here. When you think about running radio stations and all the stations that are out here, how it survives is (unclear) it's just, it's hard to understand, just is. You said you can't hear it sometimes. How do these people stay on the air, you know. So I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) people still listen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I struggle with the antenna to find it. Speaker 2: See, (laughter) people still listening. They're committed to it. So, I think that's one of my legacies is to do that. The other, the other legacy is to, to, to help my people. Is to put things in place that will benefit them. And it will take, you know, I'm not Oprah Winfrey. I don't move the world. I, I don't have the world impact. But I think God's got me here to have the impact that I have, for the people that I touch. And that's it. I learned early on where I was supposed to be. And that's a good thing cause I got friends my age who still don't know. Now what am I--am I really doing what I'm supposed to do? I know I'm doing what I'm supposed to do. Speaker 1: So you never get tired of this association? Speaker 2: It's not a job; it's a way of life. Story_ID: 79853 Speaker 1: And one last question we always ask is how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, God. Now that's a hard one. How do I want to be remembered? I want to be remembered as somebody who was fair, just say, she--Melody was fair no matter what position--you know, somebody's gotta win, somebody's gotta lose; but it was ok to lose with her cause it was fair. You know, I, I really pride myself on trying, you know, not be selfish. You know, and to make the right decisions. My mother says, do the right thing. And you know, it doesn't always feel good, but I'll make it palatable for you. So that's what I wanna be remember as. I don't have to have built a monument, or you know, being the richest woman--that will never happen, or (laughter) or, you know something just so out of the ordinary; just being a decent person and being fair. That's what I want to be remembered as. Speaker 1: Well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you so much. Story_ID: 79854 Speaker 1: That's my Las Vegas Connection. I bought a second home in Las Vegas [Nevada] cause as I was telling you all, sometimes I do have to get away and rejuvenate. And those are all my friends in Vegas. That's what that is. This was in Christmas--at Christmas of this past year. And another young lady from Chicago has a home down there (unclear) that's at her house. But those are all the people I hang out with when I go to Vegas. And a lot of those people live in Chicago. They just have second homes. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: That's you in the back row in the black? Speaker 1: Yeah, the tall lady (laughter). Speaker 2: What the hell was I wearing? There's a gentleman that really needs no introduction, Minister Louis Farrakhan [HM]. We were at an event and I've never had a chance to take a picture with him. And that's the picture we took. That was about 2-3 years ago. That must have been 2000, something like that, 2001. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Remember I told you I had my own baby doll. That was her. That's Latrice, my sister, who works here now, who's working with me. That was taken in '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: I got a better picture of me and my husband. I got a better one. Boy, you make those pictures look so nice. Wow! Wow! And that's my husband. (Laughter) That's Pierre Cooper. We've been married for seven years. And he's just a great guy. He, he, he lets me just be me. That's so unusual (laughter) in a young man, as a husband. But he is really a supportive person; understands that, you know, I am career driven and he doesn't make a lot of demands of me and supports me. That's--he's a great person. This was taken in 1999, if not 2000. Speaker 1: One of the first articles done on me and my dad [Pervis Spann, HM], as kind of a generational passing torch. And that was--appeared in "Indigo", in their profile book in 1999. That's me, and my dad also has a picture of that. Just talking about the transition and, you know. Speaker 2: That's my photo when I made "Crain's" "Forty Under 40" in 2002. And just kind of talked about, you know, what I've done with the company, and that kind of thing. That got a lot of, lot of attention. "Crain's" really reaches the business community in Chicago. It's very well respected, so that helped a lot. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay..