 Story_ID: 467972 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers; Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name? Speaker 2: My name is Gloria Dean Randle Scott [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], that's G-L-O-R-I-A, D-E-A-N, R-A-N-D-L-E, Scott, S-C-O-T-T. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: April 14, 1938. Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth? Speaker 2: Houston, Texas, Jefferson Davis Hospital (laughter). Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This interview is being held at Jack Yates Senior High School [Jack Yates High School] in Houston, Texas which is my alma mater from high school. Speaker 1: All right, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 8, 2007. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 467973 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna begin with what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color probably is red. Speaker 1: All right. And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like fish a great deal. I love peach cobbler. Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right, and the time of year that you love the best? Speaker 2: It's springtime. Speaker 1: All right. And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not really as long as it's near the water. Most of our vacations have been near the water. I love to fish, I'm a great fisher person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My husband [Will B. Scott] and I would take vacations on the Gulf Coast or on the East Coast of North Carolina, down in Acapulco [Mexico], with Christmas we've gone a number of places. They always have been around water. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have a favorite phrase, and I use to motivate other people and to talk about what I think is the reality of life. And it is we must do, D-O and not just be, B-E. Speaker 1: Oh, very good. Story_ID: 467974 Speaker 1: Now, tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Juanita Bell Randle, J-U-A-N-I-T-A, B-E-L-L, Randle, R-A-N-D-L-E. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born? Speaker 2: She was born April--I'm sorry, June 13, 1912. Speaker 1: And where she was born? Speaker 2: She was born in LaRue, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Up in East Texas. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell me their names? Speaker 2: I can, Henry Bell, and Ella Allen Bell. Speaker 1: Do you remember much about them? Speaker 2: I remember a great deal about them (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay well let's, let's talk about your grandparents first. Speaker 2: All right. I guess my earliest memories of my grandparents f- fall around the time that I was, might be about one and ha- one and a half to two. My mother lived in Houston [Texas] here with me, my oldest sister [Greta Randle] and older brother [Billy Randle]. We were all tots of course, and shortly after I was a year old, my mother contracted pneumonia and in those days, there was no cure for pneumonia and what happened is that she had to go on bed rest so that her lungs would heal. So my grandfather, in the middle of the winter got a man from East Texas, to drive his pickup truck to Houston to get the three children since he knew that my mother couldn't handle them and had to really be on rest and she was their youngest daughter. So they came to Houston and in the front of the truck my grandfather and this man who was driving and me wrapped up as a baby and my oldest sister and brother who were four and five and six years older than me, rode in the back of the truck. So they took me to East Texas to the farm. Now I don't remember that ride, I cannot say I do, but it's interesting because I do have some memories of being around the wood burning stove in the house we lived in, in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], at that time when my grandparents came, my grandfather came and I stayed with my grandparents until I was about three, three and a half years old up in East Texas and I remember them being very warm and taking good care of me and making my older uncles, their children take of me and they had lots of stories about that. But when my mom recovered and was able to come back to Houston, when I was about three or maybe a little over three, she came and got me, but they wouldn't let her bring the other two children, because they still thought she might be too frail, so that started out with them. Then we would go back at Christmastime. My grandfather every October, after the harvest was in, would send us peanuts to roast and potatoes, sweet potatoes he'd dug up, walnuts, they always send packages to us and inquired about us and then we would go and visit. Story_ID: 467975 Speaker 1: And in the summertime, we would go, I would always go back to East Texas to spend summers with them, and my [maternal] grandfather [Henry Bell] taught me a lot of things; he taught me how to ride a horse and he called, he would talk to me and he would call me his little--I thought he was calling me his little darkie. But, I learned later that he was calling me his little donkey and the reason that he was calling me that, is they say I always had strong legs and my uncles, in fact I have an uncle who's eighty-seven, who never lets me forget this, every year, he tells me how I caused him to get whippings because my grandparents would leave me in the bed with the cover on me, my grandmother would come to the room and the cover would be off and she had told him to watch over me and she would give him a whipping because they weren't doing what they were supposed to do. And he said, they tried to tell 'em, "We, that girl had the cover on her, we didn't, she kicked it off." And my grandmother said, "Stop lying, you know that girl didn't kick that cover off." So they knew then that I had strong legs and my grandfather called me his little donkey, because I would kick the covers off. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But he did lots of things with me and took me to the fields with him, my grandmother baked and cooked a lot, they had a smokehouse with food in it that would be cured for the winter and bacon and so forth, and he'd always take me through there and tell me about it, I beca- I could go with him when he slopped the pigs and fed the cows. And then I would go with my oldest sister [Greta Randle] and brother [Billy Randle] and my cousins sometimes to the spring to get water, they got water from the spring and I would have a syrup can, since I was so little, and again I had short legs, they (unclear), I was short and the older kids would talk about a ghost that lived down there, they thought Mr. Ed Robinson's [ph.] ghost, so sometimes on the way back they'd say, "Here comes Mr. Ed Robinson." So we--everybody would start running and of course they were all bigger than me, their legs were longer, they'd leave me behind, I'd be running with my little legs and the water would stop up on my legs and I'd get to the house and the sand would be on them and my grandfather would sa- and my grandmother would call and say, "All right come here you all, line up, 'cause you all been scaring that baby again." And they'd get a whipping, so they always did all these things. And so my grandfather just really, my grandparents were just loving and they watched over us and taught us about picking peas and work, I'd have to help as much as could, again get the water, I was little, and they took us to church all the time with them on Sunday and, really. So, I enjoyed them even as I grew up and as I grew up a youngster and a teenager, they never came to Houston [Texas] to visit, but we would go there. And I remember my grandfather taking me one day, into the field across the other side of the highway, you would call it and he said, "I want to teach you something today," and we were walking, he said, "If you're ever down here and you're walking along the side like we are and you hear something in the bushes walking, don't run and don't say anything, just keep walking." He said, "Maybe if you speed up and if it speeds up, then you slow down and you find the nearest house that you can go to, but don't do anything but keep walking," and said, "as soon as you can get to that house, then you run," he said, "because that's a panther stalking you." He said, "They walk along," and said, "you're short and all," he said, "but I want you to know that." So you, you know all kinds of things like that, that as a child, they would teach us and tell us about so you wouldn't panic or whatever and, so I have great memories of them. And I was very, very soft, I was thirteen when he died and I really, really didn't want him to die. My grandmother lived quite a bit longer, she was, she did come once to Houston, Ella [Ella Allen Bell], and she, she would snuff and she loved too kiss us when we come and had enough snuff bottles, she and my aunts, her sisters, to make a yard full of fences, this is how that was, I loved the legacy really much, but. And she always told me, since we lived in the city, my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] moved to the city because she said she didn't wanna live the rest of her life in the country. So, there was a college in Tyler [Texas], Texas College, where my grandparents sent my older aunt to and they were gonna send my mother when she got ready to go to college. She was a very smart girl in high school, but she had to leave home 'cause she said if she stayed in the country, she knew she wasn't gonna ever get out, so she wasn't going to Texas College. So my grandfather used to tell her that she should've stayed there instead of going to the city, but they loved us, and it was great love. Story_ID: 467976 Speaker 1: Do you know how much education your [maternal] grandparents [Ella Allen Bell and Henry Bell] had? Speaker 2: My grandfather didn't have any education beyond very, very early, and I don't know how many grades 'cause they were in the country school. And my grandmother had about three years of school, of education. Speaker 1: Do you know whether they learned to read and write? Speaker 2: They did. My grandmother, I knew, could read and write, I'm not sure about my grandfather, because he would always have her writing and doing things, so I don't really know if he could or not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he adapted well with whatever, you know, he was doing and he would conduct business and she would always be there, so he might have. Speaker 1: Okay. What about the land? Did they own the land? Speaker 2: Yes, they owned acres in East Texas and it's still in our family which they farmed and sold the products. They sold cotton, peas, watermelons in the summertime, and two or three other crops that they had, but they owned the land. Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge how they acquired the land, did they buy it or was it left to them? Speaker 2: It was bought. It was bought collectively with my grandfather, his part of the land. Th- there were two sets of land, and we still have those, my grandfather's land which they lived on when I was growing up, early life, to tell I went to the other place, which is my grandmother's family's land and it was bought into the family when they first came over, the generation before my great-grandparents, it would have been. My great, my great-grandfather on my maternal side was a Blackfoot Indian [Native American], because the Indians would give protection to the slaves who, if they could get to Texas, 'cause Texas was not a state at the time, if they could get into Texas, they could get into one of the Indian reservations and the Indians would take of them and there were a lot of, I won't say marriages, but there were a lot of productions of, with Indians on my, and then--so when, when they left home and my great-grandfather who was Indian and my great-grandmother who was not, they acquired some land and then they passed it on to their children, and they bought other land. They bought it in small parcels as I understand it and my grandfather's people did the same thing, he and his brothers, they came across into Texas further east and had to come further west because of something that hap- an incident that they said happened. But they got together and bought land and they farmed it. Speaker 1: What was the incident? Do you know what it was? Speaker 2: The incident related to some white men running them out, really. They said that they thought that somebody had killed somebody or had threatened to kill somebody and they just kind of routed out all of the black people, especially the black males who in the area, they had said that they were gonna come and kill them. So then he and his brother left and came further west into --near where, near Tyler [Texas] in LaRue [Texas] where they are. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 467977 Speaker 1: Now on your, your father's side, tell me your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name was Freeman Randle, R-A-N-D-L-E, and I did know my grandfather and grandmother on my father's side. Speaker 1: Where was your father born? Speaker 2: In Wallis, Texas. Speaker 1: And when? Speaker 2: I'm not really sure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not sure? Speaker 2: But I know, I guess-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I could figure it out. He was sixty-one when he died in 1965, so-- Speaker 1: All right, that's fine. Speaker 2: That's the year. Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother, Mama Randle we called her. Speaker 1: Do you know her first name? Speaker 2: Yes, Caroline [Caroline Newsome Randle]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Caroline came and lived with us for a while in Houston [Texas] when we were growing up and she was, had lived--had an elementary school education. My paternal grandfather did not have a, an earlier, I think he only went to the first or second grade and-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Freeman [John Randle] too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was Freeman. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And he kind of was a laborer. My grandmother was kind of ill and that's why she lived with us. She came out of the country and lived with us, then she went to California. She and a number of their children moved to California early in our lives and stayed there until she died in fact. Yeah (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, you're back on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Most of her children, they all went out, moved out to California during the time of the war and got jobs there, and so we were separated from them and didn't really get to see them very much anymore. Speaker 2: All right. Do you know about the land in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wallis? Speaker 2: Where the--yeah. Speaker 1: I don't-- Speaker 2: The Randles? Speaker 1: No, I don't know anything about their land, I don't really think they had any land. All of their children, they all came to Houston-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then went on to California and one other uncle who was near, near my father's age lived down the street from us, and then another lived in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], they all came to Houston. I don't really think that they had any land (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Land, okay. Story_ID: 467978 Speaker 1: And tell me about your siblings? Speaker 2: I have four siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My oldest sibling is a girl named Greta [Greta Randle], G-R-E-T-A, who is six years older than I, was six years older than I. She, when my grandfather [Henry Bell] came and got us, they kept her. She stayed in that country, as we called it until, until I was seven years old and my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] brought them back. But I always say, she was the best of my mother's children. She really was, she's even tempered, really outgoing, outgiving, really very, very gracious and good person and she came to Houston [Texas], back to Houston, she'd been as a young child, and then after my mother got well and all and, she, she got me when I was three and I was home alone in Houston with them from age three to six and then going into being seven. And my mom got pregnant with my next youngest sister and so she brought the other children home so I had an instant family when I was six. (Laughter) But Greta went to high school at Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], she went to Jack Yates and was interested in home economics and was an excellent cook really that's what she, that became her profession and she worked in various places over the years and made excellent desserts. But she had four children and did a really good job I think of making sure they all went to high school and on her salary, and on her work, and she was a single parent mother. Interestingly enough, her first child when he was born, the young man who was the father and she were going to get married, but his mother didn't want him to marry her because they were of a different class I guess, whatever. So, and she worked very honest woman and just was a very good woman and was a really good role model for me. Speaker 1: Okay, and the-- Speaker 2: My brother-- Speaker 1: --next one? Speaker 2: --was the next child. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I would say that probably my brother, but of course, the only boy, there were four girls and one boy. And I'm not sure what the dynamics were at work, but he was not quite up to doing the things he should have done as I would see it, and we often had discussions, he didn't do as well in school. He was interested in running track and in those days athletics was just that and there was no moving forward so he didn't really study he was not dumb, he just didn't study as well. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Billy, his name is Billy, Billy Randle, and he's three years older than I am. And when they came from the country, Billy was afraid of the city, although he'd been there as a small child and fire engines and things when he would run in the house and he was very timid and afraid. And the way my uncles talk about my causing them to get whippings, he caused me to get lots of whippings, because I was kind of an outgoing child and I, we had went to elementary school [Blackshear Elementary School, Houston, Texas] not too far away and when he came from the country, as they did in those days, they put him back a few grades. So he was older than I am and he was--but, so he, and I was a year ahead of myself I would say in school and so we would get out, I'd get out at two o'clock and of course he'd get out at three, and we lived a block and a half from elementary school which was a very simple walk as far as I was concerned and so, the first few days I took him to school and showed him how to come home, and then, I came on home and stopped waiting for him, and he didn't get home, I had to go back and find him, he couldn't figure out how to get home. So, I think I said something to him like, "I don't understand what's wrong with you because we all live but, you have two streets to cross," da-dah-da-dah-da. And in my neighborhood--this is kind of getting into that, but it's about my brother really. My neighborhood, we had neighbors who, the whole neighborhood raised the children of everybody and for some reason they thought I walked in front of Billy. Billy really kind of got on my nerves, I guess because he wouldn't do things right and so I, I wasn't walking because I thought I was better, but my neighbors would tell my mother, "I saw them and she was walking in front of him (laughter)." And that's the truth, it was the truth, but it wasn't because I was better, and so, and like I said, and she'd just leaves him places, well he was older than I was, and I really thought he should, he should have been leading me, but at any rate. So, one day we were coming home and so my mother said, "Come on in here because you're gonna get a whipping." And I got, "What did I do to get a whipping?" She said, "You were le- leaving your brother again and I've told you that's your brother and da-dah-da-dah-da," so I got a whipping and so I thought, okay. And so I'd say, I'd make him walk next to me and so forth and, and not (background noise) do kinds of things like that-- Story_ID: 467979 Speaker 1: So you were talking about your brother, Billy [Billy Randle]? Speaker 2: Billy. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yes, and I was saying that Billy was timid and kind of clingy, and one of the things that has happened in my life as it unfolds, you'll see, is that there were a lot of people who were external supporters and one such person was, this is really about Billy, but it was at the church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] that I attended which was right across the street from where we lived and Mrs. Milligan [ph.] who was the daughter of the minister, Reverend Sykes [W.M. Sykes], had sort of taken up with me and you would have called her a godmother, but she called herself my gospel mother and every Sunday after church I would go home with her and her husband, they had no children, to have dinner and spend the afternoon and then they would bring me back for BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], and I would go home. So, Billy again was just kind of, I don't know, and so I took him to Sunday school with me, I guess the first week or so after they were there and he was to go home after church which was right down the street (laughter), right across the street and down four houses. So I got ready to go with Mrs. Milligan and Mr. Reverend Milligan, and he, he was just standing there outside the, the car and I just, I remember this vividly and I couldn't lie about it. And so, he was just standing there so, I said, "Little boy, what are standing here for?" (Laughter) And he just kept standing and so Mrs. Milligan didn't know that my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] had brought the children, and so, she said, "Well, we're gonna be leaving so be careful," and so we left him standing there. So, I guess he went home and told my mother (laughter) that I had left him. So the phone rang at Mrs. Milligan's, a lot of people didn't have phones in those days, and my mother told Mrs. Milligan to bring me home, so I got brought home and I got a whipping she said, "Why did you ignore, why were you ignoring your brother?" (Laughter) Who knows why I was. So, to make a long story short, but Billy, I helped him as much as I could as I understood a lot more, he was slow, I would say that, slow, but not dumb, and I think he was lazy, and I would say that to him, so I'm not saying anything that I didn't say to him often. He wouldn't study and do the things he needed to do, unlike the things I did and I tried to get him to do those, so he ran track a great deal, he graduated from high school. He took up with a group of fellows though who were not doing what they should be doing too, and his life kind of took a different pathway and he graduated from high school probably two years, at least a year after he should have graduated, and then he went to work and he left town and went, stayed in another city and then he came back, he has a little--a daughter, we found out about and tried to make contact with her. In fact, I supported her for several years and he ended up with diabetes and he died a few years ago. Story_ID: 467980 Speaker 1: Then my next sibling after me is named Carolyn [Carolyn Randle]. She's seven years younger than I am and she's the child who was born, my mom [Juanita Bell Randle] got pregnant and she brought the other two children [Greta Randle and Billy Randle] home in that year and I was six, and then Carolyn was born in February. So having been an only child at home for, two, at least two or three years, and suddenly I had a huge family (laughter), had had all these children. So she was the baby and of course we had to ta- to take of her, and she was a good little baby but she had a habit of crying and holding her breath to make you do whatever she wanted you to do (laughter). And so, I went through this several times with her, then one day I decided not, nothing is wrong with this child. I mean, we'd have to stay home sometimes from school 'cause my mother worked, had to work and of course my father [Freeman Randle] worked and so I would have to come home from school, if my mother had something to do, and so I said, now Carolyn, I know nothing is wrong with her, she'd just hold her breath, so I decided to swat her on her behind and she said, hah-hah-hah-hah, and then she started to cry again and then she stopped so that was our link out. But I had a lot of--I had to babysit for her and to help with her and help her to develop and she developed into quite a good young lady. Again I'm seven years older than she is so, when I was seventeen, and I was going to college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and she was just turning ten. She liked art and to do things and she, since she was this, I call them the second half of the family because it's seven years, the, the three of us. And then I'm right in the middle and everything that's said about middle children is true, we have the uppers and the lowers (unclear) there so I helped to take care of Carolyn, take her to kindergarten and so forth and to school and tried to be a good role model. She liked to do things, we all went to church together and we had a real--have a good relationship and she liked to practice things and she was--she got to--she wasn't in the glee club, she was in some clubs in high school and she grew up, when she graduated from high school. I went away to college when I was seventeen, when she was just turning ten, to Indiana and I didn't really ever come back home to live again, I came back and forth, but then I went on to graduate school [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], so I was away for quite a few years. And when she graduated she went to California where my grandmot- my paternal grandmother [Caroline Newsome Randle] and them, in the family were to go to school, to go to junior college out there and she went to junior college out there and then she came home, she came to Indiana where we were and stayed with us for a while. Then she started to work for the post office and that's where she spent her life work at the post office. She has two daughters, one of my nieces here is her oldest child, and she still works for the post office and is just about to retire. She's come to retirement. Story_ID: 467981 Speaker 1: And my very youngest sister is Linda [Linda Randle Anderson]. And she's eleven years younger than I am, and Linda was a baby, the baby of family and all that that implies. And so (laughter) she went to school, did well in elementary and secondary school, but my father [Freeman Randle] died when she was--in 1965, so Linda was in high school at that time, in junior high, and she came to live with us in Indiana and went to the university high school, Indiana University's lab school [Indiana University Laboratory School, Bloomington, Indiana] and enjoyed it, she was thirteen, I think at the time, somewhere around that age and she made friends and was, she was very, she's a very smart young woman. And she had a friendship group that included her, a couple of children who were from the George [ph.] family who lived in the apartment building, another little African American boy and another little Caucasian girl and her, and they were really good friends and, but the teenagers and all and she--one of the things I'm gonna say about her, she, we tried to help her not tell fibs and so forth and things and to get her homework and we, my husband and I both were in graduate school. So one day I came home early and the television was on, I could hear it outside the apartment, so I knocked on the do--on the door so she knew I was coming and I turned the key, so she turned the television off and ran in the back room and started like she was doing her homework. So I said, "Linda? Were you watching television?" "Oh no," she said, "I wasn't watching television." I said, "I know I heard the television on." She said, "No, I don't think you did, I think you didn't hear the television." I said, "Oh well, you know what? It probably turned on by itself and it was in there on and you didn't even know it was on, so you know what? When Will [Will B. Scott] comes home we're gonna discuss it, we're gonna punish this television set, 'cause it is doing these things it had no business doing." So we took the television set and we put it in the closet and we locked it up and so she and her little friendship group that's, they all came upstairs and they wanted to see the television being punished. (Laughter) It was amazing. Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're gonna stop here and change the tape. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. (Laughter) Oh I tell you. That was something. Story_ID: 467982 Speaker 1: So, you were telling me about how the television was being punished (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the television was punished. So, Linda [Linda Randle Anderson] brought, she told all her little friends so they all came upstairs and knocked on the door and they said, "Linda told us that you all were punishing the television?" And she said, "Isn't that right?" And so, we said, "Yes, we are." So they started giggling and they said, "Can we see it?" (Laughter) And we said sure. So we took them the closet and showed them and we said, and we're gonna tell your parents about it because the television apparently just with Linda, just grabs her and makes her turn it on, either turns itself on and makes her watch it when she's supposed to be doing other things, and I'll bet yours do too (laughter). And so, that was the television saga, but she developed a really good friendship group and she stayed with us and then she went home, after my father [Freeman Randle] died, my father died, and the year after he died, my mom [Juanita Bell Randle] wanted to come back home to Houston [Texas] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: So she came back home and went to school here. Story_ID: 467983 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother [Juanita Bell Randle] and father [Freeman Randle] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: We talked briefly about your mother being ill, but let's talk about your relationship-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: --with her at home. Speaker 2: When she came and got me, when I was three, and brought me back to Houston [Texas], and so, she and my father and I lived with another couple down on St. Charles [St. Charles Bay], and I learned later, in ob- observing a lot of family, black families were like that, you didn't have enough money to have, to rent a house by yourself, and so the two bedroom houses, a lot of people would have two families living in them. And so, we lived in the house with Kate [ph.] and Melvin [ph.], down on St. Charles, and of course, my father went to work, my mom worked, she worked as a domestic and she also had a job though that she got downtown in what we would call Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company], it was called W.T. Grant, in the soda fountain area. And, she wanted me to go--she put me in kindergarten, I, went out but she brought me back, Fourth Missionary Baptist Church [Houston, Texas] kindergarten, Fourth Missionary Baptist Church and which was not a, real long way from where we lived and there was a private kindergarten, a very good kindergarten and always wanted me to learn things, and she was very much, almost adamant about learning. And so this kindergarten experience turned out to be one of the really best things in my life, and Lou Jane White [ph.] was the principal of the school of the kindergarten, so I went there for two years, until I was five and I graduated but the school, every Friday, they would give immunizations, so if your left arm was from the last week, you'd get the right arm, because doses of vaccines then were so strong then, you just couldn't give them to children all at one time and so, they'd check us, they would give us every Friday. And a man named Mr. Martin [ph.], I, I'm sure they had, I know they had to pay for this so, I don't know how much, Mr. Martin drove a station wagon and he would pick the children up and take us to the kindergarten and that she explained to me, 'cause my arm would hurt so bad and I would--said, "I don't wanna go; I don't want it," and she'd say, "You have to go and it's for you to keep you from dying." That's the way she would say it. So, every Friday, I'd get in the car and cry with the rest of the kids. And the kindergarten had various programs where parents would come, it was an interesting, as I look back on it later, and you had a lot of learning so my mother always went, sometimes my father would go but they would always go. So, at the--when I was five, I, we had graduation and I was the valedictorian of my kindergarten class. Now that, that tells you about the kindergarten, I mean, to have that kind of expectations and all, and I, I learned to play the triangle; that was an instrument in the band. That's what--they would have, band concerts with the kindergarten band, the parents would come and they'd be so pleased. And then I'll just jump forward later in life, after I met, my husband's [Will B. Scott] a musician that I married and I told him I knew how to play the triangle he said, "You can't play a triangle, the triangle only has one note," (laughter). But anyway whatever it was, I played it. So the, the Fourth Missionary Baptist Church kindergarten was very good. So my mom, when I had graduated from that when I was five, and my dad, if I could just throw him in for a moment, the smallpox vaccine was the last one we were to get and we got that right after graduation, and my father took me that morning 'cause school was out, on his way to work. We rode the bus and he got off and took me over to the kindergarten, and th- there was a, kind of what we call a trailer outside, the health department had a trailer outside and the Nurse Johnson [ph.] was the lady giving the shots and so I was all dressed up and I had on my socks and my little black shoes, I remember this as if it were yesterday and I was, my ha- father was holding my hand and the children would go in there, they would be crying and, and you know, I knew the shots hurt so, they told me, "Hold your breath and it won't hurt." You know, children told the children those, people tell the children those things. So, we went in, and I was trying to be a big girl because my daddy was there with me. And so he was holding my hand and Nurse Johnson rolled up my sleeve and stuck this needle in it and I took a big breath to try to hold it and that needle just seemed it was penetrating my whole arm, and it was hurting bad, and so I finally let out a cry and a wail, crying and so then she finally took this needle, the needle looked like it was sixteen inches long and my poor little arm just went limp, so my daddy took me out and stopped my crying. He sat there with me but he had to go on to work so he waited for the bus to take me back home. Now, I'm five years old, and this is again how the times have really changed, so he put me on the bus and I knew how to get off the bus at the right place, at the end of the bus stop and to walk home from elementary school which is why I didn't understand why my brother [Billy Randle] didn't know that later on, but anyway (laughter). So, I got--I was on the bus and I was holding my arm and when I got home, Margie [ph.] was the girl who was babysitting and I told her my arm was hurting so my mother called, I remember about, I don't know what time, maybe it was when she had lunch and Margie told her my arm was hurting and so she told her put a hot towel on it and it should be better. And so, she put the hot towel on it, it helped a little, so when she, my mother came home, she bought me a huge bag of popcorn to help with whatever the pain, so that, that was the end of my kindergarten. Story_ID: 467984 Speaker 1: But then I was five years old, and that was like in May or June, and in September school was starting up, but you had to be six years old to go to the first grade, and for children whose birthdays were not, you had to stay out a year. So my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] decided that I shouldn't stay out of school, and she and Mrs. Lou Jane White [ph.], who was the principal, both said that I had learned too much and I was ready to go to first grade. So somehow they conspired a way that they would not present my birth certificate, so my mother took me to school for the first grade. She did not take my birth certificate, so she told the teacher that she would send it by me later that week, I think Thursday or Friday, they had to, teachers have to, I know now I have to identify students and you get them logged in. So this is another woman who enters my life, and was a lifelong friend and mentor and very important in my life and that's Virginia Perry Norris, who was my first grade teacher. So Mrs. Norris signed me in when my mother told her I was five, I mean, six years old, and so forth and she was looking at me, and so every day she would ask me, "Did your mother send your birth certificate?" And I would say, "No ma'am," and so Mrs. Norris, said later she was observing me, she said obviously I was a little smart little girl because I could, everything that we had during that week, I could do well and plus she said I knew, I seemed to know all the children from my neighborhood. I was so tiny, I'd have to stand on my feet to look out the window, but I'd say, at recess when the kids used to have recess as they should have it again, that's just an editorial, I, I'd point and say, "Ralph Jones [ph.], Ralph Gilbert [ph.]," and all the kids who lived in my neighborhood, so she said, she observed me pretty closely. So she said she'd catch me off guard, she said, "Little girl, come here. How old are you?" And she said I would say, "My mother said I'm six years old." And she said every time she, she did that all week long and my mother sent, never sent the birth certificate and she said I never said I'm six, or looked away or what--I said, "My mother said I'm six years old." So she decided that she would just not report that she didn't have my birth certificate and leave me in school, because I could do all the things the other kids did so that's, so my mom, that was one of the things that she did (laughter) very early on for me. So--and she was always interested in our educations, so I went on to school and progressed and then by the time I was near ready for, in fact, at the end of high first at the second grade, they were suggesting that I would get skipped, that I was smart enough to move on to the second or third grade, whichever it was and my, my mother said no. I guess since she knew I was already a year younger, she didn't know I--so she wouldn't let me get skipped. Story_ID: 467985 Speaker 1: She kept a tab on us and that time I was still alone without my sister [Greta Randle] and brother [Billy Randle] being there and we had moved to another house on Sawyer Street which is where I spent the, the time from five years old up to I graduated from high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and all on Sawyer Street. And that's where we lived, we also shared the front bedroom with a two bedroom house with a friend Margie's [ph.] mother was there, Margie, the girl who's babysitting for me. And then the war [World War II, WWII] started and they went to California, and so when they left to go to California-- Speaker 2: Well let me ask you-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --about you, your father [Freeman Randle], what did he do for a living? Speaker 1: He was a chef cook. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He worked at Lindsay's Cafe [ph.] in Houston [Texas] at the Cotton Exchange Building [1884 Houston Cotton Exchange Building]. He and my uncle, his brother who lived near us, he was the main chef cook for mos- all--all the basic foods and my uncle was the pastry cook with the, desserts cook and the man they worked for, Lindsay [ph.] was a white man who had a ranch, so all of his food, his cows and everything he brought from his ranch. And the Cotton Exchange Building is just like the New York Exchange, but for cotton since that's a big--it's a big commodity in the South, so it was a major building with, and they only served lunch, I guess breakfast and lunch. And I put that in because my father told him about his children and of course my uncle, he and my uncle were there, my uncle didn't have any children and they helped as they could, but by the time there got to be five of us. And so Lindsay did this, my father asked him, since he knew about foods, so my father asked him to give him the things that he would normally throw away, like kidneys, beef kidneys, the--what people call lights, brain of pork, the pork bones that they didn't cook, now they do of course, cook and serve. All the foods, all the meats that they didn't use, he would just be throwing away, my father asked him if he could have those so he could feed his family, and he gave them. So, so he, he brought home, we had like beef tongue, you know, when I grew up, I went places people said, "Beef tongue?" I said, "Oh yes, beef tongue is very rich in protein." And he would cook it, he would boil it in onions and garlic and so forth, and then we'd tear, take the outside part off with a little (unclear) on it and you'd have roast meat, I mean beef and we'd make sandwiches with it and eat. And then, so all kinds of foods we had and kidneys, when the fellows used to tease me in high school, my father told me this, is another part of his kind of humor. My legs I guess have always been a question in my family and so he said, he would tell me, he said, "Now don't let those boys be messing with you," this is what he's saying, he said as I was growing to teens. He said, "They're going to be bothering you because you've got nice legs," he said, "you just tell them your daddy said don't bother you that those are kidney legs." He said, "The reason you have those nice legs is because you've gotten all that good protein," and so forth, that was a part of his humor. But he worked very hard, he fed us and he didn't make a lot of money. And like I said, my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] worked full time but, but I've, I know that his having asked Lindsay for the food made all the difference in the world for us, because we didn't have money, we didn't have spending money, and we didn't eat a lot of fancy, we didn't eat any fancy meats or whatever, every now and then, maybe we'd have some pork chops, things like that but we had back ribs and good food, and all the food that people now see as whatever they call it (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But the food we grew up with and ate and had really gr- really good meals, so-- Story_ID: 467986 Speaker 1: The one thing about him [Scott's father, Freeman Randle] that, and I grew to enjoy and, and like, his one thing he wanted to do is on Saturday, he worked six days, Monday through Saturday and then Saturday they got off at noon, and they'd have to clean up everything. And so on Saturday, he would wanna go down on Milam Street here in Houston [Texas] which is an area downtown where black people were. There were dentist offices and things, and he would wanna go over and spend the rest of the evening with his buddies and drink beer. He loved beer, and so he did and so I would go, as I grew up, I guess I was seven or eight and I would go to Lindsay's Cafe [ph.] on Saturdays on the bus--we never had a car--and I would get the money and bring it home and he would keep out some money for him and he would go over on Milam and my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] didn't really like that, but that, that was, I learned in later life, that was the only thing that he did, when he would go with his friends, and so that's what he would do on Saturday evenings. And then, my father didn't like organized religion and I grew to understand that greatly as I grew up (laughter). But he was very religious, like in my house we had prayer in the mornings and we had prayer at night before we went to bed, he read the Bible and knew the Bible better than a lot of people, and on Sundays, when we would go to church, after my mother started back to church for a while, I was the only person in my family who went to church, but he would stay home and cook dinner every Sunday so we could go to church and, and he read the Bible with us and, and he just, this is what he, this is his words, he would say, and I know this is gonna sound strange cause people don't like to use the N word, but it was not used in a disparaging way, and he said, "N can be nothing, and N in the church really aren't anything." He said, "They're evil and corrupt and all this," he said "So don't tell me anything about churches," but he was religious and raise us in that way. And I, I guess the only really big regret I have probably in my whole life is that I never got a chance to give him some relief, yeah, I was growing up and I was going to school and I made a deliberate decision for example myself to go all the way through school so I could help my family 'cause I knew I couldn't pull them all along with me and try to do that. And so, he got ill and he died right at, right before--the year before I graduated with my doctorate and so I really was, that's something I really, I had great plans to be able to do things for him and, you know, raise him up and let him travel and so forth so. Speaker 2: Do you know where your father got his training to become a-- Speaker 1: A cook (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a chef? Speaker 1: I really don't. I don't if he ha- had it when he came from, from Wallis [Texas], or what, I do. I really don't. He and my, and nor where my uncle got his training to be the pastry cook. They might have had jobs 'cause they came as full, as young adults when they came to Houston as full adults so they could have worked and we never really talked about it, but-- Story_ID: 467987 Speaker 1: You grew up; the war [World War II, WWII] began, and you were talking about having enough to eat, did you ever realize that your family was poor? Speaker 2: Well we knew that we didn't have a lot of money. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And that we were poor in that sense, yes we, I did. I knew that my neigh- most of the, in my neighborhood, for example, I knew the poorest people, we were one of the poorest families, there were about three families. I could have made a sociological chart of the people in my neighborhood from those who had really good jobs, as good as they were in those days, you know, we thought and all the way down to those of us whose parents didn't, and a lot of the people in our neighborhood and I, we knew everybody in our neighborhood, the street-- Speaker 1: Well what was the makeup of the neighborhood (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The makeup of the-- Speaker 1: --in which you lived? Speaker 2: --neighborhood, I would say the person who had the most was the man who kind of owned his own business, he was a carpenter and he fi- he fixed things and built things and so he had his own business and he probably made the most collective money of anybody in the, the neighborhood. And his wife and my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] were very good friends, they--in fact his wife is the person who got my mother going back to church and I'm trying to think of her name, right. Then, then there were about four families who were related to the [U.S.] military and therefore you had military money coming in, although the men were away, their wives and children were there, so they would be the next level I would say of people. And then there were people who worked at day laboring jobs but they were consistent jobs and then there were a couple of people, I'm not sure what they did, but they made enough money that their houses were well furnished, I'll put it that way. And, in every case though, the, the man and woman worked in, in our neighborhood every, every family in our neighborhood, both man and woman worked except for one family and th- this woman I learned later, I th- I said she didn't work, but she was a seamstress, so she made things at home, that was her business and that--but everybody else went to work every day in the neighborhood and there was one man I know who did kind of sheetrock and so forth, and I guess you'd call him a carpenter, but he worked for like other companies and people. Then the people who were right next door to us the woman was domestic and I think Mr. Ralph [ph.] worked at a food store, like a big chain food store and like stocking things, stockroom man, I think that's what he did. Then the people down the street were, I would guess you would call them middle laborers, kind of day laborers, but had work every day. And so, I, I wouldn't--I don't know exactly, so it was really a low income neighborhood. The man at the very end of the neighborhood was the funeral home owner Waco [Texas], and so he had good income coming. He didn't stay all the time; he went back and forth there, and then the people on the corner, I guess I'm, I should get to them because they probably had more money than even the man I thought had his own business. And that was the Chandlers [ph.], they had a filling station on the corner and they had, you know, candies and things inside the filling station for oil and so forth and so-- Speaker 1: And all these people were black? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was a to--right here in, it was in Third Ward [Houston, Texas] and I lived on one of the streets that, I lived on Sawyer Street and you've seen the paintings of the artist row houses in, in Houston [Texas]? Well, I lived in a row house, the house in fact that I grew up in on that street is still there. I've been trying to find out who owns it, I really th- would like to buy it. It's a, I went and took pictures of it one day and went all the way through it and a it was much, much smaller than I've ever even remember in my head, but it was, but it was a real neighborhood, real neighborhood, and a lot of camaraderie in it. And there was one woman whose husband was kind of a man in the church, he worked for the church and again I didn't know people worked for the churches and she, I used to do work for her, I started when I was about ten or eleven doing kind of clerical work for some of the people, especially the women who were in, like the lodges and so forth. There was one woman who was the treasurer and I would help keep her books and things but that would be the-- Story_ID: 467988 Speaker 1: When you think of sounds, sights and smells of your neighborhood [Third Ward, Houston, Texas], or your home, what takes you back to that time? Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, a smell that really takes me back is pinto beans, because we all--you could always smell the pinto beans in the neighborhood when they were cooking, and I guess it's because they probably had ham hocks in them and things like that. But that would be a really big smell, and sounds would be of, well one sound would be the railroad because we lived right next to a railroad track and we, the sounds of the railroad tracks and the sounds of the trains takes me back to my neighborhood regularly. I mean, if I hear them and I, I'm always thinking of, and that was another whole kind of education, we won't even get into. When the trains would come and when the flooding would be in the valley, and that's where Hispanics or Mexican Americans live mostly in Texas. And there would be a lot of floods in the, Rio Grande Valley [Texas], sometimes they would bring all people up to Houston [Texas] on the rail, on the freight cars, they would be able to come down the track and we also learned about people who would hop the freight trains to ride to other places. It was--and to be--but the railroad sound is one that really was very much a part of my neighborhood. I guess the other sound would be the sound of a lot of animals like crickets and things, and the cicadas. that's another, now that's the one sound that really takes me back, because there were a lot of trees on my street and the cicadas would be in those trees and I learned that name much later; I didn't know what they were then. But, as a little girl, I learned that when the sun was, when there was clouds, I guess they were, but when there was no sunshine on the ground, and then when the sun would start coming out, as the clouds would be moving through them, you learn later and the cicadas would start singing and they would go, chirp, chirp and th- oh you could hear them, and you could, you could really clock when the shade was coming and sun was moving. So that's another sound that would take me back, and then the sound of kids playing baseball in the streets. We had the, we'd make four bases and we'd play up and down the streets and kids skates going through the neighborhood. and at, at night, the people who, few people who had radios, 'cause everybody didn't have a radio, the people would gather together to listen to news things. I remember the neighborhood people would gather together to hear the Joe Louis fight when he fought Max Schmel- Schmeling [Max Schmeling] and it was fascinating, I remember to this day our people would be hitting and you know, the people, the men would be saying, "No do this, do that." No television at that time, just radios and people would share. And then the other sound that I would have would be the music from Rose Hill Baptist Church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] which is the church that I attended there. The choir singing and rehearsing and so those are, and I guess the fire engines going down Holman Street, we lived at Sawyer [Street] and across Holman was the main street and the fire engines and police cars and so forth, but that would be, that would be it. Story_ID: 467989 Speaker 1: So now we're in elementary school [Blackshear Elementary School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Okay. Um-hm. Speaker 1: What type of student were you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well I should say what type of child were you? We know you were a good student. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, I really was a child, I guess that you would probably call square, because, and then again, the early adults to whom I was exposed, starting I guess with kindergarten and my parents [Juanita Bell Randle and Freeman Randle] and the people around us, all were about having you do right and I attributed a lot of my development as the person to my church. I said, I was for a while, I was the only person in my house who went to church. This is before my sister [Greta Randle] and brother [Billy Randle] came back and before the other children were born, I was staying alone with my parents. And Rose Hill [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] was right across the street and as later life, I would describe that I was a high energy child, I used up a lot of peoples energies, I mean I was like a sponge and I was attracted to the church and I, I said it many days, the church probably helped keep me out of a lot of trouble, because I would, I would go over--this is the truth and this sounds weird to people when they say, when I say this. I think on Monday night may- maybe they had prayer meeting, I would go over and sit in the back of the church for prayer meeting. On Tuesday night, they had something else, I would go over. On Wednesday night they had Christian benevolence meeting. Now, I learned probably as a very young girl what a benevolence fund was, how people in the church would put their money together so that when people needed loans and things, benevolence and I, 'cause I asked, what the word was, I, I was inquisitive like that. If there was something I didn't really know, I'd ask. And Mr. Milligan [ph.], the husband of the ma- of the woman I was telling who'd take--I would go home with them on Sundays he worked for the post office, he was the person in charge of that, then I'd go to choir rehearsal and then Sunday school teacher, teachers' meeting on Friday night, I would go over and sit and listen. So, the church, a lot of that and then the people there would take us on field trips and we always had six weeks of summer bible school, you know, it isn't like now days, it's two days or whatever? We would have six weeks and it was great for the children, because we had nothing else really to do. And so that kind of helped to shape me to be the kind of person that I was and to really learn. And when I was seven, we were practicing for the Easter play. We had Easter, churches, you know, used to have Easter programs on Easter Sunday, and we were doing the, going to reenact the crucifixion and so we were practicing on Friday evening, Good Friday before Sunday and this, the girls were playing Mary Magdalene and all the others and the boy had the cross on his shoulder and, you know, the--the various things and so we were going down the aisle and so the girls were crying and we were, and so our, our director said, "Okay, you all can stop, that was good, we're all ready for Sunday." And so I remember sitting down and I was crying, I sat in the chair and I was crying, and so she came over she said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], you can stop crying now. It's all over, it's good. You all are doing good," and I said to her, "Did they really kill him just because he was doing good?" And she said, in later years, again as an adult, she said, that you can't imagine, "I said, 'What, what--if, I said, yes?'" And I said, "Well, if that's the truth, I want to be like him and I want to be a Christian, so I want to be baptized Sunday." They always baptize on Easter Sunday, and she told us later, she said, "I said, 'Oh girl, unh-uh, your mama, no you can't just decide you wanna be baptized. No you--I have to go and ask.'" I said, "Well, will you go and ask my mother?" She said, "I have to go and ask your mother." Well, we lived right across the street. So we went over to my house and again at this time my mother was not in church, nobody in my family was in church so she told my mother that I had said that I wanted to be baptized. So my mother said, "Girl, you don't know what you're talking about," and I said, "I do, I wanna be like Jesus." And she said, "Oh, you don't know what you're talking about," and I said, "I do, yes I do, I do want to be like Jesus, I want to do good; I want to do the right things." So eventually she relinquished and so she had to get a dress, get a white dress for me for Sunday to be baptized. So I was baptized on Sund- Easter Sunday morning, and nobody in my family was there. Story_ID: 467990 Speaker 1: So no one came to your baptism. That's where we left off (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not from my family, nobody was there. The, the people at church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], Mrs. Milligan [ph.] was there who was kind of like the minister's [W.M. Sykes] wi- daughter and all, and people of the church who really had, literally, you know, they had informed them that they were my family too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But none of my family came because nobody was attending church at that time. Speaker 1: Did you feel bad about that or were you okay with it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I think-- Speaker 1: --because you had your church family? Speaker 2: I was okay with it. I really, I don't, I don't remember pe- I've been asked that before, I don't remember really feeling bad, I might have been sorry at first that nobody was there, you know, I might have felt that way, sorry but Mrs. Milligan was responsible for getting me the towel and it was a real immersion baptism, I mean we had, we had a baptismal pool that you--and I was immersed and they got me up, got me dried off and all and took it so I don't, I don't remember really being-- Story_ID: 467991 Speaker 1: Tell me about your elementary school, what was the name of the elementary school? Speaker 2: Blackshear, B-L-A-C-K-S-H-E-A-R Blackshear Elementary School [Houston, Texas], it was at Holman Street, Holman. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you remember about Blackshear? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember a lot of things about Blackshear that, things about the educational part but things also about being black, black skinned. When I went to Blackshear of course, I, I'm black, I always have been genetically and I always will be. And one of the things I learned there which turned out to be helpful throughout my life was about color and caste. And Mrs. Norris, again, Virginia Norris [Virginia Perry Norris] was extremely important in my whole development through Blackshear. She was, she was a first grade teacher at Blackshear (unclear) first, and she was very dark skinned, very bright woman and there were teachers there who were light skinned, there were a few of them who were light skinned, about three or four and I don't know what they formed or whatever, but, they had different kinds of behaviors (laughter). So, I've said I was not going child and I ca- I lear- I read early and could read things and there was an, a sign up that said, I guess, tryouts or practices or whatever for the Tom Thumb wedding. I don't know if you know what a Tom Thumb wedding is, you probably--and so I went to the cafeteria like they said, you know to be for the Tom Thumb wedding. And so I was sitting there, I was in second grade, I will never forget, and so I was sitting there and so, Ella Holliday [ph.] came in and she said, "What you doing here?" And I said, "Well, I came to try out," or whatever the word was, "for the Tom Thumb wedding." She said "Oh, you're too black to be in the Tom Thumb wedding. You can't be in the Tom Thumb wedding." And so, I don't know where my ef- where the effort came, I just decided that I would sit there, you know, I wa- I wasn't gonna leave, that they'd have to do whatever. And so, I sat there, of course I didn't get chosen but when I got there, but no, when I left there and I told Mrs. Norris about it the next day and I told my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] and them about it and so when my mother heard, my mother was really uptight about it. So she decided she was gonna go over and tell Ella Holliday off, but I don't know, she didn't. Some, my--Mrs. Norris, I think told her just to forget about it, 'cause she was ignorant. Now that's, that was one of the first lessons that sh- to that ba-, "Baby," she said, "There are a lot of ignorant people especially light skinned people who think they're better than the rest of us." And so this was very early, seven or eight years old. So, that was the kind of learning. Story_ID: 467992 Speaker 1: --Then you started to look--and then but, and then with a teacher--you also learn the teachers who were really interested in the children because my teachers, our class, and our class went all the way through school together, luckily we had quote, I guess good teachers, like Mrs. Norris [Virginia Perry Norris] was our first grade teacher and then we were passed onto Ms. Davis [ph.] for the high first grade who was a very good teacher, who taught us well and she was brown skinned and she taught, treated all the kids the same, then we went to another teacher. And they tried to put us, and there were some teachers who were kind of flaky, that's the word I would use these days, so they kept us out of the flaky teachers, and they sent us to all the good hard teachers who were gonna really give us a good education. And I would say, of all the elementary teachers I had, only one was flaky (laughter), but I won't even name but, and the others we really learned. So, that was the kind of learning experience Blackshear [Blackshear Elementary School, Houston, Texas] was and it also was, our principal, W.L.D. Johnson was an outgoing man who was very tall and erect and he was always telling us that, "You little people, you need to do this and do that so you can be able to be somebody and do things." And that was the kind of expectation that that was there at Blackshear, for the dining room and all the things and I remember his retirement. He, he retired, I guess when I was in the fifth or six grade and I was a part of the choir and we, we learned the song, I know to this day, you know? "Blackshear, oh Blackshear we'll miss you, you're loved and cared so dear. You were father and mother to all the children here." Somebody made up that song for us to sing, little choir which was very true and he brought his family and all there and they insist--he was one of the people who insisted that we should be able to take the standardized test, because all of the black kids didn't take the standardized test in those days. And so he, I don't know, under what guise they didn't but they didn't and so I remember his--so when the fifth grade, in fact I'd have to stay home that morning and I didn't know we were having test, we had to, we took the Wechsler Intelligence Test and when I got to school at noon, I had to stay home and take care of my little sister [Linda Randle Anderson] for my mom [Juanita Bell Randle], and David Ransom [ph.], who was, we went through school together we were competitors I guess the whole grades and when we graduated, David was valedictorian and I was salutatorian in my class separated by .001. But, so Dave when I was, I was, I came on to the classroom and David's we were in Mrs. Millard's [ph.] class and David said, "This morning we had this test," and he said, "It was all about things, we had to look at shapes of things and tell what they were and all kinds of things," and so forth and so on. And then somebody said, "Yes, and we had to spell pneumonia and a lot of the people were spelling N-E-W-M-O-R-N-I-N-G, but that's not the way it's spelled." I mean this, I remember this so vividly. So, I took the test later on that afternoon by myself and so this was one of the, so that was one of the first intelligence tests that we got, and several of us were rated at 108 or better on those intelligence tests. Story_ID: 467993 Speaker 1: And then, when we got to the, that was fifth grade, and the well, well that was still fourth, then we went to fifth grade with Mrs. Coleman [ph.] who just really revved us up in our, and I've identified the teacher who I was saying was a flake 'cause (laughter) I won't call her name but anyway that was, that was the classroom and anyway. And then we got to Berdita Jones' class, was sixth grade, now there was also a six grade teacher, was a very light skinned woman who, Ruth Chumley [ph.], who disdained black skinned children and rarely would let us do, like they'd have the May fete, and other kinds of things and she would always select (unclear) children but, and she also had a thing I guess about poor children. I don't remember, but Mrs. Norris [Virginia Perry Norris], late, in later years explained to me that there was a family of children and a woman that she was helping. Mrs. Norris was a wonderful person, she helped and did so much in the city, and this family lived outside of town, outside of Houston [Texas] and the little girl wanted to be in something that was gonna require a dress, you know, like a May fete or whatever. And at the time that she asked about it, she didn't, her mother didn't have the money to pay for that, so Mrs. Chumney apparently told her, "Her mammy shouldn't--if her mammy couldn't take of them, she shouldn't have had 'em." Now this is--you know, so Mrs. Norris, again went into play and she said, I think she told Ruth Chumney something like, "Here's the money. Anything she wants she can have, and don't you ever again say anything to this child about anything." I mean she was that kind of, real person's champion. So these are lessons learned, I guess you would say informally but to, to study and to really be good, we learned all that at Blackshear and the activities to do it. We, again, Mr. Johnson [W.L.D. Johnson] was a good principal, opened up opportunities and we participated in the fire prevention month from Blackshear. I think my picture got in the newspaper when I was in kinder- in, in Blackshear Elementary School [Houston, Texas] 'cause we did a song, we sang on the radio and just all kinds of developmental things and so it was a very good educational grounding. A lot of things I learned later having left the school, but it was a very good environment, very warm environment, overall again I don't have any other learnings that you needed to have about what it was gonna be like and all these stupid people as Mrs. Norris would call 'em and say, "Baby" (laughter). Story_ID: 467994 Speaker 1: Besides church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], were there any other organizations that you belonged to or participated in, like the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]-- Speaker 2: As a little girl? Speaker 1: --or the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]? Speaker 2: Well, when I was a little girl I was, I participated in the Y, I was a Y-ette, and all the way through to high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], I wanted to be a Girl Scout, I wanted to be a Brownie, 'cause they were, when I was little, but my family didn't have that kind of income and it wasn't a whole lot, you learned, but I didn't have enough to buy uniforms and to pay dues and so forth, and to get back and forth I guess 'cause the troops would be meeting in different places, they, they weren't at the school, and we never had a car in my family. So I instead again as I said, I'm, I was a real intense child used up a lot of peoples energy, I wanted to be a part of groups so I joined the Y as a Y-ette, they were called in those days for elementary kids and we would, on Saturday mornings we would walk oh some twenty or twenty-five blocks to the Y almost downtown here in Houston [Texas] on Saturday morning to go to the Y-ette classes and learn crafts and things and I stayed with the Y until I, in fact all the way through high school I was a Y teen and so forth. Then when I was I guess I must have been thirteen or fourteen, I had--thirteen, I was thirteen, I got, Vera [ph.] was here, my foster sister worked at a drugstore down on Dowling Street [Emancipation Avenue] after school and she was at that, she was in college at that time so she was, but the com- the family was a black family who owned it, the Hyatts--Harggets [ph.], and I got a job working eight hours a day Monday through Saturday and I had the evening shift from three to eleven [o'clock] and I was making regular money. But I was making, let's see, four dollars a day or two dollars a day, it was either twenty-five cents an hour or fifty cents an hour, I ha--have to, to be accurate, I have to go back to it. Speaker 1: Was this your first job? Speaker 2: That was my first job like that in a structured setting. No, I had worked at, I had babysat and helped my mom [Juanita Bell Randle] with domestic work and all before, and especially I had done babysitting, I had had jobs babysitting and cleaning and, because there was a girl who, whose family lived in what's now is Third Ward [Houston, Texas] called Sugar Hill, they called it, 'cause when white people moved out, mostly Jewish people really lived there originally and when they moved out, then black people moved in who had money, and I used to go and work for a family over on South Norris Street [sic. Norris Drive] and the girl was about my age and I would clean up every Saturday morning I'd clean up her room and I'd pick up all her panties where she'd left everything the whole week long, I mean, and she was not (unclear), I'd said okay. But that exposed me to a number of Caucasian families and as I lived and worked and I've been able to help other people understand there was a lot of dysfunctionality in those families, a lot, and what I observed and later went to kind of validate and look at and listen to my mother and other women who worked, how they talked about the families and the things and, and the chauffeurs the men who were chauffeurs and all. And in Houston, there are garage apartments everywhere especially in the white area because they'd have live in servants quarters where people be living in mostly during the week and maybe come home and to their churches on the weekend. But, that was a real learning experience and with this family it was very interesting and you'd be able to--I, I see people all the time, you know your full learning has to do with everything you do, if you're tuned into it like that, the things you observe and this is what I try to help the young people do all the time and pass it on, 'cause I learned so much just from observing and then validating, going back to see did it happen, how did it happen and so forth. Story_ID: 467995 Speaker 1: So that was a lot of jobs like that, then I had a job, um-hm? Speaker 2: I was gonna ask, I read something about you having a paper route-- Speaker 1: Oh yes, when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when you were younger? Speaker 1: --I was little I, that, the Houston Informer, I sold the Houston Informer, it was a black newspaper that came out once a week first and then it started coming out twice a week. But, my brother [Billy Randle] and the other kids in my neighborhood we would walk again, almost to town, down where the I-45 [Interstate 45] is now, the interstate, that's where the Informer office was and we would walk down on Saturday mornings to get our papers, they were ten cents a paper and we would sale them on the way back and so there was on Live Oak [Street]--there was a little grocery store on the corner there on Live Oak and Delano [Street], I think, Live Oak around in there. So the first time I came through selling the papers, I'd been there a lot of times but I'd never seen this man but I would always offer anybody and so this man said, "No, I don't want no paper," and I said, "What?" He said, "I'm blind; I can't read." So I said, "I'll read it to you," and I guess that taken him back (laughter) and so I read the headlines and the various things. So every week I would come by and I would read him the headlines an things and he'd let me keep the paper and sale it again, that was what we did we'd sell the news and by the time we got back home we would have sold--we had some regular customers, you know, you dropped them off but that was, so that was one of my jobs I had to make money. And I worked at a drive-in, drive-ins were real popular, I think they kind of emerged in Texas, and Bulldog Drive-In [Houston, Texas] was the name of it, my oldest sister [Greta Randle] and I worked there and I was a soda fountain girl back in the back with them. Story_ID: 467996 Speaker 1: So when I started to work at the drugstore, I was able to save money and to join Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. So that's how I joined Girl Scouting. So I joined as a Senior, and I had a very, very rich experience, our troop was out of a black church in Third Ward [Houston, Texas], and I--in fact I have a picture of my troop somewhere back there in the pictures, I think I'm gonna get you to copy. And we learned, we went to camp, learned camping we had a black camp, but the black community in Houston [Texas], black businessmen bought land at Willis, Texas near Conroe [Texas], and built a camp for black girls because camp, Girl Scouting was segregated and there was no camp for black girls, we couldn't go to any of the white camps. Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: And so, Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Sr.] and the men who owned the former, Carter Wesley [Carter W. Wesley], and several other black people went together and bought the land and built, robin, Camp Robinwood [Willis, Texas], which was the camp where black girls went so we would have that experience. And so, that was a really rich experience for me and out of that I became the president of the black Senior Scouts, senior council they call 'em and that was really my first interaction with whites in any significant way. The see--two seniors councils the black and the white Girl Scout presidents of the senior councils would meet, and so it was through Girl Scouting that I really had my first really white/black experiences close up. Then we had a regional conference in Oklahoma in region five I think it was called and four black girls from Houston went to Norman, Oklahoma, and that was where the University home--of Oklahoma [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma] is and of course they weren't prepared for black girls ca- 'cause nobody, they didn't have no black students first of all, in those days black kids couldn't got to state universities in those days. And so, there was another black girl at the whole meeting who was from Muskogee, Oklahoma so there were five of us out of some hundreds of kids for this round, this region five round up. So, we went up on the train and the four of us from Houston, we bonded with the other young woman too, but we decided when we looked around and saw that we were the only ones there of course and we had, they had to let us stay in the dorm. I guess they didn't have to but they did, they probably did (laughter) have to so, we had met with her. And so then on Sunday, we went to church, 'cause you know, they were invited, but it was a white church, they were having the service and so we were told we shouldn't go because nobody black, so we put on--got up and put on our uniforms, then we said, we were Girl Scouts and we learned everybody's the same, so we put on our uniforms and we walked right into that church and it scared the hell out of the people that literally (laughter), I'm sorry, but it did, they looked around and so then we also decided we might as well as long as it was, we were there, we might as well sing the Negro National Anthem and so the time we could appropriately, we stood up and we sang, 'Lift Every Voice and Sing,' and the rest of the, I mean, it was, there was no hostility as anything shown, but you know, and so, but that was our--. And then we had a meeting, so that was again Girl Scouting offer that kind of, and then we had a session in Austin [Texas], but we couldn't stay on the university, it was on the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] campus and the black girls who came couldn't stay on the University of Texas campus because it was for whites only. So we stayed over at Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] in the dorms which is a black college [HBCU] in, in Austin and we decided that we were gonna bring that to the forefront when we got back here to Houston, and we did, that we would, we were Girl Scouts and we shouldn't, we should not, if black girls couldn't go well, white girls shouldn't go either and at that time we had a black executive and director and a white executive director, and of course we graduated within a year but we left all those things on their plate and eventually they merged as it were. So Girl Scouting was but it, prob- we have a lot of enriching experiences and as a Senior Girl Scout I did a mentoring project with girls at Hester House [Julia C. Hester House, Inc.] here in Houston. I, I liked to dance, I was a modern, I learned modern dance, I learned it at Jack Yates High School [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] by our teacher, Ms. Branch [Bonnie Branch Williams] who taught us. And so, I did a, there were a group of girls out at Hester House, were young girls, and I organized a modern dance class to teach them modern dance and so there were a lot of really good experiences with Girl Scouting. Story_ID: 467997 Speaker 1: So you--when you leave Blackshear [Blackshear Elementary School, Houston, Texas], and you go to, you come to-- Speaker 2: Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas]-- Speaker 1: --Jack Yates-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, s- Speaker 1: --by this time do you have any idea of what it is you'd like to do in life? Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was interested in science. I'd, I, I liked science and the out of doors and I'd go to camp and all and as I was kind of looking around, I was thinking I probably would like to be a doctor or do something. And, and so that as I went to Yates, and in the seventh grade we had a science class, a good science teacher and then we met Mr. Farnsworth [ph.] who was the chemistry teacher who people considered to be eccentric, but he was a ma- wonderful teacher and he was, he gathered us together and he created a science club, and he had a classmate or friend, I don't know what it was and I never got the chance to ask him later in life, who was on the faculty at Baylor Medical College [Baylor College of Medicine] here in Houston [Texas]. And of course Baylor didn't admit black students at that time, they had no black faculty so nobody black went out to Baylor. And he got his friend to let us come on Saturday mornings and learn dissection of cats and animals out of Baylor and this is, this is so ironic, I tell people this and they look at me and they don't believe it. So there were about eight black children and a lot of us wanted to be doctors and, and I guess it's because that was the thing in science that we knew about. We didn't know about a lot of the other things, but we would go, we would went out and learned dissection of the cats we were exposed to, Baylor has, I guess they still have it, they have a whole human body in cross section on the wall from the head all the way down to the feet, you know how you have cross sections on slides, they have it mounted around the, in, in the medical school and they also had eight of the nine systems dissected out in bodies that were in formaldehyde that sat around the room, every system except the nervous system, they were working on it because it was gonna take, you know, to get all the nerves and we were exposed to all of this. These were German war prisoners or Germans who died or whatever that those bodies then were used for this dissection and to put this so we had, isn't that something? We had all this exposure to the medical school things at Baylor (laughter) as these young black kids in this high school. So Mr. Farnsworth was a major motivator and so that's what I, I wanted to do, David [David Ransom (ph.)], most of us would want to go into medicine as we, I guess Joe Cramer [ph.], was probably, Joe Cramer was a very bright young man, he was third in our class and he had a CPA [certified public accountant] before he graduated from college, to tell you he was good with math and things. So, he was always interested in math kind of things and David, I think the rest of us were interested in medicine and even though there was only one black woman doctor in Houston that I knew anything about, Doctor Rowett, Catherine Rowett [ph.] and I did get to know her but that's what I would--that's, so that's what, that was my goal when I was, that's what I sort of fo- focused myself on wanting to do. Story_ID: 467998 Speaker 1: So you said you also learned modern dance-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) here? Speaker 2: I learned at Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], yes, Bonnie Branch [Bonnie Branch Williams] was our P.E. [physical education] teacher and she taught us modern dance and interpretative dance, she had us create a dance to 'Lucky Old Sun' ['That Lucky Old Sun'], which I know to this day and I, and all the moves and it's, and we, and that was a good kind of social gathering thing for us. We didn't as I recall we didn't have a dance, we were not to do dances at other places or anything, but we learned it in school and we did things inside the school for it. Speaker 1: What else were you interested in? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Music, or--? Speaker 2: I, I was interested in music in a way I guess I would call it in a small way. I wanted to learn to play the piano, but we never had a piano and we didn't have enough money for music lessons, so when I was a teenager, I made a trade with a lady who went to our church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], she taught music and I told her if she would teach me music, I would clean her kitchen in exchange. And so, we started that little process, but I didn't have a piano to practice on at home and so that just kind of fell by the wayside. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And one of the other women, though, that I worked for, I would help her out with her writing and so forth, her letters, had a piano and I learned by ear, I would play, I would put the song book up and I don't know if I was picking out the notes, but I woul- I learned to play by ear a little bit, so I liked music in that way, but I never developed it. And I sang in the choir, I was in the glee club at Jack Yates, I was involved in that, and I was involved in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]; I was on the student council and also in student government, and I was out, my whole, one of my homeroom representatives and we organized a club called the, what was it? Well, Let and Do [ph.] was a club that was organize- I was a part of that, that was Let and Do, was club outside of the high school that a lot of the girls' parents had organized for us from that age. Some of us were in Girl Scouting and others but the Let and Do club, we did, well volunteer things like people do now for people and so forth and then I was also, I was in the honor society all the, all the years I was in school and so I'd be, I was president of the honor society during my senior year and I was president of the Y teens at one point at Jack Yates. And the Charmettes [ph.], was a social club that was organized for us, Mrs. Eula Cotton [ph.], who was our English teacher, a wonder English teacher and Mrs. Thomasine Prater [ph.], who was another woman who just was a big influence in my life. She was a social science teacher and from seventh grade on, she was very important in my life. She was brown skinned from the family, that would have been low middle income or even lower, and it turned out she was from Indianapolis [Indiana] and I went to school in Indiana, later we found all that out. But, she was a woman who was immaculate all the time, dressed very well and she was kind of somebody we all admired and, and she was, she would, she was really good, that's, and she taught history and so forth and social science, and she kind of helped to mentor a lot of us, and especially those of us who were poor. And when I was getting ready, for example, when I was getting ready to go to college and she said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott]," this is how she talked, she said, "Now, you need to buy you a clothes rack and when you buy your clothes to go to school, 'cause you don't have a lot of money. Buy some plaids and then buy sweaters of all the colors in the plaid and then you can wear that same skirt a lot of days and you put on the yellow sweater, put on blue." I mean, and routine things that she, 'cause she said, she was from a poor family, that's when she said, she had a hard time getting into college and all that. And so she was magnificently important in my life, she and Mrs. Norris [Virginia Perry Norris], and all the way through the time that I married, and she came to Indiana the next year to visit her sisters and all that, I proudly took her down to the campus, my husband [Will B. Scott] and I married on the IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] campus the year before, but she's in. And then she had a niece who came to (unclear) high school and the timing was enough that I was older and I could help her as it were and I'd have the sister. But so she organized the, a club and then Mrs. Cotton organized the Charmettes, and we were parts of that kind of a social club, but always grooming you for something. Story_ID: 467999 Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to be in a cotillion or debutante ball? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or go to the prom? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I went to the prom. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And my cousin in fact took me to the prom, the, the mid-winter prom, our--at Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], the class that was graduating sponsored the mid-winter prom, we had two classes, a January and a June class and so I went to the January prom with my cousin and then I went to the June prom with the young man named Paul Beckham [ph.], who was one of our classmates and for the prom, Mrs. Bess Bernie Harper [ph.], enters my life. Our, our high school dean at Yates, Ethel C. Ellison, was another person who was very much important in my life, and she was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and that's really how I got to be influenced about Delta. And Mrs. Ellison called me into the office one day, it was getting to be prom time and I really wasn't planning to go to the prom, 'cause I knew my parents [Juanita Bell Randle and Freeman Randle] had no money for a dress and all that and she said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], there's a club of women here in Houston [Texas] who buy dre- prom dresses and you're the person I'm gonna recommend this year to get the dress." So that's how I met Mrs. Harper. Story_ID: 468000 Speaker 1: We were talking about you preparing for the prom, and you were gonna get the dress. Speaker 2: Yes and then Mrs. Ellison [Ethel C. Ellison] called me into her office and she said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], there's a group of women, as I said who give, who will select a girl each year and they will buy a prom dress for her and I'm recommending you this year," and I was just overwhelmed. And so, Mrs. Harper, Bernie [Bess Bernie Harper (ph.)] was her name then, was the person who was the president of this group. And I name her because she became very important in my life also, and very important in many lives here in Houston [Texas], and, but, a lot of people don't realize it, Miss Bernie was a black woman who was the administrative assistant and financial person for E.E. Worthing [Evan E. Worthing] who is a millionaire here in Houston, a multimillionaire, and she was real light skinned, so I don't know about any of that, but any rate, she was a very focused woman in the community. And so she, I, I met her, she influenced him, encouraged him, 'cause he never married, he never had any children, he had a dog that was--and I think he was gonna, I don't know what he was gonna do with his money when he made his will, but she convinced him to do a scholarship for the children from three black high schools in Houston, to be able to go to college and he established the E.E. Worthing scholarships [Evan E. Worthing Scholarship Fund]. He established them two years before I graduated, no one year before I graduated he established them in `54 [1954], and I graduated in `55 [1955], and that's how I went to college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. I, each high school could select students to be considered for the scholarship and William Holland [William S. Holland], whom I haven't mentioned yet but he was the principal at Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] who, again was a formidable person who gave us so much learning and support. But he and a committee of some kind would select and I, again I had the highest average, I was the salutatorian. I had the highest average of a girl, I was the most scholarly girl and all that, and was very much involved and so I was selected. But when Mrs. Ellison called me to the office and introduced me to Ms., Ms. Har- Ms. Bernie, I never had any idea that a lot of things would happen in my life because of that. So, that's how I went to the prom, and I enjoyed it, I really did and I had a good time and I was glad I was able to go. But I really, I would not have been going if I had not gotten the dress, 'cause I had no way, my family really could not have afforded a, an evening dress for me. Story_ID: 468001 Speaker 1: So you graduate [from Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] in 1955? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did you decide what college you would go to? Speaker 2: Well, I selected and applied to about six colleges all together. Since I was a very good student, our teachers really and m- and our principal [William S. Holland] made us think about college, 'cause he would say, we knew we couldn't go to the colleges in Texas, like Rice University had a very good science department right here in Houston [Texas], one of the richest colleges in the whole country and of course University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], and the University of Houston [Houston, Texas], which was not really, I've learned later was, it's a good thing they weren't considered because they were just a very mediocre school. They had a cougar that lived in an air conditioned house on the campus, that was their mascot and that was probably, but they won't let anybody black really come on to the campus. So any rate, so I, Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], I applied to Mount Holyoke and again I knew about Holyoke because of the Garwicks [ph.], the family I mentioned I babysat for, then I applied to Radcliffe because I had heard of Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a, I had longed to go to a women's college 'cause I'd heard they really did really good things and developed women. And, I applied to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], because Howard was a good school, had a good medical, had good science departments and a lot of kids from Houston went to Howard. Then I applied to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], the reason I applied to Indiana University was because my high school principal was from Evansville, Indiana and he told us all that Indiana had, it was a good school and they had started admitting blacks a few yea- quite a few years earlier and that it was. And it had a very good science department because it had several Nobel Prize winners and, who were teachers and he was always trying to get us the very best. Then Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] also had a large number of Nobel Prize winners and a good science department, so I applied to Michigan, University of Michigan and Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. So, those are the six schools I applied, that's how I, I got applications in and I got admitted to all of those and I got scholarships to two or three of them in addition to the--the Worthing scholarship [Evan E. Worthing Scholarship Fund] you could take anywhere, it was your scholarship to take to whatever school you wanted to and it seemed like a lot of money in those days. It was a thousand dollars a year, it was a four thousand dollar scholarship, and was a thousand dollars each year. So, I eliminated the colleges in this way, Holyoke and Radcliffe were so far away and getting there by train, that's the only way you could travel then, and I also would have had to have a winter wardrobe. I'd grown up in Houston, I had never had a winter coat and so, we dropped them out. Mrs. Garwick who, had gone to Holyoke, and who had recommended it, said that she would get me scholarships and all that and. But it was the whole thing I couldn't handle, the getting there, the take clothes and all that, so I dropped those off. Then Howard was kind of my next choice in line but my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] said, "As much as, all those kids go away from here to Howard and they just party and they come back home the next year, they flunked out. And you cannot go to school to flunk out and plus you don't have all those muttons and things like they wear, the middle kind of income kids," as she said, "So, you don't have the kind of clothes that are there either." So we dropped out Howard. So that left Indiana, Illinois and Michigan and Michigan for the same reasons that Radcliffe and Holyoke, was too far north, I would have had to have heavy winter clothing and I dropped it off, so that left Indiana and Illinois. And I had a very good friend that I had grown up with, Jo Billy McDade [ph.], who had been admitted to Bradley University in Peoria [Illinois], Jo Billy, played basketball and he got a Worthing scholarship, but he also got a basketball scholarship to Bradley in Peoria, so I said okay, I'll go to Illinois because then at least I'll know somebody there and we'll be kind of close to each other. But Illinois didn't have housing for black girls, you'd have to go and live in a rooming house and I said, "No way am I going all the way to school to live in a rooming house." Well, Indiana luckily, and I didn't know this at th- I just knew that they had open housing for black girls but they had only had open housing about three years or so, but they had moved to that point with the president. So, they had a good science and so I went to Indiana, that's how I ended up going to Indiana (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. Story_ID: 468002 Speaker 1: Is this now the first time that you live away from home [in Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. It's the first time that I go away from home. Speaker 1: And how's this experience for you? Speaker 2: It--the experience was very good and this is when I really knew the strength of all the things and the people who had really been, we call them mentors now, but people who had been really intimately involved in my life and helping me to learn things and to feel secure and to be able to ha- achieve and have some accomplishments. That's significant that there were a lot of things, and my high school principal [William S. Holland] was certainly one of those people and, and he had taught us that because you're black or Negro in those days, "You're bright, you do, don't let anybody, don't let anybody keep you from doing because you're capable," and he portrayed that he was, his pictures on that quilt over there, but he was ve- if you had not known he was an African American you wouldn't have known it because he was very white, his genes, he was white, his hair was straight, but he never--I mean he was for us. And so, he said very clearly, "You are capable of going anywhere and I know you can do," and he made the white people in Houston [Texas] respect Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] now this is, there was a woman named Ms. Askew [ph.] who was one of the supervisors and she might have even been a school board member at one time, and she would regularly come to the campus and instead of going to the principal's office to check in as she did at the white schools, she would just go directly to the classroom to observe. He would find out she was on the campus and she was, she's just my example, but there would be others and he would get like the speaker, loud system there, he would get on the loud system and he would say, "Ms. Askew," he talked with a southern Indiana drawl, "please, I understand you're on the campus, please come to the principal's office and check in like you're supposed to do." Oh, you can't imagine how empowering that was for us as kids there and he did this, he, he would not let our men march behind the animals in the, there's a big fat stock show parade here that'd be going on in Houston starting this month. And they would put the black high school bands behind the animals after they'd plopped all of their feces and so forth, he said, "No, the Yates band will not be in the parade, if they can't march somewhere," I mean, this is the, this man was by precept an example, I mean really and prepared us for a number of these kinds of things so, I would say all these people helped to prepare us. Story_ID: 468003 Speaker 1: So I, I was not squeamish about going away from home, I felt comfortable with it and I had to take the train, as it happened, Izzie Shelton [ph.], who was this senior at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], who also was a Worthing scholarship [Evan E. Worthing Scholarship Fund] winner from the previous yea- two years and was at Indiana, she had gone, she'd started school somewhere else but she'd gone to Indiana so I was able to go to, to travel to school with her and we took the train up. It was my fir--first train ride out of Texas beyond Oklahoma, we went to Oklahoma for Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] thing, this is my first trip away from and we packed my lunch in a shoebox with my food, because you couldn't eat on the trains in those days, you know, in the dining room either. So we had our food and we, it was an overnight trip to St. Louis [Missouri] on the Texas Eagle, so I woke up the next morning and we were in southern Missouri and of course the world looked very different, those house just looked very, very different and I guess they had all of those winter things on them and so forth, just different. So we went into St. Louis, changed trains there and took the New York Central [New York Central Railroad] east to DePauw [DePauw University], well to Greencastle, Indiana where DePauw is and we had to get off and we had four hours there because the Monon [Monon Railroad] ran to Bloomington [Indiana] and I had shipped my trunks and all so Izzie and I got off and we went to a movie there in Greencastle and that was my first foot down in Indiana. And then we went on to school and I lived in a dorm, tru- in a new center that was being experimented with, four dorms for men and four for women, Oak Hall is where I lived my four years. And I got there late that evening, of course it was about eight or nine at night and the room I was assigned to had bunk beds all of them had bunk beds, it was not a real high income dorm it was and my roommate of course had taken the bottom bunk so my first bed was the top bunk (laughter), Joyce [ph.] from South Bend [Indiana], which made, I mean she was there first and all but, and everybody was there early, took the top two drawers, all the things and so I took what was left and, but, I had a really comfortable kind of existence there, I met black students from Gary, Indiana, a lot of them from Gary and Indianapolis [Indiana] and other places. And the other thing our teachers had taught us in the South, is that we really had to achieve, we had to be better, not only in the whites students, but for the black students in the North too, because the North had better schools than we had and so, we, you know, this is, we were all revved up, at least I was and I'm knowing that I had to achieve. So when I got to Indiana as a freshman, there were about five or six thousand students in the fresh- may- no about three thousand students in the freshman class and this first meeting the dean of the junior division, he was called Presley Sikes, gave us these speeches and he told us that there was a rumor going around Indiana, all the Indiana in state students, 'cause Indiana's a state university, that you were guaranteed a year at IU [Indiana University] if you were a citizen of Indiana, but they should not believe that rumor, because if they didn't perform, at the end of the first semester they would go home if they didn't make pr- 'cause Indiana couldn't pay for that. And he said, "For all you out of state students, all of you all stand up." So I stood up and he said, "Now for you, if you don't make grades at midterm, we will send you home because the citizens of Indiana can't be paying for you to come here and not make good grades." So they had what they called smoke ups, if you got a C or lower than a C in a class, you got smoke ups, and so fifteen hours was a normal load as a freshman could take, he said, "If you get more than six hours of smoke ups, then we can, we can send you home at the mi- in the middle of the semester, so you all had better study." So I'm thinking, okay the fear of God is certainly in me and I'm gonna study, 'cause I sure can't go home, I had the scholarship [Evan E. Worthing Scholarship Fund] and all these things. So, I buckled in and, but I was also again my organizational behavior was there so I got involved in the dorm, in the government of the dorm of, and, inside and the next year I was, I was elected at the end of the year as the president of the dorm, so I was the first African American to be selected for the president of a dorm at Indiana University. And so I went on the residence, women's residence hall council and was very active throughout my whole time at Indiana in organizations and so forth there, which was, which was very good for me. Story_ID: 468004 Speaker 1: And so, I was a zoology major. Speaker 2: What made you choose zoology as a major? Speaker 1: Well, that was what you had to take to be a pre-med student. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: And went there to be a pre-med, I really went there to, to go to medical, to do pre-med and go to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --medical school and at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] you had to be a zoology major because that's where you got all the comparative anatomy and all the things. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: And then, and take a minor in botany or chemistry, one of the other areas, so I was a zoology major and a botany minor and was on my way to, to, and at the end of the third year, actually you could not go into medical school for your senior year. And I met a very good friend there, Lyndon Lawrence [ph.] who was from Indianapolis [Indiana]. We were the only two black students in the whole zoology department and we got to be friends and he was very smart and he wanted to be a med--a doctor, so we were, we would work along together. But, remember I only have the scholarship [Evan E. Worthing Scholarship Fund] that, that I have four there and it's a four year scholarship and then I, after my second semester at IU [Indiana University], I got a job, I worked my--the rest of the time I was there. And so, I had told my advisor that I, I would, 'cause th- they asked me how was I gonna pay for medical school, you know, and I said, "Well, I'm gonna work my way through, I'm gonna apply for scholar- ," and I applied for scholarships to the NMA [National Medical Association], even the black medical association would not give women scholarships in those days, you must even, that's, that's the other part of the double interaction of gender and race. So, there were just hardly any scholarships for women, everywhere I applied and so I said, "Well then, I will work." So my advisor was Dr. Briggs [William J. Briggs, III], and he and the first part of my junior year he said, "Ms. Randle [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], we need to talk," and he said, "You really can't work your way through medical school." He said "I'm--." I said, "Yes I can, I, I know I'm, it'll take me longer or whatever but I, I can." He said, "No, Ms. Randle," he said, "It's not that you don't, you're not, don't have the ability, but there's no way for you to work your way through medical school. You have to do all these various kinds of clinical things and all." And he said, "And so, and you cou- I can't tell you not to apply and so forth," he said, "but if you don't have any money, you won't be able to go." He said, "But you have an excellent mind for analysis and research," he said, "you really do and I don't know, have you ever thought about working to get a Ph.D. or working to go into research? Instead getting a graduate degree and master's [degree] and so forth?" And, and I said, "Not really," 'cause I really wanna be a doctor, and so he said--but I didn't know about those other fields and things, I must say I didn't and so, he said, "Well, we'll talk again." That was the beginning of my junior year, he said, "But even if you do go and try to get to medical school you should go ahead and get your bachelor's degree and then apply. Don't try to go in at the end of your junior year, because you just don't have any money." So, and he told me wh- what classes to take the next year so that my, I'd get some other skills of research and all of that and so, I did and I decided I would get master's in zoology and, and I would try to go that route, academically and not try to go to medical school 'cause they just didn't have any support for that. So that's what I did, I went ahead and-- Story_ID: 468005 Speaker 1: So you meet your husband here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met my husband when I was a senior in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. And I met him in Indiana, we had a mutual friend that we didn't know each other but a friend from Hawkins, Texas, a girl named Ada Edwards who was from Texas and Texans tend to, we really do tend to find each other wherever we are. And so she knew about me, and she was a Delta and I had met her and she was a very good friend with Will [Will B. Scott], my, my husband, she and some other Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and they said they were on a mission to help him find a good girlfriend, a good woman, I mean somebody who was capable and all. So when they said, "Little Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott]," they called me. "Little Gloria, Gloria ought to be good and Will--." So they got us together as it were, but it was long and arduous 'cause I wasn't looking for anybody for sure. My goals were to go and get my degrees, as I said, and get myself substantially set up so I could help my family and others and help myself and I knew that my family was poor and then there were these other children coming along, and my younger sisters [Carolyn Randle and Linda Randle Anderson], and then by now my older sister [Greta Randle] had two children and so I knew that our family--I was gonna need to help so that, those were my goals, so I wasn't looking for anybody to marry or to date seriously or anything else so. And so, my senior year we met and that was very interesting because Ada kept saying, "I want you to meet Will, I want you to meet Will, because he's from Texas." She said, "He's from Corpus Christi, Texas, so he's a pretty nice person." So my, the first half of my senior year, I was coming home for Christmas and I was taking the train out of Indianapolis [Indiana] and so Ada called me and said, "Why don't you call Will and ask him if you, you can bring something?" I was bringing her some food back, Texans take food. Her mother was gonna meet the train and troop and give me some fresh butter and things to bring back to her in Indiana so, she said, and so I called Will and asked if he wanted, if there was anything he wanted too, back from Texas, any food or anything and so he was busy having a party or something, he said, "Oh no," he said, "but I'm having a party want to come over?" I said, "No, I'm on my way home to Texas, so thank you," and so he said okay. Well, I had met him that summer, Ada had gotten us finally together at a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] dance, his, his group he had trio, with The Three Souls, and they were playing for the Kappa dance, and I was dating a Kappa at the time and so Ada said, at intermission I'm finally gonna get to introduce you to Will. So, at intermission she did, and he was, seemed to be a very nice young man, and he was kind of not bashful but he was not boisterous and all and so he said, "Ada and them tell me that you're from Texas," and so forth and I said, "Yes," and he said, "Well, I'm glad to finally meet you," and he said, "After the dance is over we're gonna have an after party at my apartment, would you like to come?" And so I said, "Well I don't really know," because I hadn't asked my date and we hadn't decided what we were gonna do after the dance, and he said, "Well, you can't bring your date," and I said, "Well, I won't be at your party, thank you." And that was our first meeting and so I went my way and he went his. Story_ID: 468006 Speaker 1: So then the second interaction was at Christmas when I was coming home, when I called him [Will B. Scott] and asked if he wanted something back and he said no, and I'm not sure he even remembered. He, well I guess he did, 'cause he remembered I was from Texas, but. So then the following January, at, at semester break, I was in Indianapolis [Indiana] visiting my friends, I had several friends I visited there and over the weekend, we went to the club that Will's group [The Three Souls] was playing in and he and his drummer knew the young people I was with and he said, "Well, we're gonna be here. If you all gonna be here, come back down to our, music, come hear us some more." And so, I really was not of the age to go into the places, but we went anyway so, and I got to know him and so then he, he said to me, "Well, I would like for you to know more about me, because you're in college and all." He said, "I'm not, I went to college for a semester, but I'm not in college but I've taught myself a lot." And he was a very good musician, and he said, "Music is my world," and he had a day job as the wholesale record distributor for the company that he recorded for and for others and so that was his, he was one of, I think there were only two black people in the country who had that kind of job and I think he and a man in St. Louis [Missouri]. So, and at night they played of course as a trio, so he was very well set with money I guess because he was, had these things. And so, he said, "Well, I'd like for you to get to know me better," and so I said, "Okay," so he said, "Well, you want to come over to my apartment?" And I said, "Well, I don't know about coming over to your apartment 'cause I don't know you that well" (laughter). And so he said, "Well, I'm not gonna bother you or anything," and I said, "Well, you're right about that." I mean, but any rate, so, he said, "Well, I'll send a cab," because he didn't drive and of course I didn't drive. I didn't have a car and so I said okay, so I took this cab over and I told the cab that I would pay him to wait for an hour and I did, I said, "What would it cost to wait for an hour?" (Laughter) And he looked at me with, I said, "No, I'm gonna give you the money up front. It's not like I'm gonna run in and run out." So I paid what I owed him so far and what it would cost to wait for an hour, because I'd decided if this man starts anything funny then, I'm out of here (laughter). So by the time the end of hour was up and I said, "Well, I have a taxi waiting for me," but he had showed me his books and if--I would not have known he hadn't gone to college if he hadn't told me 'cause he was very well versed, he read Schopenhauer [Arthur Schopenhauer] and Kahlil Gibran, I mean and he had just read was really real knowledgeable. So, I said--well so I left and I said--and he said, "Where? You have a cab?" And I said, "Yes" (laughter). And he said, "Well where did--when did you call a cab?" I said, "Well, I didn't, I had the cab wait for me, 'cause I didn't know what was gonna happen here." (Laughter) And he laughed and he, he later told me, he said, "Well, I know you were very different from all the other women I'd ever been around at that time." So he started coming to Bloomington [Indiana] to visit and to see some of the things I was interested in and we dated off and on over the rest of that semester and then I graduated in June, if, I was a senior and-- Speaker 2: June of 1959? Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's when my mom [Juanita Bell Randle] came up for graduation and also he met my mother and he had a little cross he was gonna give me for a graduation gift but it had a diamond in it and I said, "Oh no, I can't accept that, no my, I said nobody--my mother won't understand and nobody will, no I can't accept this, I wouldn't accept it." And so he kept it (laughter) and gave it to me after we got married. But so, we dated off and on over the summer and I would go hear his music and I was in summer school in Blooming- well I, 'cause I, as soon as I graduated, I entered the master's program and started doing my research work and all and studying. And so, in I guess in November he came down, I had a very good friend from Indianapolis who was living at the, she was living at the place I was in, we lived in kind of like a union building place but for graduate students of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and she was an older student, she was studying for her bachelor's degree, but she was living there and so I went home with her for Thanksgiving and we had decided that we would come back to Bloomington and so Will and his friends were there and so they decided they would come back, down to Bloomington, they took us back to Bloomington and went back. And so, in--at the end of Thanksgiving, he proposed. He said, "You know, I've talked to you a lot now," and he said, "and you understand that I'm, I haven't gone to college, but," he said, "but I'm committed to going to college if we would get married," he said, "because you're smart and I'm very smart too," he said, "and I just never went to college." He said, "And as we've talked over these times, you've told me how you're going back south as soon as you graduate." I said, "That's right," 'cause I never adjusted to the North to live, I really didn't and I said as soon as I get my degrees, I'm going back south. He said, "Now I was thinking if I'm interested in you, and I really am." He said, "I've even talked to my father about you," he said, "and I don't, I don't have a job that I'm solid in 'cause the job I have is only one other one, black person like that in the country," and he said, "so I'd better get myself back into college so I can move." And so, I said, "Well that's a good idea." So that fall, he started in Indiana, Indianapolis, starting to go to school to take courses at the extension center [Indiana University Extension Center; Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Story_ID: 468007 Speaker 1: And so we married after Christmas. We were gonna marry the 18th of December, at first and go home because I knew my mother [Juanita Bell Randle] wouldn't want to have a big wedding, and we didn't have any money, I've always been realistic with that and I thought, there's no way, so, I said well, we'll marry and then we'll go home and then we'll have a reception or something. So we were gonna get married on the 18th of December and then, it's very snowy and cold in that time of year so I had gotten the chapel at the Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], a very nice chapel, a big chapel, so I'd, I'd reserved the chapel and I'd gotten the flowers and Dillis [ph.], my friend was gonna be the bridesmaid and a young man that Will [Will B. Scott] knew, was gonna be the best man, they were gonna come down to Bloomington [Indiana] and we were gonna get married at the chapel and then go home to Texas for Christmas and meet his parents, he'd met my mother already and I was gonna meet his parents, dah-da-dah-da-dah-da. Well, as life would have it, all of the blood test and everything, the information didn't get finished, although it really did. I was in Bloomington and this is another thing that chagrinned me to death, and this is, also makes me tell people, "Don't try to do things outside your job." The--that, that influenced me the rest of my life, 'cause here was a receptionist who, I had taken my blood test in Bloomington, the doctor there had drawn it but they had sent it to the health center in Indianapolis, Marion County [Indiana], and of course Will had applied for the marriage license in Marion County, and that's, you know, and that's where we was gonna, he was gonna get it. We were gonna get married in Bloomington, but they didn't have, okay. So this woman on her own now, so I called the doctor's office and I asked the nurse, "Have the results come back? What--'cause I need to get this information there." And, "No," she said, "Well this time of year they're very slow." So we're right up to Wednesday, we were gonna get married on Friday, we were right up through to Wednesday, and so I went down to the doctor's office and I said to them, "What is wrong? I know that there's nothing wrong with me so it couldn't be anything." He said, "Well no, they just, it's not here, my secretary's called and they haven't sent the results." So then Thursday, I went to the doctor's office and I was livid, and I said, because Friday's the next day, right? So, he said well, he told his nurse, he said you look into this and see what's, what's going on, and so forth. So the next morning I went up, and he said you come back in the morning 'cause Will ha- at the same time he had the people at the wedding, he'd applied for the license, he had them waiting, 'cause, if I got the results, but they had, they were gonna send them back to the doctor there. I'd put them on bus to get them up to him and he'd get 'em, dah-da-dah-da-dah, on the 18th so, I was sitting there with, and then nurse said, well, she said, I called and they said they have sent your results to us on the cer- . So she said, but I don't have them, so then the receptionist said, she said, "Oh, they're here, she said but I called Marion County, Monroe County [Indiana], and they said they didn't have any wedding application, and so I just held on to 'em." You cannot imagine, talking about wanting to turn somebody into snuff (laughter). Story_ID: 468008 Speaker 1: In 1959, you graduate with your master's [degree]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in zoology? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and by the way, did you pledge-- Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: --while you were in college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]? Speaker 2: I pledged my sophomore year, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], Gamma Nu chapter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so tell me what happens after you get your master's? Speaker 2: After I got my master's, I went and spent three months, four months at Indiana Central University [University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana] and got all of the courses and the student teaching to be able to be eligible for teaching in Indiana and I was one of the, I was the first black student teacher to ever teach in Manual High School [Emmerich Manual High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], and in any of the high schools other than the black high school in Indianapolis [Indiana] at the time, but so that's another whole story. But any rate, it just seems that everywhere I've been going I was pioneering or doing something and was productive and did a very good job. So, at the end of that time in December I got a job at the Indiana University Institute for Psychiatric Research [Indianapolis, Indiana] which was a major research organization and my professors in Bloomington [Indiana] knew about it, and then there was a, a French physicist who lived in the apartment complex that Will [Will B. Scott] and I lived in who heard about me at the medical center and he asked me about teaching at Marian College [Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana] part time in addition to my job at the psychiatric institute. I was research associate in, in genetics, in fact, interestingly we did a lot of very early research work on anomalies for children, Down syndrome and so forth and also on the human papillomavirus back in 1961. We were looking at the relationship with rabbits and so forth is where we were. But so it was a research and then I started teaching at Marian College which was a Catholic college, four year college and I became the first African American to be hired in a four year college in Indiana full time, I mean, I'm sorry, in Indianapolis and the first African American woman to be hired in a four year college in Indiana at the time, and I taught biology there for four years. Story_ID: 468009 Speaker 1: As I was working I decided to go back to school and to get, I, in consulting I wa- decided to go and get a degree, I 'cause I was involved in a number of other organizations in the professional area and I decided that what I was gonna do was reorient where I was going. I would get a degree in higher education, a Ph.D., with a minor in zoology and botany, that was a new degree program that they'd put to--at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] to take your academic areas and give it admin- administrative edge to it. So that's what I did, I went, I decided to go and get the degree and my husband was going to school that was one of the other reasons it was good to do, and so he entered school full time and he got his bachelor's [degree], master's [degree] and doctorate in five years. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: He was, really did very well. So by 1965, I had worked at Marian [Marian College; Marian University, Indianapolis, Indiana] and I graduated my first full class in 1965 and then I had worked at the institute [Indiana University Institute for Psychiatric Research, Indianapolis, Indiana], so then we left to go south as I had said that I was gonna do to work and we decided, the two of together decided that what we wanted to do was to kind of dedicate what we learned and what we could do to black colleges is, h- historically black colleges [HBCUs]. So it was a deliberate decision, we had job interviews all over the country and other places and at other schools and in St. Louis [Missouri], and we really had almost signed a contract, we had signed a contract to go to work I St. Louis. St. Louis was just starting up this community college system and the downtown campus was heavily black, about 90 percent black and we were offered a visit and we found an apartment and everything and we were gonna go there, because we had put our name in a registry for black colleges and we hadn't heard from anybody so a very good mentor and friend of ours called us up the Sunday night after we got back from St. Louis, and said that one of the presidents from one of the black colleges was there in Indianapolis [Indiana] and wanted to meet us. He'd seen our credentials and all and wanted to talk with us about maybe coming to work there. So we went up to Indianapolis and met with him and he wanted Will [Will B. Scott] to come and be chair of the social science division and he was just reorganizing the school and wanted me to come and be dean of students and to teach if I could part time, so Knoxville College in Knoxville, Tennessee. So we thought about it and we had these oth- this other contract we were to send back to St. Louis, and the salary was much less than it would have been in St. Louis, and a number of things and of course St. Louis is a jazz place right? And so Will would have had some outlet so, we decided we'd go to Knoxville College and that's how we decided, we went to Knoxville College. Story_ID: 468010 Speaker 1: During this time, the Civil Rights Movement is, is in full force (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me, what was your role in any, if there were any in civil rights? Speaker 2: Yes, there were. Yes. Speaker 1: Besides making this decision that you wanted to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --teach in black colleges [HBCUs]. Speaker 2: Well, I, my involvement in civil rights came in a very interesting way through the sorority, when I, I had pledged in 1956, and in 1958, I was elected as the second national vice president, which was the undergraduate vice president and I was at school in Indiana of course which was predominately white, there was not a lot of civil rights, anything going on up there, a little bit here and there but not really in the--there were fifty black students at IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and we were trying to get things straight on the campus and we're doing, working on that, the barbershops and so forth and all that. But I was at Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] headquarters for a meeting, executive board meeting, and it was in 1960 and someone came in and told Dr. Jeanne Noble [Jeanne L. Noble], who's also one of my mentors that something was happening and she just interrupted the meeting and she threw her hand up on her head and she said, "Ah, oh my god, my god. We've gotta do something about that," she said, "We--somebody call Dr. Willa Player [Willa Beatrice Player], the girls at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] are having a demonstration in Greensboro [North Carolina] and they are about to close down the middle of the city, and we know that they're gonna need FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents and people." 'Cause we thought then the FBI was supporting black people in the South. The Deltas had, they--we thought we had some agreements but any rate, we had a lot of agreements with women, white women and others in the South that when the black girls were being, the kids were being arrested, that they would go and do the bail for the black girls because they were being raped by the jailers at night. So there was all this heightened activity and Delta involvement so, I was saying, "Well, what is this?" I didn't know nothing about Bennett at the time and they quickly explained that the Bennett girls were activists and the, that these sit-ins had not worked in February, so they were leading a civil rights march to the down--they were gonna sit down in the middle of Greensboro and stay there. And they were trying to get help there because it was a women's college and there were about six hundred women and others involved, so, all of this flurry. So, that was really ho- and I, and, and in the chapters in the South with things going on and we were doing a lot of through Delta, in helping with the Civil Rights Movement. That's really how I got my immersion; I would go to campuses and talk and work with people about and with the various chapters and so forth about it. So then, in 1960, in the late summer we had our national convention at which I would move out of my office because I was, be no longer an undergraduate, but CBS, I think the 60 Min- ['60 Minutes'] I don't know if 60 Min- CBS in fact came to the meeting because the Deltas had gotten very actively involved with civil rights across the country, and they wanted to interview me, because I was a student at a white college in the North and what they really wanted to talk to me about was, "How, how--didn't I think that was horrible all those things those black kids were doing in the South?" Well, needless to say, they didn't get that kind of response from me and so that was really my first, and I said (laughter), I gave this interview in Chicago [Illinois] at the old Chica- the hotel there in Chicago, it's well known. Any rate, and the, I remember the announ- the person doing the interviewing, his face just got pale. I don't, I don't think he expected my response, but that was how I really got involved. Story_ID: 468011 Speaker 1: So then, when I, when we went to Knoxville [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee], however in '65 [1965], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was very active going throughout the South to cla- to campuses and getting the black students involved because things really were bad and we got there in month Sep- August and September and October, Stokely Carmichael wanted to come to the campus and there was this big discussion among the administrative camp, cabinet and all, "Should we let Stokely Carmichael come?" So as dean of students, the president said, "Well, you know what's your--?" I said, "Why not? Yes." I said, "I do have one quarrel with him, though. He wants to charge the students five thousand dollars, they don't have that much money in their budget so as long as they can. He'll come if he, I think he should come for free if he wants to really come, you know?" So--but I have no problem with him coming, so there was all this discussion about what it would do to the school and dah-da-dah-da-dah, so what we agreed is that my staff, all of the student personal staff would be at the gymnasium for the meeting. The student government could have him there and do whatever. And they said, "Well, he's gonna rant and rave." "So what?" And so we had him there and he really got the students fired up literally, and Knoxville needed firing up. We lived in the middle of a very racist neighborhood, the college was there, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was always active up in Maryville [Tennessee] and in Knoxville [Tennessee], in 1965, and so our students got involved in a way, on the campus. They had a demonstration, they kept it to the campus afterwards, and they asked for things to be done for the students differently and that was fine. And so, we then among the other black colleges [HBCUs], we worked with having back up things and I had--when I got to Knoxville, I had made an agreement with the sheriff that anytime, any of our women were arrested that th- he would let me know because we didn't want them spending the night in jail for whatever reasons, and we had that agreement. So, a num- number, a number of things-- Story_ID: 468012 Speaker 1: Then of course we left f- Knoxville [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee], we moved to North Carolina in Greensboro [North Carolina], and that's where a few years earlier, the civil rights sit-ins-- Speaker 2: Sit-ins (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and so, in fact, and North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], was a very activist institution except that what we found in North Carolina is that, because it was a state school, there were state rules that prohibited the students from doing various things and in fact, in 1960, had prohibited them from having a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Color People] chapter. And so, that's how the sit-in young men went to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], that's another whole story altogether. Bennett women are the ones who organized the sit-ins for, for Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] in 1959, this is important to say I think. In 1958, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been invited to Greensboro to speak and he'd invited by the NAACP and some other groups but when he got to Greensboro, nobody would let him speak. The pressures in North Carolina was really tremendous on black people, and so no church would even let him speak. So Dr. Willa Player [Willa Beatrice Player], who was the president at Bennett at the time, Bennett has a beautiful chapel, said he could come to Bennett to speak and anybody white, black, or other who wanted to come could come to the chapel and so he did. So he spoke there and then in the spring of '59 [1959], the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was formed at Shaw [Shaw University] in Raleigh [North Carolina] just, and the Bennett women had been activist since '37 [1937], they closed down the theaters in Greensboro in 1937, because they had to sit in the crow's nest, so they have a long activist history. So when SNCC was formed in '59 [1959], then the Bennett women decided that between Thanksgiving and Christmas of '59 [1959], they were going to boycott downtown Greensboro because they couldn't try on for clothes, it was just the, the whole thing and they knew that they had done their homework and through their NAACP chapter, they knew that the merchants, retail merchants made the bulk of their money for the whole year between Thanksgiving and Christmas and that's why they were gonna boycott. But the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was active in Greensboro also and there was not any guarantee that the Southern Association [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] wouldn't close down the school if the students got arrested and were out of class. So in those days, classes didn't end until January, the end of January so they had all the placards and things made but they postponed it to do it after the end of the semester so they wouldn't lose their credits and all if they were arrested and so forth. So nobody, so the, but the young men from A&T went to Bennett to be with their NAACP chapter and that's really how they got involved in this and to this day, nobody would really tell why they independently went down to sit in at Woolworth without letting the Bennett women know. But the first people in the picket line were the Bennett women 'cause they had all the pickets and things done. So through the state being so restrictive, and the private school there being Bennett, there was a lot of civil rights things still going on. Story_ID: 468013 Speaker 1: Well when we went to North Carolina to work, North Carolina had just been sued for unequal education among the public black institutions in the state, a suit had been brought, and, of course, that's about the same time as the national suit of Adams vs. Richardson [Adams v. Richardson, 1972] was made against the, the federal government for under funding and doing things with the black colleges [HBCUs]. So we hit North Carolina at just about that time, and of course the students were very active and the, our first year there we were, we went there in '67 [1967], and in spring of '68 [1968], Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, I went to A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] as the assistant to the ch- the president and as the director for research, institutional research, and a professor and my husband [Will B. Scott] went as chair of the sociology and social work department and the number of the students at A&T again, they were very much involved and so when Martin Luther King was killed in April, I was on my way from the campus to go to a, a deans meeting, a women's meeting in Atlanta [Georgia], I should never forget, and I heard it on the news and I decided I'd better go back to the campus because I was sure there would be big implications and I did. You didn't have cell radios, cell phones in those days, so I just went back and things, the campus were kind of in turmoil, in turmoil and of course the students were standing on the street, everybody was just so shocked and there was a major street that ran through north, through A&T and the students were standing there. They ate food, and these several cars and white boys came through shouting, "The nigger's dead, he's killed." And the next thing you knew, there were bricks being thrown at them and things escalated and so by the next day the major had ordered in the National Guard and they had, they were having running battles with the A&T students and so it was in the heat of it and my husband had been working with the police department to train them in what we would call now, diversity. And so, as our stud- A&T students were being arrested, he called the chief of police and said, "Well, we'd like to get these students bailed out or whatever. Tell us--stop arresting the students, we can take care of it here." Of course, he got no cooperation, so he decided never again, I will not be back to teach you anything. So, we were involved in, in that sense, in trying to help students and so forth but the classes, the, the university was viewed as a problem institution in that sense, because the students would be getting involved and then it spread to the other colleges and so it was throughout North Carolina, but that was--and we were always trying to mitigate things and to make it possible and safe for the students. Story_ID: 468014 Speaker 1: What is your view about desegregation? Speaker 2: Of education or desegregation? Well I will-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think that we had a very bad thing happen. I think that all of the efforts were very honest. We had segregated schools, and obviously schools were not being funded appropriately, and so the solution seemed to be to integrate. And I don't think anybody had any quarrel with that except there were a few people on the edges who were saying, "Separate but equal could be just a--we, we don't necessarily want to go to school with white children necessarily. We want to have equal funding and support." Because you had very good black teachers and you had a culture in which people were, whatever income level were relating to each other. You just didn't have this, and we're doing an excellent job with very, not many resources at least in Houston [Texas] we were, and in other cities it was diffic- more difficult. In Arkansas, for example, but still on measure things were moving along, you just didn't--and what we thought, my high school experience, for example were teachers that you could, you gotta be better educated because even the black kids would be better educated. I found when I went to Indiana, that wasn't true, not many of the white or black students knew a whole lot more than I knew, that I had learned at Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], but any rate that was water under the bridge at that time. So this movement, as we watched what unfolded, with integration several, I would say, bad things happened with education for black children, and I'll put it succinctly and, so I can, won't be too long with it. I'm gonna pull up an example of some of the exp- studies done in little, in, in Arkansas. I'm just gonna pull that and take it out of Houston for the moment and there were children who reported as young adults that they had to get up early in the morning at four o'clock because of course, busing, to get on the bus, to get a bus at six to go to a white school in the next county, da-da-da, and the things that they would have to go through during the day, but they never told their parents when they got home because they figured if their parents were putting them through this, that this, that white must be right and that what white people had must be better because otherwise their parents would not put them through this kind of turmoil and torture. Now, I'll move it back to, as, as people talked and a lot of conferences we've ha- that sentiment was throughout children, they didn't know any better, and the parents didn't either, the parents thought they were doing the right thing and something that is attributed to Thurgood Marshall have said, and I'm putting it in that context because I wasn't there, but the, the context, not just him but several other people in reviewing some of the things that happened that nobody--African American people in America never ever realized that they would be giving over their destiny into the hands of white people to make policies about and do whatever the kinds of bad things they wanted to do to neutralize black people and that power in America and that desegregation, 'cause we never really got to full integration, was really what happened with that. You mov- you rolled it over into the hands of school boards and people. We closed black schools, which were again the neighborhood rallying points in communities for people who were uneducated at what parents and involvement and left kids literally out there by--on their own, plus the schools were down sized with ability. The best black teachers in every city and this can be documented, I mean it can be a major dissertation, I'm sure that people have done dissertations on this, I know Fred Rogers [ph.] in North Carolina did, the teachers who were good the black teachers who were mature who had, were taken and put in the white schools and the poor white teachers were brought to the black schools and the inexperienced white teachers, right here in Houston, that happened were brought into white schools, into the black schools. And so you had just a mish mash and it never got settled out really. It's never--and the residual of it got transferred into generationally and that's across the country, but in some places worse than others. So I guess my view of it as I would and educate and have done research and looked at it is that, we should have tried separate but equal and it might not have worked either but we never tried it and at least the core culture. And the whole thing of, you see, children learn from a 360 degree total experience and you can't really break it up and just give them academic learning and, 'cause the self-esteem all of that is a part of who you are and you learn that this is, as you hear my story unfold, it was Blackshear Elementary School [Houston, Texas] it was Jack Yates High School, and the things around it that made me who I am. Story_ID: 468015 Speaker 1: So tell me where you go after North Carolina? Speaker 2: Well, after North Carolina, we were there nine years at North Carolina and did several amazing things with North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and with the State of North Carolina. I was able to get several studies done and to work with some of the other schools and to highlight the presence of the African American schools in North Carolina, and also bolster professional in North Carolina. My husband created the social science dep- social work department and made lots of inroads for getting rural students focused on graduate school, and he now has, there were more than two thousand students overall who got into graduate school, who got master degrees, kids who never heard of going to graduate school, whose parents said, "Oh my, I can't let my daughter, my son, unh-uh go," and he explained to them you have to let them go. So the impact movement there was really very, very solid on both of our parts. We worked as a team and that, I worked through getting A&T accredited, getting us accredited from Southern Association [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools], that was my task, but also to get the professional schools accredited and I will quickly tell you, because this is important. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My president sent me to Raleigh [North Carolina] to a meeting the first--second week I was there on the board of higher education and I went to this meeting. I was new and I was sitting there listening to Cameron West, who was the director for higher education, oh just berate the black schools [HBCUs] in North Carolina and saying that the state had to decide how long it was gonna spend this money on these schools where they had schools that weren't accredited in them like the business school at A&T and the engineering school and, and da-da-da-da-da, and I was just listening to all this and I was thinking, oh my goodness, what is all this? So I, they said duplication, the state was paying for duplication, so at the right point I raised my hand and I said, "I have a question Mr. West. What is your operational definition of duplication? Because obviously every college has to have some of the same courses, so what is the operational definition that's being used?" And he grew pink, then red then purple, and he said, "Duplication is duplication, don't you know what that means?" I said, "Yes I know what the dictionary, but that doesn't fit with what we're talking about, 'cause you're talking about an operational term, so what is duplication?" So he just kind of bristled and he went on to whatever else he said. So I left it alone and so, he was giving these statistics about A&T, and of course, I didn't know if they were accurate or not, I hadn't seen things. So, I asked him at the end, I said, "Could you tell me where you got these statistics from?" And he said, "Yes, we have a report that's done," da-da-da-da-da. I said, "Well could I go to your office when we leave here and could you give me some of those reports so I will know what I'm talking about," and he said, "Yes." So when we went back to his office, he said to me, "You better go and check with your president and make sure you're all on the same wavelength." And I said, "I'm sure we must be or he wouldn't have brought me all the way here from Knoxville [Tennessee]." And I left the office and I thought, how arrogant, I mean. So I was driving back to the campus and I really started to get furious and I thought, what is this? There must be a whole lot more to this than I even think it is and obviously it has race mixed into it. So then I thought, well I guess I better tell my boss tomorrow morning about this meeting. So I went to the office about 7:30, I'm an early morning riser and I was, I went to his secretary and I said, "When Dr. Dowdy [Lewis C. Dowdy] comes in, please tell him I'd like to see him when he has a chance this morning. I need to just report to him on the meeting." So she said, "He's back there," so I went back and I said, "Dr. Dowdy? I just wanted to share with you this meeting because it occurred to me at the end, I was gonna ignore it but I thought I'd better tell you about this because I think something is wrong." So he said, "Oh Dr. Scott [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], you don't have to tell me anything," and I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "Dr. West called me this morning at home at 6:30." I said, "Really?" I said, "Okay," I said, "then that validates--I don't have to say anything else except that I know why you brought me here and others, why you brought Will [Will B. Scott] here. You're trying to get this school so that it doesn't fall in this duplication stuff." And we started out and we got the engineering school accredited, we got the business school accredited, we got the nursing school accredited, it had been there twenty-five years and it had never been accredited except that the duplicat- oh, I'm sorry, part of the critical thing that made Mr. West turn purple. When I asked him for the operational definition he said, duplication, I said, oh you mean like when North Carolina A&T has had a nursing school for twenty-five years and then UNCG [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina] gets one four years ago and it just got accredited? And that's when he turned purple. But any rate, so our work at A&T was to look at all the racism involved in the schools, the support of them and so forth and to get them done and I think we did a good job with that. And I said to the president, you knew, you really knew what you meant when you were trying to get schools accredited because if those schools hadn't gotten accredited, they would have ample, not really, but they would have shut that--made, made it merge and they're still trying to make it merge with UNCG, but any rate. Story_ID: 468016 Speaker 1: So we left there and we went, came home to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], but while I was at A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], I took a two years leave of absence and worked for the federal government at the National Institute of Education as head of post-secondary and that was a very good experience, because it exposed me to the federal government and the things that were going on. And my first assignment after I got there was to, I was lent to the civil rights office for about two months to read the desegregation reports that all the seventeen southern states had filed, and my presid- the president of the university system in North Carolina, Dr. Friday [William C. Friday], called the office and told them under no circumstances was I supposed to be allowed to read the North Carolina plan and comment on it because it would be a conflict of interest (laughter). So I didn't, somebody else was assigned it but you know I did, so at any rate, it was, so I'm--I'm just using that to say that there were layers of things beyond just the demonstrations that all were affecting education for blacks and that's a part of our, our journey too. So, we left A&T and went to Texas Southern. We came home to Texas; Dr. Sawyer [Granville M. Sawyer] had invited us to come back to Texas, and we came to work at Texas Southern and we worked here for two and a half years. And then I served as the full time professor of higher education. I was national president of Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] at the time and I wanted to be just teaching and not have an administrative position and so that's what I did here and worked with, I think at in the graduate doctorate program off the ground at Texas Southern and my husband [Will B. Scott] worked in the social work program and got it accredited here at Texas Southern. And so we worked here for two years and then we're asked to come to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I won't go into all of that; that was a quirk. We really, we moved home to stay but we ended out things at Texas Southern with good, good, good, good results. Story_ID: 468017 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were talking about you had come back home to Texas, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --now you were leaving again to go to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] (unclear)? Speaker 2: To Clark (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Clark College. Speaker 2: To go to Clark College in Atlanta, Georgia. Yeah, Dr. Elias Blake who was a very good friend of ours, in fact when we were at Knoxville [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee], we had had one of the first Upward Bound programs, my husband [Will B. Scott] and I and Dr. Blake was a national deputy associate for that and we had met him then and had worked on several things including the organization of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, I was there when that was founded. And he invited us to come to Clark, in fact the first year after we went to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], but we said no, we'd come back home to Texas to stay and we were gonna stay and then a series of things happened and he got me to come, he said I really need you to come to Clark as my executive vice president and again, no woman had ever, and I didn't go because no woman had ever been that, but I went over to learn about it, and there were all these rumors all over the country and people wanted to know, "Why was I gonna leave the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] to go to work at Clark?" and that, you know. And so, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution was interested in it and I really hadn't decided to go and, because we were at Texas Southern, and Dr. Blake asked me to come over and read there so, they'd just had their self-study and gotten reaccredited and to see and to learn about Cl- Clark before I decided I didn't wanna come. So I went over one morning about five o'clock in the morning and Lady Bird Johnson was on the plane from Houston [Texas] and I'd gotten to know her and so I got off the plane and there were all these ph- there was a photographer and a news person and moved over because I was sure they were, she was coming off last, she was in first class. And so, I moved over and I started to walk far and the photographer turned around and started to follow me, and he was taking pictures and this woman was saying, "Dr. Scott [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott], we understand you're gonna be coming to work at Clark College." I said, "Now that's not true. I'm not--I don't have any job at Clark College." Which I didn't, I was--she said well that's what we hear and we, we know that you, why, why would you leave the Girl Scouts and, and I, and then there was a woman behind her and said, "Dr. Scott, I'm from Clark. Please don't say anything." So, we walked all the way through the airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], I just didn't say anything and this man is taking pictures and this woman's asking me questions, so we finally got outside in the car and I say to the lady from Clark, what is this? She said, "I don't know how they fi- nobody was supposed to even know you were coming here 'cause it--no, you're not." I said, "That's right." She said, "But there's such interest and we don't know why." But, any rate, she said now that she was from the Atlanta Journal, now that they're here and they've taken these pictures, and he framed one on the escalator going down, he got in front and there was me and then there was his reporter and then there was the woman from Clark. She said, "They're gonna run this picture I bet you this afternoon with the story about it." I said, "Well I can't help that, because all I can tell you is I'm not, I don't have a job, I'm--." She said, "Well, I know." And so when I got to the campus, the president was not there. He wasn't gonna be, even be there that's why I was going over just to read in his conference room and get these papers. So, to make a long story short, a number of things happened, and I still didn't give my word that I was going because I had to go to Iran for some things and so forth. But any rate, we ended up going, my husband and I ended up going to be the vice president there. And Clark was at a very pivotal time, it was moving forward. Dr. Vivian Henderson [Vivian Wilson Henderson], who had president had really moved it to be one of the schools who had a major study and had a plan in fact for the next ten years. And one of the major parts of it was to create a mass communications department, which and right there in Atlanta was very important. So, in addition to being the executive vice president's COO, the president asked me to work with the mass communications program people because they were all very young and inexperienced to get that off the ground and developed and that was a major accomplishment and it was, it still is fantastic as a part of there. And so I was able to do several things, get a lot of grants and do training with staff at Clark and my husband created the social work program and again got students involved in research and so forth, and so we had a really good sojourn. We were there for nine years and I'd say we helped to move Clark up a really big notch during the time we were there and worked in Atlanta, got involved in several groups within, in Atlanta also as a part of that, the churches and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and a number of organizations that were there, and I would say graduated with nine classes of students and a number of them have, continue to be in touch and created quite a number of students--we sent some of the first students to Africa back in 1979, '80 [1980], to work with the Methodist church [United Methodist Church], and so there were a number of opportunities available and done for Clark students, so that it was a very good ten year era for Clark. Story_ID: 468018 Speaker 1: At the end of the time we were leaving, I was coming back home to Texas, and we were gonna s- get our research and training and development center done down in South Texas on our property. We have ten acres of land and we, and my husband left, he went to Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] to help Grambling get a social work program done, and I had helped Grambling do there desegregation study and plan and to ask for a Ph.D. in higher education and then helped them to design that. So that came on line just as we were leaving and the, the president there asked if I would please come and work with him for the first year on that, and so since Will [Will B. Scott] was there, I decided I would do that. But, and in the interim, Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] were both looking for presidents and my name had been submitted to both of them. And I was asked to submit my credentials and all, which I did to neither because I was really ready to go and do our thing, you know. We were ready to go and do our thing and I'd been working so long and hard and helping to facilitate, help people to know that black women could jobs and I had done research on that and all when I was at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. So I really was, I didn't follow through on either of those and went home and around Thanksgiving, I got a call from someone who said, "You haven't responded to the Bennett people?" And I said, "No, I haven't." I didn't send them a letter. I didn't send neither group a letter really, because I was very keenly aware in those days, one of the things that people did was to give statistics and say, "Well we've talked to this many women of African American descent, our women," da da da, and I'd never would play the statistics game, so if I wasn't interested in something I didn't even respond, so they couldn't count me in. So, to make a long story short, I was convinced that I should send my credentials in to Bennett, but it was the Friday after Thanksgiving and they were due in on Monday, and in those days you didn't have FedEx [Federal Express; FedEx] or any of those things, and I said, "Well, I can't do that." And the person who's calling me was one of my mentors said, "Oh yes." I said, "No, I haven't even updated my resume 'cause I wasn't gonna do this, anything else," and she said, "No, why don't you just add on a sheet or two and send it?" I said, "How can I do that to a committee? I mean, no, no, no, no, no." To make a long story short, I would say that I was talked to and me, and I decided after I started looking what Bennett, where Bennett was and thinking back to 1960, when Jeanne Noble [Jeanne L. Noble] had talked about it and knew that Bennett was a very fan--fantastic place and had a produced a number of students and we were with A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] of course, Bennett was right down the street, so we'd known Bennett in those days too. And so I went into the search process and I emerged as the person to be the president. And that's the--and then in that same year, Dr. Niara Sudarkasa [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa] was selected, in fact she was selected in January to be the president of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], first woman to be president there and I was the second woman to be president at Bennett and Dr. Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] was the first African American woman to serve as the president of Spelman, so the three of us were selected. It was the first time there were three African American women presidents of colleges simultaneously in the United States. And, well I had done a lot of research in the '80s [1980s] and presented data to people about the absence of African American women not only in pre- presidencies, but in college, but throughout, in organizations and associations and in tenured positions, so that was a lot of my research and background and we worked on that. So after finishing up at Clark, I went on up to and I was there for fourteen years and one of the things that I had said--I was asked to say what would I do, and thought that Bennett should have a women's leadership institute [National African American Women's Leadership Institute], and that was one of my big things to do and we got that started and got them financially sound, got them reaccredited twice and added a social work program which we got accredited. My husband, ca- I got him to come and do that, we had a psychology as a discipline which, and we graduated and produced a lot of Ph.D.'s in psychology and so forth. And, but you know, I had a very good growth period. I, I said I would go and stay ten years after, 'cause I put my projects at home on hold. In fact, we had all the architectural everything for that and so, ten years had ended up being fourteen and I just said, I gotta go (laughter) so, at the end of that time I came back to Texas. But, I had a very rich legacy of working with a number of institutions and a lot of, over the years that I've been involved, I have been very much involved in accreditation. I just wanna say that I was one of the first black people to serve on an accreditation team along with Jessie Smith [HistoryMaker Jessie Carney Smith] from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Dr. Charles Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] from Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. In 1966, all the accreditation teams from Southern Association [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools], even the black schools [HBCUs] were all white. And so in 1966, the very first three served on the team to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] in the spring of '66 [1966], and over the years I've done at least nineteen or twenty accreditation visits and I've served as chairs of several groups and some white colleges too but, so that's been a part of my legacy is trying to get the accrediting associations to do the right thing. And you asked earlier if I had any sayings? And one of the sayings I have in higher education is that for every black college that has a problem, there's a white college that has the exact same problem but nobody ever holds them to it or loses their accreditation for it. And I've left it open for people to prove me wrong and nobody's proved me wrong just yet. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So. Story_ID: 468019 Speaker 1: You talked about Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Niara Sudarkasa (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) do you know her? Do you know her well? Speaker 2: Yes. I know, I met her, I met Johnnetta and Niara at the same time when we became presidents-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --of the three colleges. And I don't know if you remember the journalist, she had a program in, oh, this is terrible, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and she did a major television program with the three of us just starting up, 'cause it was very unusual for us to, for the, in, in our world and the higher education world period. And there weren't a lot of women presidents of four year colleges at that time, so that was kind of a watershed time when women were beginning to move into presidencies and the same year I became president of Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] in the Method- United Methodist system which there are about 120 colleges and universities in the United Methodist colleges, which a lot of people don't know and this is the first time there had been three women presidents of colleges in the Methodist colleges, so I was one of those and with the woman at Randolph Macon Woman's College [Randolph College, Lynchburg, Virginia], Linda Lorimer, and Stephanie Bennett who was up at Centenary [Centenary College; Centenary University, Hackettstown, New Jersey], so I was overlapping two sets of threes of women presidents for the first time in 1987. Story_ID: 468020 Speaker 1: Do you think you'll work with Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] again? I understand they ha- they're having an accreditation problem, now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think that Knoxville is an example of what I was talking about with one black college [HBCU] and one white college having the same problem, and the black college being sent under. I could name three or four others like that. That is a real part of the problem, it was not so much that Knoxville was so way out, as I reviewed it and looked at, and then of course, they chose to become a different kind of college and did so and were accredited by that group and so they, they became a work very much like the school up in Kentucky, Berea [Berea College, Berea, Kentucky], where students would work and get out. So I'm not quite so sure right now what's going on, but I don't think they're seeking Southern Associations [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools], they've moved out of that line and became one of the other kinds of colleges and of course did a wonderful job creating a lot of very powerful graduates. Josh Curry [sic. HistoryMaker George Curry] is one of the graduates that was produced while we were there and--the journalist. And so, I, I helped wherever I can as a consultant or whatever else and here to help, try to help these colleges-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --because god knows we owe--we owe it to them and to the next generations (laughter). Story_ID: 468021 Speaker 1: Now, s- stepping out of the academic arena-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --we need to talk a little bit about your involvement with the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. Speaker 2: All right, sure. I was a girl, Girl Scout here in Houston [Texas] in San Jacinto Girl Scout Council and I think a little bit earlier I told you about that, about going to Oklahoma and all that. So, when I went away to college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] I was not involved and at my job at Knoxville [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee] as dean of students, at that time that was in 1965, a Dr. Jeanne L. Noble who was on the board of Girl Scouts, national board, who was one of my mentors, she had been president of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] when I was the second vice president and they had gotten Girl Scouting to try out a new program, called Campus Gold, to try to look at young women who had gone, who'd graduated and had gone to college who were Girl Scouts and to see could we not get them as volunteers to learn to be troop leaders and so forth. And so, she called up and ha- had the Girl Scouts ask me if I would have a Campus Gold group on Knoxville's campus and we did. So we created that Girl Scout group and we sponsored three troops for girls, Brownies, Juniors and ca- two, two Brownies and a Junior troop in the low income neighborhood right around Knoxville College. And it was a fantastic thing for the college girls as well as the students so. And in Girl Scouting once you start doing something as a volunteer, they keep, you know they keep rolling over and so, the next thing I knew I was asked to serve on a regional committee and that to help select kids for international opportunities, and I said I would do that because also, I wanted to always try to make sure that things are equal and the girls, black girls had a acqu- equal access to those. So I served on that group and then we moved to North Carolina to Greensboro at A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University], and while I, when I went there, Girl Scouting was just undergoing kind of a realignment like it's doing right now nationally, and council coverage and a new council had been created and I was asked to serve on a committee to help set up the personnel policies and all for that council and to help them recruit the first executive director. So I did and I did another volunteer job. Story_ID: 468022 Speaker 1: So then, someone nominated me to be considered for the national board of Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], and they wrote and asked if I would let my name go into nomination and at the time I said, well I needed to know more because I hadn't been actively involved, and I did not know what the status of scouting for black girls was throughout the country and to please write back and tell me, because I had lots of other ways to spend my time and if they weren't being responsive then the answer would not be yes. So I got back a very good letter of report that Girl Scouting was looking at diversity, really giving full attention to it and that the decade of the '70s [1970s] was to be Action 70, pluralism was to be the centerpiece and that a lot of work was being done, so I wrote back and said, "Well sure, I'd be glad to be on the board," and the national meeting was in Seattle [Washington], and we went to the national meeting where which I was elected and the conference opened with the girl event, is always the big event and it opened with the one hundred voice choir which was like the centerpiece, it had been spread out and the Girl Scouts had invited the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League, a lot of the groups because they were really about serious diversities, so they, they said anyway. And so this one hundred voice choir, so we're sitting there with the opening night and we're sitting there and Dr. Noble [Jeanne L. Noble] who I've mentioned was on the board and Dr. Farabin [ph.] and others, and the curtains open on the choir and it's a hundred voices and they are lily white and there's a hushed silence in the board thing and I thought, now these people wrote and told me, and I'm thinking in my mind, well was that true? And so then I thought, okay there ninety-two flags are going to come in, one of those girls, some of them will be, 'cause I thought somebody should, any rate they were all lily white too. Now they had invited the 'Seattle Today' show to come and cover it, everybody was excited and the young woman who was the anchor of that show was black and so she had her crew and all in there and so I just sat through the rest of the meeting in kind of stunned sil- I was trying to wonder, who could, what? You know, and so Dr. Noble said in a very low whisper, "I don't believe these dames did this," but it echoed 'cause it was such a hush. So after the meeting, some of us, we'd never met each other, members, black members coming in with the board and Ada Deer, who was a Native American woman, and we said, we need to go somewhere and sit down because something is not right. And the next morning, each of us got a telegram from somebody, 'til this day we don't know who they came from and mine said, "Why are you going to take your intellectual ability and your know how with organizations to a racist organization?" And others got others, so we met with the president. I'll make this quick, and talked with her said, "You--there's a problem first of all, our national president should apologize for this. That was the right thing to do, whatever happened with it, there should be an apology, 'cause we had talked about diversity and pluralism, Action 70, and we do this?" So we decided we would have a conference on scouting for black girls and at the site that was agreed on to find out really what was his status and we would have said, sixty largest communities, but we got to the January board meeting and the pressures are now there. We had a two hour tea group when this was introduced because people were resisting, said oh no, we can't have a segregated meeting, da da da da da, so we prevailed. I won't go into all of that and voted to do so and to fund it and three members of the board resigned, two white women, well four, two white women, a white man and a black woman resigned from the board at that time. But we went ahead; we had the conference and it was the best thing that had ever happened to Girl Scouting, because we had sixty neighborhoods tell us in their own words, what was going on. We found black staff were being less in some places, just a number of things, but there were issues that could be put on the table. And we also opened up the way for girls to be involved, because we had a senior Girl Scout, a volunteer and a staff member from every council that came to be the voting delegates, the first time girls had ever voted on anything national. So, the eighteen recommendations helped us to lift Girl Scouting up, and so I served on the board as prep- program chair and during that first three years, two of the first three years. Story_ID: 468023 Speaker 1: Then I was elected first vice president in '72 [1972], and served as chair of the executive committee, helping us to work through and being met administrative skills and so forth and then in '75 [1975], was named national president and had several goals, I had ten challenges to the organization [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and I won't go into all the things about that but, they were to get Girl Scouting of course to be open and equitable and so forth and to help girls develop and I think we met all--not I think, I know we did. And so, one of the things that we did, Elizabeth Koontz, Elizabeth Duncan Koontz, who was the first African American woman to serve as head of the labor, women's labor, Women's Bureau in the [U.S.] Department of Labor was on the board, and Liz chaired the, a kind of a diversity committee, it was called something pluralism then, not diversity, that's a new word, you know, this, this ilk. And really giving attention to things, all, you know, it's hard to give, you really only give 360 degree attention to things, you lose something when you're trying to do things and so we did and, and everybody was on board. And so one of the things we did, as a part of this, was to change the face of Girl Scouting, I'm very proud of that. Ruth Boyd who was a black woman who was the ANED, the associate national executive director, Frances Hesselbein, I hired as the national director and Ruth gave the leadership for the programmatic development, we had a review done of Girl Scouting and its image and we created the new pin, with the three faces of women on it and their ethnic face, people don't realize the noses, they're different. This was, and so this was presented at the '78 [1978] convention at the end of my three years as president along with a number of other things that we did to really open up Girl Scouting and the, the good work of women, black and white dedicate--and Native American and Mexican American, dedicated to really upping Girl Scouting. So that was a very, very productive time. And then, internationally we did so too. We met Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] at the Buckingham Palace [London, England] for a four hour tea while we were in London, and then I hosted Queen Elizabeth for the bicentennial in 1976, which was a real highlight in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and we gave her our Hidden Heroines project, so that was very, very, very nice to do. And I think Girl Scouting has grown a great deal and moved ahead in a number of ways, and I'm glad to have been a part of it. Story_ID: 468024 Speaker 1: You also worked with the Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, I was on the Urban League board for about eight or nine years, and I headed the education committee, worked with Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and John Jacobs [HistoryMaker John E. Jacob]. John Jacobs is from Houston [Texas] as a matter of fact and made, I would say milestones with education. We did a number of things and one of the things I've talked about, 360 degrees of focusing on young children, we had several projects that not only got them intellectually and academically done, but went into their informal lives, providing opportunities for them to grow and develop. And one of the things that came as a result of a lot of work that we did in the Urban League was the creation of the McKnight Program [McKnight Doctoral Fellowship Program] in Florida. Dr. Israel Tribble [Israel "Ike" Tribble] was one of the members of the education committee and we were all knowing that there was a dearth of black Ph.D.'s that was beginning to show and one of the things we talked and with the Urban League we were trying to look at solutions for this, and so Dr. Tribble was in Florida and was introduced to the people from the McKnight Foundation and did the proposal and we all helped to get that done and the McKnight fellows were born and they have created a good, more than hundred, hundreds of black Ph.D.'s and that led to us helping Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to get a grant. Dr. Orlando Taylor [HistoryMaker Orlando L. Taylor] there, the vice president to produce black Ph.D.'s for black colleges and universities [HBCUs]. The Urban League was extremely important, we worked with Girl Scouting and with other organizations in concert with the Urban League to make things happen and tremendous investment and power and those were very, and it introduced us to a number of corporate people on the board to help with black colleges and other kinds of things. That's the other thing I guess you do is, at least I do as a network when I'm on a board or something, I try to help educate other people about things that can help African Americans and whatever venue it happens to be, I just try to get them involved, and the Urban League gave me that opportunity and created some new people too. Sharon Robinson [Sharon P. Robinson] who's now the head of AACTE [American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education] in Washington [D.C.], one of the first African American women to serve as head of a, an association in education in this country. Of course, Liz Koontz [Elizabeth Duncan Koontz] also was president of NEA [National Education Association], but had, there hadn't been anybody since her, so the Urban League was very important. Story_ID: 468025 Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations that you'd like to talk about that we haven't? Speaker 2: Let's see, I've, I've talked about the Urban League [National Urban League], and well, I guess the, the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], when I was vice president at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I started to represent Clark and go to those meetings and to try to help with the development of investment, because they are private schools and have great need for funding and support, and I was able to forge several relationships out of that. So the nine years I was at Clark, and then the fourteen years I was at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] as president and I served on the UNCF board when I was president of Bennett and did the same kind of networking and brought the issues to the table because often people who were in positions, such as the directors and so forth, don't really bring all of the schools to the table. One of the very things I'm proud about in UNCF that didn't make some people happy was to make people equally support the colleges instead of the few pets that certain people would have, and they would, and one of their directors, I won't even call his name but, it was during the time I was on the board so they can figure it out, went to the Lilly foundation [Lilly Endowment, Inc.] in Indianapolis [Indiana] and in the discussion, said to them, that "Oh, only about five or six of the black schools [HBCUs] are gonna survive so I wouldn't be putting my money." And little did he know that before he left good, somebody called me up and said, "Let me tell you what just was said about the black colleges," and of course I was livid and eventually confronted this person with it and of course, it was, I didn't say anything, such thing. But the results were that he was trying to get more money to be given to UNCF to manage for the institutions instead of having the institutions apply directly to Lilly foundation, and then he could control in many ways who got the money, and that's true. In fact a very real crisis almost came with the, some money that had come from the state department [U.S. Department of State] to go to historically black colleges in the UNCF and we were to do proposals for them and we did and there were three nine schools, nine or eleven schools selected, I guess eleven and out of the top eleven, Bennett was number nine and so I was, we were expecting to be funded, I mean we didn't know that we were number nine at the time but any rate, we knew. And so, the president had some other ideas about what he wanted to do about the black college. Story_ID: 468026 Speaker 1: So we were talking about UNCF. Speaker 2: Yes. The United Negro College Fund, which as you know, is the, made up of the private black col- forty-three of the private black college [HBCU] and now I think it's down to thirty-nine in the United States because there schools are not accredited, they've dropped out. And I was sharing the leadership piece and some of the things that happened with UNCF during my tenure with them and over the fourteen years that I was president of Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], that one of the things that not only me but several of the presidents, there were a good six of us at least who were trying to hold the organization to be accountable on an equal way for all the institutions and also for so much more that could be done for the institutions rather than for the organization as it was founded. One of the things that was very telling about the kind of differential treatments that were going on related to a live case study that I know happened with the money that came from the state department [U.S. Department of State]. There were to be about eleven colleges funded and we all wrote proposals for the programs and submitted those and as it happened, knowledge after the fact knowing that Bennett was number nine out of eleven, and when the person who was the staff person presented the list of schools, because they had all the evaluations and all and submitted them, the assistant to the president, asked her to remove Bennett's name from the list and she said, well I don't understand why. Their--their proposal was evaluated just like all the others and so I don't understand. So, he said, "Well Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III]," I'll mention his name, "Bill Gray said to move their name." So she said, "Well I'm, I'm not moving. I, I am above board, I am ethical and we have eleven schools and this is number nine so, I don't know what else is going on but this is it." So about two days later she got another notice that said to move Bennett's name and so she said, "Well, I'm not and, and you can tell whoever that I am not, I'm giving you all the proposals as they were," and said, "Well why? I'm not--." He said, "Because Dr. Scott [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott] is always on his case and gets on his nerves," and so she said, she thought, "You're not, you don't know what kind of nerves you're gonna be on if, if she ever finds out what happened with this." So at any rate, he called her down to his office and she said had a stark raving fit and that, that's how he used to do the staff members a lot, just, just berate them and so forth and she said she walked out, and because she had been instrumental in helping to get the money there even and all that, and was just, just appalled. And actually the way I found out about it is because my phone rang one Saturday morning and this person said, "Just listen to what I have to say and I'm just telling you this just in case some things happen, I don't know what's gonna happen," and then she recounted to me what had happened and she said, "Do, don't do anything about it," and she said, "Normally I wouldn't even be involving it, but I'm an ethical person and I, I don't understand what's going on and so this is--." Well to make a long story short, we got the grant. However, she left, she said there's too much unethical behavior going on. Well, I share that because that was just the tip of the iceberg and the unfair differential treatment, and I was, for whatever school, I wasn't for any, for any school or against any school, it was just, there's a way to be documented fair and open and UNCF was created by Fred Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson] to enable the institutions, not UNCF, to become a giant or to become an or--an organization that then became an entity on its own and so it did very successfully created the special projects division where it got the Bill Gates money and everybody in the country thought that Bill Gates had given the money to UNCF colleges, not so. UNCF manages those scholarships for anybody from any school anywhere in the country, white, black or other. And the, and it just created a whole bureaucracy level and all of that has to do with something with the institutions. And the--so the whole notion, I guess back to my involvement was to try to keep them honest and until I had left the presidency and we have even called, my board called them down because one of the things they had done was to invade the Bennett College annual giving area. There's an agreement that UNCF would not solicit people in the geographical area around the college, and of course they were doing this all the time and so I, other presidents wouldn't do it, but I called their hand on it and that, so much so, to the people who would be chairing our local things and when they got letters and they would send them to me, and I'd send them right back. So our board and one of its board retreats asked him to come down so that we could talk with him, he sent instead, Vernon[AB1] [ph.], his assistant. So, which was all right but we got the agreements there. So I guess I'm saying that one of the things that I've always felt that I had the responsibility to do, is to try to make things right and, and to keep things ethical and fair. Again it doesn't--everybody is not always gonna be on the same wave length and that's not possible, sometimes it is, but to be fair about it. So that was my sojourn with UNCF, so I was not one of the people in favor with the administration, and it really never bothered me because I knew I was ethical and right about it and would continue to be that way. Story_ID: 468027 Speaker 1: I happened to have been fortunate enough to be in Washington [D.C.] and was involved with the meetings that led to the formation of the--of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], as you--the short name for it which was founded by, with Dr. Blake [Elias Blake] again, Dr. Blake created a company, ISE, Institute for Services to Education, in which they got grants and helped the black colleges [HBCUs] with it. And a group of the presidents wanted to look at how they could be more involved and perhaps more influential or whatever and they created NAFEO, and I was in Washington when that was first created there in the basement of the old Washington Hilton hotel [Washington, D.C.]. I just my, my threads go through many of these things, and I did--in 1980, I had done a major study of African American women and where they were in colleges and universities in the country and this is the study that showed that at that point there was only one African American woman president and that was Yvonne Taylor [Yvonne Walker-Taylor] up at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and she was there because her father [Dougal Ormonde Beaconfield Walker] had been president and died in office and they named her the interim president. And there really had not been any plethora of four year presidents after Dr. Willa Player [Willa Beatrice Player]. Mary McLeod Bethune, was the first one of a four year college and then Dr. Player was the second at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] as a four year college and she left in 1965, and there had not been anybody since that time until the late '70s [1970s], and Mable McLean [Mable Parker McLean] at Barber-Scotia [Barber-Scotia College, Concord, North Carolina], I think was next, I can almost count off the names (laughter) to tell you how many it was. So the whole notion of helping other people who have responsibilities, like other presidents who were often concerned that their schools wouldn't get things and that that happened sometimes too. But we always kept the records on ours, and I dared them at all to bu- touch anything that belonged to Bennett. And then of course there was the whole thing of reporting out how much UNCF [United Negro College Fund] put in the colleges which didn't always go out just quite right. So I guess I'm saying, the organizations that are the umbrella organizations or, placed themselves in between the colleges and universities and the funding world or the corporate world or whatever that makes people have to come through by them, is really very unfortunate and that's some of the responsibility. Story_ID: 468028 Speaker 1: The other organizations I would say that I've been involved in which relate to higher education, the Association for Institutional Research and I served on that executive board. I was one of the first African Americans to serve on that board many years ago. I served on the American Association of Colleges and Universities [ph.] board and I was the only African American woman there for several years, I served on the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities board as a member of the executive body on the NASCUM [National Association of Schools and Colleges of the United Methodist Church (NASCUMC)], that's the Methodist colleges, N-A-S-C-U-M [sic.], on that board and I served as a member of the board of the Africa University. In fact, that's a major contribution that I feel I've ma- I was a founder, one of the founders of Africa University in Mutare, Zimbabwe, which is founded by the Methodist church [United Methodist Church] and I was appointed to the board in 1988, and from '88 [1988], to '94 [1994], we developed a full blueprint of, designed a college university and opened it up formally in 1994 in Mutare, and I had the honor of presiding at that official inauguration of the university there in Zimbabwe and have been involved with it off and on ever since. I was a member of the Women's College Coalition executive board, and served there for, for several years and then I served as a member of the DACOWITS, that's an acronym the Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services in the [U.S.] Department of Defense, for three years from '79 [1979] to '81 [1981], and in '81 [1981], I served as a chair of that group. And that was all about looking at opportunities for women in the services, protecting them, opening up. And a major initiative during that time was to get women access to combat pay, because only if you have access to combat pay do you have full salaries in the, in the [U.S.] military or access to full salaries, and of course people would say, "Well, women can't do that because they have all these problems," and we successfully reduced all of the differences in women and men in the services to one and that's the women produce the babies and very clearly identify that. And they talked about upper body strength, there're men who also don't have upper good body strength; it has to be developed. So all of those things we took one by one and Patricia Schroeder [Patricia Scott Schroeder], I have to give her a lot of credit for staying the course in the [U.S.] Congress about this and all the generals and all the things that we now see as major problems that have surfaced about Iraq [Iraq War]. We see where all the corruption, I'll use the word, the corruption exists, and a number of things that happened that really don't have to happen and, but they happen sometimes against certain groups or whatever kinds of people and are unjust as they were. Speaker 2: That was an appointed position? Speaker 1: The, the DACOWITS? Yes, it was appointed by the Department of Defense and the, and the president would second it in some way, but the secretary of defense was the person who-- Speaker 2: What president was this under? Do you remember? Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979], '80 [1980], '81 [1981], that would have been, Carter was through '78 [1978], so whoever followed Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm not gonna even say the name. (Laughter) But any rate, that was the next president [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was '79 [1979], to '81 [1981] and the defense chair, we worked with Larry Correb [ph.] and Carlucci [Frank Carlucci], so--over the time period. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And during that time, one of the things we did was to visit places all over the country, military bases over those three years and we started out with the [U.S.] Navy in Norfolk [Virginia] to understand the whole thing about women being on ships and so forth and all those things. And I guess the one kind of thing that I really value from having been in that experience is that we were able to get people to think through the whole thing about what it really meant to be combat ready and what it meant to be access to combat if you never went to combat, because a lot of the men who have access have never go to combat and to get that at least on the table. And then one of the highlights, the joys, you're talking about things. We visited the academy the military academy of the coast guard up in Connecticut [United States Coast Guard Academy, New London, Connecticut], and I was in charge of the full dress rehears- the full dress parade. There was a young woman who was the senior officer for that week and so we did the whole, the whole walk of the military parade and one of the men, you know I walked, they said, "Oh, you don't have to walk all that direction, you can just stop and wa--." I said, "No, I plan to walk it all, I'm in good physical health, and this is, and I know an African Ameri- no African American woman had never done that before." So I, I've done things not so much for me, but as the old adage says, "When and where I enter, the whole race enters with me" [Anna Julia Cooper], and I believe that, I guess I'm called a race woman in that sense because I value our race and I think it should be everywhere. And so when I have the opportunity to make it so, I try hard to do it and so that was a real highlight and we had that. Story_ID: 468029 Speaker 1: Then the other organizations that I have been involved in, the Top Ladies of Distinction [Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc.], which is a non-profit volunteer organization of women across the country which was founded here in Texas, up in Tyler [Texas] as a matter of fact, up near my maternal relatives' home, selected me to be an honorary member of that organization and so I value that, and I have been a part of that for several years. I'm currently--I was initiated into or inducted into the Consortium of Doctors [Consortium of Doctors, Ltd.] in the late, mid-'90s [1990s], and I currently serve as the director, national director of the Consortium of Doctors which is a group of African American women who have doctorates and we have about 250 members and we do mentoring is a big part of our program to help bring the next generation along, so I serve in that capacity. And I'm trying not to leave anybody out, 'cause I don't want anybody to say, "You didn't say--." Speaker 2: This is your current project? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That's, that's your-- Speaker 1: Current, the current from nin- for 2006 to 2008 Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I served as director, and we will be having our annual meeting in Dayton, Ohio this, at the end of July and we'll be phasing an undergraduate, Underground Railroad as a part of that experience for people and looking at a major mentoring program nationally across the states and getting clusters of women to work on that as, as a major project. We made major contributions to the statue that's in the mouth of the Savannah River, if you were in Savannah [Georgia], I don't know if you saw that or not, the black family? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There--the, our group is the group that helped to fund that and to make contributions to that and [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou wrote the writing around the edge of it that's a, a major monument since the large majority of the slaves coming to the South brought, were brought in through the Savannah River. So, and I mentioned Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and I'm very much involved in that and I have been after I was served as undergraduate vice president, I served as national secretary and then I also served as national chair of the education committee and helped move that along. I served as a member of the board of directors of BISA, the Black Women in Sisterhood for Action which is a major project out of the Washington, D.C. area and, and currently serving in my home conference, Southwest Texas Conference as a social action mission coordinator for the United Methodist Women and I've been involved with United Methodist women activities over the years, ever since I first went to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], but very closely when I went to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and that. So, that takes us into looking into looking at social action and reviewing legislation, helping our congregations look at and take actions that benefit human beings and people so that's some of the things I've been doing in and out of the professional area. And I have a consulting firm I guess I'll just summarize with that, when, in fact when I went home, when we were going home in '87 [1987], to build our physical facility, my husband [Will B. Scott] and I, down at our place at Loyola Beach [Texas], I was gonna take my consulting and training business full time, 100 percent, it's G. Randle Services, which I founded in 1975, and I do consulting and organizational and personal development and research for that. And my husband and I own Scott's Bay Enterprises which is our place in South Texas where we have rentals and special events. We have a fishing pier and other things and we have a small retreat center there, because the larger one, we were gonna build and I'm still debating about that now, would hold one hundred people and it's right on the bay. It's a beautiful area out in the country and it's very amenable to having retreats or training and so forth. So, and I do a lot of consultation and have done a lot of development of curricula and things for people and programs in areas and so that's kind of-- Story_ID: 468030 Speaker 1: Let me get something-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on the record, 'cause I have read two different things. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You were the eleventh or the twelfth president of-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess I must have-- Speaker 1: --Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: --been both (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: When I went there, in fact when I was, even when I was inaugurated, I was told that I was the eleventh president, and it was not until two years later, or maybe even three years later, that one of the alumni was doing some research and went back and did some counting and it came out that I was the twelfth. The difference was that there was some interim persons who, one who had not been accounted but, as an interim, should have been accounted and that brought the debate up that I was really the eleventh inaugurated president, but the twelfth president because of the interim nature. But that, that was, I, I said to the board, when we had got that cleared, "Well I really was the eleventh and the twelfth, it was that intense," and they couldn't settle it, really they got like two presidencies out of me in one, (laughter) but I officially came, became the twelfth president. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 468031 Speaker 1: What are your concerns and hopes for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well I would say, some of my concerns for the African American community revolve around, in an interesting way, one, education. I think that the African American community at the very early levels is being highly shortchanged and gerrymandered, if you will, away from true education, notwithstanding that states have these tests that they are--have for people to--and teaching to the test are bad for any group of people period, because education is more than learning facts and having the correct answer on a multiple choice. As I've tried to say, it's in what has, what sustains people to be leaders and to be effective citizens is the whole 360. It's the respect for people. One of the things that's happening with our educational system is that we have all of these students identified as quote special education students, special needs, and they are, a lot of them are identified as being attention deficit [attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)] students and therefore, we need to drug them with Ritalin. Now, I will share a quick experience on that that really makes me, I'm very much concerned about this. I went to a school in Greensboro [North Carolina] to--it was during Black History Month, I think to speak, to talk about the academy and I took my robes, the academic robes and my hat and so forth. I was gonna talk with the children about this and try to inspire them for colleges and so forth. I was there about a half an hour early. I was sitting there in the principal's office and a teacher came in and opened up this drawer and she took out this capsule and she went to the desk and told the secretary she was signing this out for a student and it looked like a drugstore, and I s- I was curious, I am curious, I am, that's been throughout my life since I was a little girl and I observe things around me. And I said to the secretary, "What, what, what was that medicine, the student for medicine?" No, she said, "I came to get the Ritalin," and I thought, the Ritalin? And I asked the secretary and she said, "Oh yeah, all of those are drawers for the students," and I said, "You have this many students on Ritalin?" And she said, "Ritalin and other things." Well, there was some thirty drawers around this area, and I said, and I was shocked and I was determined to ask the principal some questions which I did later and found some very distressing information. Well, I point that out to say that, I'm a scientist by training and one of the things I really try to do is to document things and to look at things that you can document, not what somebody feels, thinks or believes, but what you know. And one of the very clear things that I have been most surprised about and concerned is that schools almost systematically have gone through and cut out recess, and physical education out of the curriculum. Now as a biologist, human beings and, and you learn this and everybody else does at some point, we have something called metabolism, and anabolism is what you take in, and catabolism is what you break down and you, you reach a medium point for metabolism and if you take in more than you burn up, it gets stored as fat. So, this whole problem of obesity and also attention deficit, which is a matter of not using up energies and sure if children have energies, they haven't used up, children especially have high rates of metabolism which means that they have lots of energy (laughter) to burn up. And if it's not used, they, they do it in some way or another, they either divert themselves from attention in classes and store as fat if there's no other part of the body being used, so, it's a problem we've created. So I'm really concerned about that. We have all these children labeled and I use that term rather than diagnosed, for real, as attention deficit and special ed [special education] students, and pull them out of the regular program or either get some. And now that the drug tests are showing that Ritalin predisposes one to drugs for later, it's unconscionable, it really is. Story_ID: 468032 Speaker 1: And I don't know if you've ever read 'Brave New World,' Aldous Huxley's book? I recommend it just--. In 'Brave New World,' there is a drug called Soma that is the prevalent thing that is used, but of course in 'Brave New World,' you have the five groups of people in the world who have been genetically engineered with the alphas, betas, gammas, deltas, and epsilons, and the epsilons are at the very bottom, and the epsilons are bred genetically to be the people who are the lower level persons, genetically bred to be and they do all the work for all the other levels. The alphas on the other end, all the overseers and the top people and they are blond haired, blue eyed, light, the beta, alpha, ga- beta, gam- you can go, I won't take the time to go, but the Soma, the drug there that, that's used for whatever is, is very much a part of that future, that projected future. There's so many elements of 'Brave New World' that are so apparent in our world, that it's kind of frightening and if you combine that with the projections from George Orwell in '1984,' what '1984' would be like, what you may have read. It's really kind of disturbing and then when you see it played out in schools especially, it's disturbing. So I think the whole notion of our children being abandoned, to be allowed to have attention deficits to create them, I don't think they're born with them, but if you don't burn up the energy, if you don't have physical education for thirty minutes a day, and burn up the energies and so forth, what do you expect? I noticed this morning on television that one of the young men who used to do exercises has started a petition to [U.S.] Congress about getting physical education returned to schools in No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], in the legislation, and I surely want to try to get some people to write in letters about that, so that's one thing that concerns me, that's the central part education. The other part of it is the, I call disconnect with the development of students beyond just the academic interface in many, many places, and a lot of that is playing itself out on a socioeconomic income level. In Corpus Christi [Texas] where I hang my hat and I'm involved, the lowest socio- the lowest socioeconomic level neighborhood serves Mexican American children and African American children. It is in the part of the city with the lowest income gradient, it has the least developed schools. Now the last neighborhood school where the children could walk to school and parents could get to and from the schools to be involved, was closed about three years ago in spite of the fact that we filed a federal lawsuit to keep it open and the income gradient going across town, that's the northwest side. From northwest to southeast which is toward Padre Island [Texas] and this is where the more affluent people have moved to the south side, had two new schools built last year. The school district decided that they were spending too much money on Solomon M. Coles [Solomon M. Coles High School, Corpus Christi, Texas], in fact, to the tune of about five hundred thousand dollars a year more because they had smaller classes. Well, all the research shows that children from lower economic areas need smaller classes, notwithstanding that also, we, citizens were, got money to make up the difference between what they said they were losing and they refused to take it. Story_ID: 468033 Speaker 1: So you were-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: --talking about your concerns (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was, my concern that just summing that up about the things that are not happening for children and the things we're creating with things out of the curriculum, and then creating the artificial number of kids with attention deficits and also especially at children. I think I guess, the other concern I have about education that in a foreseeable future, that we may lose public education all together. The fights for privatization of everything (laughter), from prisons to military things to all is, is invading the whole notion of education very greatly in ways that people I don't think even realize, and I'm afraid we're gonna wake up one morning. We're not gonna have public education which is the opposite direction it seems to me it should be going. In fact, I would think that there ought to be some residential public schools, because for children who live in an environment, however bright they are and capable, eight hours a day at school is neutralized by the twelve hours at home or whatever the number of hours they would have at home. So they're starting over every day or with a deficit and the whole notion of--the reason that the first schools that we had in this country were private schools or in private boarding schools and so forth and then the big fight came to create public schools, because they would help the masses. So the whole notion of getting children in an environment that can be stabilized, that's the point in a stabilized environment more than just the eight hours a day in school and when it's not stable there it's even more dysfunctional. So I have, I have the concern about the fight that's going on against public education rather than taking the time to see how we improve what we're supposed to have and do the right things with it. So those are my really big concerns about the future for education. I won't even go into preparation and all of that, but that's, that's core. Whatever we need to do to ensure that this country's future is going to be undergirded by well-educated and I don't mean well-degreed, credentials are different from education. And so well-educated people who have education who also have a way to live, to know how to live, but that's critically important. When I--I'll just throw out, when I was in Iran in 1978, a very critical time for the world then, and it's now about to be again, the Ayatollah Khomeini [Ruhollah Khomeini] was in exile in France. Every Friday at the mosques it seems there were tapes that were being sent in to the people, a lot of the things that were happening and I'm not trying to evaluate any of them because I was not an Iranian, but I was there observing a number of things. A lot of it centered around the whole notion of education, free open public education for girls as well as boys (laughter), the results of that having created twenty-five or more years with women being our educator--a number of things, I would hate to see us look at ourselves a few years down the road and know that we only had compartmentalized things and that the greater whatever we were gonna be doing beyond ourselves was more important than educating the citizens and doing it across the board. So that would be my big concern and there are lots of others that I have that, I won't even raise the surface on-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --because we couldn't discuss them all right here now (laughter). Story_ID: 468034 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you would change? Speaker 2: (Pause) Probably what I would change would be related to how I could have resources that would be able to let me do the things I wanted to do and influence other things. That's probably what I would change, not having access to major assets that would allow to really make changes in this world with people. But I can't think of any major things that I would have changed, because of the way my life turned out, there are times when I have thought before, I would have changed, if we had a car, maybe we wouldn't had to walk everywhere and be dependent on other people and do things. But as I review what happened in my life, it didn't really make a big difference not overall in fact, it may have strengthened me. That doesn't mean it would fit for somebody else but I think that as I looked and I think I have been very fortunate in having a lot of people who let me use up their energy, and now so I wouldn't, and I would not change my inquisitive nature. That's, that's something that often gets me on the edge of things with people because I'm looking, questioning. I have the ability to look around and understand things and think that's a God given talent and it was a, and I was given that by God to use it and not just to cluster it up and to raise questions about things and to, and so I wouldn't change that. Maybe some of the people who have problems with it, I would change (laughter) that way, not really putting themselves in thinking about the realities of it but I certainly would not change my genetic origins, a lot of people would say that. I wouldn't change that 'cause it, the way my life emerged has been good. If we could change how the uneven differential impact on poor people takes place in a society maybe that's the one thing I would change over all and that would have affected my life differently overall, but would have affected the, the world, our, our, places in which we live in a different way that would have allowed for more development. I would have wanted to go to medical school, I guess I would have changed that if I have been talking about resources, if I could have changed having access to going to medical school, I would have changed that and, but even then, I know, my life might have been very different with, with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's what, one thing I guess I would have changed. Story_ID: 468035 Speaker 1: Now, I know you have many, many, many, many, many, many more years-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --here on this earth-- Speaker 2: Let's hope so (laughter). Speaker 1: --but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well I, I would like to be remembered as a person who, number one, tried to be very honest about things and to do--tried to do the right thing from very early childhood and to be fair. I would like to be remembered as a person who put her energies into trying to improve things in many ways, in many dimensions, in many directions, as someone who cared about other people very definitely. And as someone who tried to make the world better than she found it. That is how I would like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Is there anything else you'd like to talk about? Because if not I want to thank you. Speaker 2: I know that you do and I won't--we could talk a whole lot but I won't do any more talking. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Thank you. This is-- Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to thank you from The HistoryMakers-- Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: --for taking the time out of your busy schedule to give us your story. Speaker 2: Well I'm, I've enjoyed it and I would just say that on balance, this is gonna motivate me to go ahead and write my biography, my autobiography which would have a lot of other dimensions because, and I hope that in the process, no one is offended if I left out anything that I've done somewhere that I didn't put in--for this time period because (unclear). But the whole notion of having been on this earth at this time has been very important for me and the many, many people that I really thank God for everyday who were my mentors and people who helped me and who tolerated my using their energy and being the kind of person that I am, all the way and then certainly thanking him for sending me a spouse, my husband [Will B. Scott] who allowed us to be partners and work on many things together in higher education and in the world, and again to try to make the world better than we found it and to use the resources we had, mental, physical, social and other to do that, so I thank you. Story_ID: 468036 Speaker 1: I talked about various times inter- interacting about the things that were happening with my family and me and my church, Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church [Greater Rose Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas], and that's the church into which I was baptized, and I cannot underestimate the effect that being in church early had on my life. When I, when my mother [Juanita Bell Randle], about nine years old, when I was about nine years old, my mother did return to church and we moved our membership to St. John Missionary Baptist Church on Dowling Street [Emancipation Avenue, Houston, Texas] where I went to church until I went away to college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and my mother went there until she died. It was a very large church and had a different kind of congregation. Many people with much more affluence and other things and, the range of people. And I've often thought that the Starlight Band there, that was my very first presidency which I was forgetting, but I was president of the Starlight Band which was a weekly meeting of children and Lavinia Thomas [ph.], who's my, her name was just popping up in my mind, was our, was the pres- the person who was our advisor or whatever and we had a junior choir and we had a number of things going for young people there, and then when a new minister came and changed a lot of that, including changing the tir- choir director, we asked not to have that happen, because it was not just the choir director but somebody who valued and nurtured us and we thought it was not right in the Christian principles. But he changed it anyway so we boycotted, we stopped singing and so for two Sundays we didn't sing (laughter), and he said this in the pulpit, and for some reason, I'm the person who got notation that I had organized the boycott. Well I did help, I wasn't lying about that. But years later when my father [Freeman Randle] died, I mentioned to you earlier and that, that's gonna bring the full circle about that part of the church. My father didn't like organized religion and so we were gonna have his funeral from the funeral parlor, but for a lot of reasons my mom didn't want it that way and I expressed to her I thought that he would not very, like to go into a church, I really thought we shouldn't do that. And then Mrs. Prater [Thomasine Prater (ph.)] who I mention was one of my teachers came to me and said, "Your mom has to live, you all have to live so you shouldn't hold out for that and do it the way she wants to have him buried from the church, from St. John," to which I said, "Oh, my father would sit up in his casket if we'd roll him into St. John Church." Well, I relinquished and we took him into the chapel, the small chapel to have his funeral and the minister, the same minister have not said, say who it is, we boycotted his decision, said from the pulpit, "Yes, there's little Gloria Dean [HistoryMaker Gloria Scott] over there, and I remember," and I won't mimic him so much, but he started like all the time (snorts), "I remember when she led a boycott against me when I first came here." And I thought, you sure are right and you know what? I'm not too far away from having one right this minute and I said, if there's any such thing, daddy just sit up (laughter). This is the inside of my mind. And so, I did not stay in that church afterwards but I got involved in the United Methodist Church, when I went to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and then Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], and that church has done a lot with education, I must say I've done and then the university. So, my saying at the end that I'd like to be remembered as somebody who made the world better than she found it, a lot of that has to do with where I come from and my religious background, through myself and my church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's it. Story_ID: 468037 Speaker 1: --This is a group of Girl Scouts from Seniors to Cadettes to Brownies and Juniors, of all races who came to Girl Scout headquarters [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] to visit with me after I became president in 1975. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Got it. Speaker 1: This is the formal academic occasion when I was awarded an honorary doctorate from Fairleigh Dickinson University [Teaneck, New Jersey] around 1977. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: This is the formal picture when I had my inauguration as the twelfth president of Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] in 1988. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This picture is the yearbook picture for the 1978, '79 [1979], year book at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta, Georgia, as I became the first woman vice president, COO at Clark College and was the first time a woman had had that high a rank in a higher education institution in Georgia. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: This is my mother, Mrs. Juanita Bell Randle, and this picture was taken somewhere in the late '70s [1970s]. It was taken around her birthday in June. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): That's a-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay good, thank you. Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandmother, Ella Allen Bell who was born in East Texas and lived near LaRue, LaRue Texas, to the ripe old age of eighty-something. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in 1987, which was taken at the inauguration of Dr. Niara Sudarkasa [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa], who is in the middle as the first woman president of Lincoln University in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], Dr. Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] is to her left who was later inaugurated as president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I am to her right front, and was inaugurated at Bennett College in 19--in the fall of 1988. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: This picture was taken--start over? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): No, you go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Go ahead. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1978, after I was elected, in 1975, I'm sorry, this picture was taken in 1975, after I was elected as national president for Girl Scouts of the USA, and it includes the ten challenges in the picture on the wall that I presented for the organization to follow for the next three years and I'm proud to say that we met all ten challenges. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is a historic picture taken in 1977, here in Houston, Texas. It was the opening of the historic second national meeting of women in the United States, the first being in Seneca Falls [Women's Rights Convention, Seneca Falls, New York]. This was held here in Houston, Texas, I was the presiding commissioner from Houston appointed by President Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and President Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: This is at the White House [Washington, D.C.], oops. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. This is at the White House in 1975, when we were having the induction ceremony of Mrs. Betty Ford, the first lady of the United States as the honorary national president of Girl Scouts of the USA. The first lady of the country is always the honorary national president. I was the first vice president at that moment, about to be elected national president and next to her is Mrs. Marjorie Ittman [Marjorie McCullough Motch], who was the national president and a girl Girl Scout who was to help us with the ceremony, the women around the side and from all over the country and on the balconies from all the councils throughout the United States. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, next. Great, what about this? Speaker 1: This picture was taken on the occasion of the golden anniversary of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was our speaker and our honoree and I was the chair of the golden anniversary celebration and had worked in many ways with President Clinton and the several projects he had in higher education. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Very good, next. Speaker 1: This is one of the last formal pictures that as taken for me as president of Bennett College to hang where the presidents' pictures hang in the college, at that time was in the administration building of Race Hall, and it was taken by a photographer in Greensboro [North Carolina] and used for our capital campaigns and all of the work. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, this picture was taken in 1996 at the Gallup Leadership Institute, I was the third African American woman to be trained with Gallup Leadership programs there in Lincoln, Nebraska. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay. Speaker 1: These two pictures on this page were highlights of the years during my presidency. At the bottom I had the pleasure of hosting Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] and welcoming her to the United States during the bicentennial celebration and the two Girl Scouts there with me are presenting her with the Hidden Heroines project, and the girls represent the range of diversity in Girl Scouting. At the top, I am speaking to our bicentennial celebration in Savannah, Georgia on the steps of the Juliette Low friendship house [ph.] and there were girls from all over the nation who are on the esplanade in the front. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, 90 degrees please? Speaker 1: This picture is of the-- Speaker 2: Goodness. Speaker 1: It's tired. This picture is the announcing of the Bennett College women's leadership institute which was a major project I identified to the trustees in 1978, I'm sorry 1987, when I was hired that I would like to do and it was officially launched with ten areas to focus on for women and led ultimately to the development of our National African American Women's Leadership Institute program or NAAWLI, which educates women in leadership from throughout the country..