 Story_ID: 336775 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Ralph Sheldon Tyler [HistoryMaker Ralph Tyler], R-A-L-P-H, S-H-E-L-D-O-N, T-Y-L-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And are you Ralph, Ralph Sheldon Tyler the Jr., or II or III, or-- Speaker 2: I'd say I'm the fourth in the line of Ralph Tylers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But all of us have different middle names. No one's a Jr. or a Sr. Each one stands in his own shoes. Speaker 1: Yes, so I was noticing that your ancestor who is the state representative was Ralph Seldon Tyler [sic. James Seneca Tyler], you know, which is different from your middle name--yeah, okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 30th, 1950, born in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm chairman of Ralph Tyler Companies [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: All right. Now, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 23rd, 2006 [sic. March 22, 2006]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my office in our corporate headquarters in Cleveland, Ohio. Story_ID: 336776 Speaker 1: Before I go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask everyone, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Correction it's the 22nd. Speaker 1: Oh, it's the--I'm sorry. He says it's the 22nd. We're a little--we're a day ahead--of ourselves (laughter). But-- Speaker 2: So it--it is March 22nd, not 23rd. Speaker 1: Yeah, Tuesday--yeah, 2006. Wednesday, it sure is. I'm wrong about that. Okay, Wednesday, 2006. All right, so there--these five short questions I need to ask before we go into depth. And they only require a short answer. And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. What is it, please? Speaker 2: Turkey. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: All right, what is that? Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your favorite--day of--I'm sorry--time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean? Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying you can share with us? Speaker 2: Let's have fun and make money. Story_ID: 336777 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history, and from what I've heard just--before we started shooting, you have a illustrative family history going all the way back. But I'm gonna ask about your mother's side first then we're gonna ask about your father's [Ralph C. Tyler] side of the family. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mabel Saundra Tyler [Mabel Webb Tyler]. Speaker 1: Okay. And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: M-A-B-E-L, S-A-U-N-D-R-A, Tyler, T-Y-L-E-R. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Webb. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: W-E-B-B. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Pendleton, South Carolina, August 11th, 1923. Speaker 1: All right. Now, how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Back to the late 1800s. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about them and what they were doing in those days? Speaker 2: Well, probably the most interesting story that I'm aware of involves my grandmother, Katherine Tyler [sic. Katherine Webb], who was a multi-racial and her father was a very wealthy businessman in Pendleton, and he fathered two children with her mother, Kate Aikens [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was her father white and her mother black? Or was that-- Speaker 2: Her father was white and her mother was black. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, reportedly, when he died he left a large piece of his estate to my Grandmother Katherine's brother, who was murdered--purportedly, as a direct result of his inheritance. Speaker 1: So ended up with the inheritance? Speaker 2: Went back to the family. Speaker 1: Okay. It's sad, yeah-- Speaker 2: And she fled to New York City [New York, New York]--establish herself. And she worked for Saks Fifth Avenue after that for forty-five years. Speaker 1: That's a horrible story, and but it's typical of that time period in terms of what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, history has a tendency to reflect that way too often. Speaker 1: So she--did she have relatives in New York? That she--when she fled to New York? Speaker 2: She fled to New York, left her--my mother and my aunt [J. Marian Webb Cotton] with her mother. Established herself and then sent for her children, and her children then were raised in New York City. My mother and my aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And went on to attend Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: This is your mother or-- Speaker 2: My mother. Speaker 1: Did she talk about going to school, and what it was like growing up in New York? Speaker 2: It was a very multicultural environment between the poor Irish Catholics and the poor Jews, and then the blacks. It was an interesting time in New York from the late 1920s through the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she grew up with having good friends that were of different races and religions, and they developed City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] right across the street from where she lived as a young girl. So her experience was educationally enlightening. She went to an all-girls, quote private, public school in New York City, and had an interesting life experience. Speaker 1: So, did she grow up on St. Nicholas [Avenue] over there? Is that where-- Speaker 2: She grew up on Convent--100 Convent Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know exactly where that is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And she went on to Hampton University and-- Speaker 2: Went on to Hampton University, both she and her sister, where she majored in home economics. Both of them majored in home economics. She returned to New York City, where she taught school and went on to receive her master's degree from NYU. Speaker 1: Okay. So was it in home economics as well? Or-- Speaker 2: It's in education. Speaker 1: Education, okay. Story_ID: 336778 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Ralph Conrad Tyler [Ralph C. Tyler], R-A-L-P-H, C-O-N-R-A-D, T-Y-L-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 12th, 1922, Guthrie, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Guthrie, Oklahoma. Okay. Now, is Guthrie one of those all-black towns in Oklahoma? Speaker 2: It was a--yeah, it was a--the home of Langston College [sic. Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] I think it was, which was a historically black university [HBCU]. And his father, Ralph Tyler [Ralph M. Tyler], was a professor, teacher, instructor at Langston College. And he had gone to Langston after fighting in World War II [WWII], and attending school in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where he studied engineering. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I know you can trace this--your father's side back pretty far, but how far back can you trace them and what are the interesting stories about some of your ancestors? I know it's a rich history. Speaker 2: Well, the family moved to Ohio at a relatively early date, about 1840s. And they were freed slaves. Speaker 1: You can go back to 17--? Speaker 2: Seventeen hundreds [1700s] with the McAfee family which were slaves from Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. You know what part of Virginia they were in? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I think around Roanoke [Virginia] but I'm not sure. It may be in some of the additional materials that I gave you on the family history. Speaker 1: So the McAfee--okay. That is--and so we discussed off camera that there's a famous architect, black architect in Wichita [Kansas] named [HistoryMaker] Charles McAfee that we interviewed back in 2002, that spells his name the same way. There may be some connection. It's interesting because you're involved in the same (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and there are not many African American Tylers or McAfee so it's more than coincidental. Speaker 1: It is. It is indeed. So, go on--so the McAfee were in Virginia during slavery and then, when did they--is there a story about how they got free from slavery? Speaker 2: Well, it's my understanding, you know, they were of mixed race or mixed heritage. And the whole institution of slavery was not as economically sound probably as it--people thought it to be. And a decision was made to free them as slaves, and they moved to Ohio and ended up in both Cleveland [Ohio] and Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. About when were they freed--about, approximately what time period? Speaker 2: In the 1840s. Story_ID: 336779 Speaker 1: You said one of your ancestors was one of the original settlers of Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: One of the earlier settlers of Columbus (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of the earlier, okay. Speaker 2: And James Tyler [James Seneca Tyler] was very active in civic and political matters in, in, in Columbus, Ohio. And, in fact, was elected as clerk of the Ohio House of Representatives. The first African American to hold such a position-- Speaker 1: Now, this is in the late 1800s, right? Speaker 2: After and during Reconstruction. Speaker 1: Okay, right--James Tyler, okay. Speaker 2: James had nine or twelve children, all of which have interesting careers and histories. And were in both--were doctors, journalists, lawyers, business owners. Speaker 1: Okay. So now, from what I understand, the State of Ohio, the Ohio Historical Society [Ohio History Connection] kind of helped your family do some research recently leading up to your family reunion in August, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Right, that's right. In fact, the Ohio Historical Society has now put a plaque honoring James Tyler and some of the descendants in the Tyler family, including Waldo Tyler [Waldo W. Tyler] who was a black pharmacist, and owned five stores in Columbus from the early 1920s through 1970s. And there's an interesting note, one of the three brothers from the Ralph Tyler [Raldo Waldo Tyler] journalist descendant area was a lawyer in Chicago [Illinois] too. They called him Tippy Tyler [Harold M. Tyler]--very prominent lawyer, and worked in the Tuskegee Airmen defense along with Thurgood Marshall (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 2: And articles were written and, in fact, there was a big write-up in Ebony magazine back in the 1950s regarding Tippy, and--he's sort of unique because he had some medical infirmity that had confined him to a wheelchair, but he was still known as an active barrister. And one time I was getting my shoes shined in Indianapolis [Indiana] and an older gentleman in the shoeshine parlor asked for my name. When I said it was Tyler, he questioned my relationship to Tippy Tyler, the lawyer from Chicago. And he told me about the time he spent on the train as a conductor and the exploits of Tippy Tyler between Buffalo [New York] and Ohio, and Chicago and some of the clients he represented. It was a whole evening history lesson for me on my great uncle, who I was--who died when I was a young, a young child and had never really known him for his accomplishments as a, as an attorney. Speaker 1: That's something. No, I hadn't heard of Tippy Tyler in all the people I've interviewed in Chicago. That's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Harold Tyler is, is his real name but he went by--his nickname was Tippy. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you know, he defended the Tuskegee Airmen in that famous case with-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --with Thurgood Marshall. It's called the camp and I can't think of the other, the name of the camp [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana]--camp--I better stop trying but I--it'll come to us before this is over. But, yeah, that's an important case-- Story_ID: 336780 Speaker 1: Yeah, there were three brothers, Ralph [Ralph M. Tyler] who was my grandfather, who was an engineer. Harold [Harold M. Tyler] who was a lawyer, and Waldo [Waldo W. Tyler] who was a pharmacist and owned a group of pharmacies down in Columbus, Ohio. Harold had no children as we know. Waldo had a son [Waldo H. Tyler] who became a pharmacist and worked in the family business until all the businesses were sold. And Ralph had three children--this is Ralph, my grandfather Ralph had three children. Ralph C. [Ralph C. Tyler], who is my father who was an engineer. Waldo, another Waldo--Waldo Tyler who was a journalist and lived in Washington, California and Chicago [Illinois], and actually started one of the first black entrepreneurial magazines in the country. And I'm trying to think of the name of it, it escapes me right now. But he started a magazine around the same time that Black Enterprise started and they competed for a while on a national basis. But, unfortunately, he had an untimely death and died in his early forties. And that magazine after that sort of disappeared into the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was that Encore? Was that Encore magazine? Speaker 1: Maybe it was Encore. It had a name like Encore or something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, Encore was a magazine that was very popular--had a lot of political content, as well as economic--it wasn't like strictly economic, it was like political--it was like a black Time magazine in some ways, and-- Speaker 1: And it was from Chicago. Speaker 2: That might now be it. That might not be it. But it went out--how long was it in existence? Speaker 1: It probably existed for about four or five years. And I remember he--when he died, he was--he lived in Marina Towers [Marina City] in downtown Chicago. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think--I know, I think I know which one it is. It's not Encore--that's not, that's not the one. It's Sienna [sic. Sepia]? Speaker 1: No, it wasn't Sienna. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I know my Aunt Jeannette [Jeannette Tyler Taborn], his sister who's still alive would know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Jeannette--her name is Jeannette Taborn, and she lives up in north of Detroit in Michigan. Speaker 2: Okay, but-- Speaker 1: 'Cause she, she had copies of it at the family reunion. Story_ID: 336781 Speaker 1: Just going back a little bit, are there any store--family stories about James Tyler [James Seneca Tyler], who served in the Ohio House [Ohio House of Representatives]? That must have been a real big deal in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, he was, he was a self-educated man and taught himself to write and took on those responsibilities as a non-professional, but then taking on many professional roles, in both politics and civic leadership. And he passed a lot of those talents onto his son, Ralph [Ralph Waldo Tyler] the, Ralph the first, and-- Speaker 1: Now, he was the journalist, right, Ralph the first? Speaker 2: He was, he was the journalist and, in fact, when I went to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] to do some research on him, he was very close to Booker T. Washington and was a part of that kitchen cabinet of black intellectuals that were involved in the Niagara Movement, that really sort of met with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] head-on-head. Booker T. Washington was from the school, let's pull ourselves up from the bootstraps, work through industrial means, and--versus Du Bois who took on the intellectual, we shouldn't tolerate this type of racism. They probably had, both had the same goals but they approached it differently. Booker T. Washington was one from the more fundamentals of bringing the class of African Americans up through economic development in our own economic ingenuity, if you will. Du Bois took it from a more educational, socialistic approach. And there were many confrontations and--in the letters, the thirteen volumes of the articles in the Library of Congress, I spent days just pouring over the letters that went back and forth between and Booker T. and Ralph Tyler, because Ralph was the person of the pen. He authored many of these letters, and documents and stories. Speaker 1: So he was, you say he was an ally of Booker T. in that conflict? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was in favor of industrial education primarily, and did he have anything to do with Central State University [Combined Normal and Industrial Department at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], or, I mean I'm--not Central, but the Ohio--they had an Ohio state-supported component of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] then, in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure he would from a political standpoint. He certainly was. Booker T. and based on his relationships even with the presidents during that period of time, all the way from Taft [President William Howard Taft] who appointed him auditor of the [U.S.] Army or auditor of the [U.S.] Navy to Taft and Harding [President Warren Gamaliel Harding], and, in fact, we have a picture of Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] in our home signed, "From Teddy Roosevelt to Ralph Tyler with my fondest regards." So he was affiliated with a lot of the large presidential kingmakers and, in fact, when Harding was elected, I think the political convention was held in Chicago [Illinois]. He was the first reporter who reported back, "It's time for me to come home. The convention's not over but Harding will be our next president." So, in terms of our enlightened electronic voting now, he was able to read the count back in what, probably, about 1920 or so when Harding was elected. Speaker 1: Yeah, that election, that was the famous smoke-filled room election in the Blackstone Hotel [Renaissance Blackstone Chicago] in Chicago. Right, when Harding was chosen. They called-- Speaker 2: And it was interesting, the way he got his journalistic career started was he worked as a caterer and server in large, wealthy white people's homes. So they'd have these parties and have these discussions in these smoke-filled rooms and, woe be it, for them to know that this black guy that was standing there serving them a drink or a canape was actually (laughter) a reporter, and would write under pseudo names and was able to pick up a lot of the information that otherwise would have been precluded going to other reporters. Speaker 1: So, he was like a fly-on-the-wall so to speak? Speaker 2: He certainly was. Speaker 1: But he could write about what he heard (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's, it's interesting when you read through some of the materials that we gave you today, and especially the journalist from the university out of New, New Orleans [Louisiana] escapes me right now. He talks about many of those instances. Story_ID: 336782 Speaker 1: Now, back to your grandfather [sic. great-grandfather], Ralph Tyler [Ralph Waldo Tyler] who--well, we're talking about him, yeah. He--you said before we started interviewing during the break we were talking about his experiences in World War I [WWI] and what he wrote about that. Could you share that with us? Speaker 2: Yes, during World War I there was a move afoot in the United States to find out what the black soldiers were doing because they recruited a lot of African American troops go fight in the war, but there was no one reporting on what they were doing. Yet blacks were losing their lives and giving their lives for their country. And the [U.S.] Department of War realized they needed to get the word out because there were actually riots during World War I in the United States. And there was a lot of unsettled nerves particularly in the African American community about the use of black troops and how they were mostly just stevedores, not to belittle that, because that's certainly needed to get the supplies to the troops. But blacks were doing a lot more and they went back and forth. And Booker T. Washington wrote to both the secretary of war and the president that he had just the person who could report on these stories, and he was Ralph Tyler. And it was even more important that he report on these stories because he had three sons fighting in the war. In fact, one of them, my grandfather [Ralph M. Tyler] had come out of a tr- [U.S.] Army National Guard unit out of Dayton, Ohio where your home town is. So all three sons were fighting in the war and he went over, and this was toward the end of the war. And his trip over to Europe was quite interesting because when he first got on board the ship, he said he had--he presented his credentials and his credentials were that of an officer because of his responsibilities, and they put him in the hull of the ship with the other black troops. He said, "I'm entitled to a state room," and there was a lot of controversy. And he wired back to the United States that I'm not being treated as an equal, and they moved him up to the state room so he would be treated fairly. During the war, he writes about being whisked from battlefield to battlefield on the back of a motorcycle. And, in fact, he was injured--this is the reporter, Ralph Tyler--was injured during some of these battles, not through the battle but through transportation and problems. And at the end of the war--and he reportedly, he reported a lot more than was ever reported back here in the United States because the filtering department in the [U.S.] Army and in the Department of War didn't want information to get out about how African American troops who could not only fight battles and were heroic people in their own right in fighting this war, but the way they were treated by the people in France and other countries was completely different than how they were treated in the United States. And he wrote one day, while sitting on the Champs-Elysees [Avenue des Champs-Elysees, Paris, France] at the end of the war, having lunch or dinner--he was having a meal with his sons, he said that, unfortunately, this, this freedom will be short-lived because they needed, they had to return to the United States where the same liberties they had fought for in Europe, they wouldn't have when they return home. Story_ID: 360497 Speaker 1: We were talking about your grandfather, right, who was the journalist? Speaker 2: My great-grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Great-grandfather, okay. Mr. Ralph Tyler [Ralph Waldo Tyler] who was the journalist-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and his feelings about World War I [WWI]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean his, his both ability and inability to get his story out and get his story told back here in the United States was representative of, of a restrictive policy that the U.S government had. You have to assume that one of the things they wanted to do was not empower people with the rights they were fighting with, but in turn covering up that information because it would heighten the level of frustration and feelings of intellectual and maybe social economic entitlement, which they didn't want to spread in, in Europe. I mean, if you do some reading, they talk about some of the troubles they had as troops returned to the United States after having fought in that war, and, I mean, they were--not only were they full stevedores in providing supplies and medical treatment and care for, for all the troops in World War I, but they were also empowered with weapons and power, and destructive tools. Clearly, the hope was they wouldn't bring back to the United States or use those as forms of leverage, if you will, for social economic means. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was also the greatest period of lynching in U.S. history right after World War I. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, and the riots in the major cities like Tulsa [Oklahoma] and so forth. Speaker 2: And, in fact, it's interesting you mention the riots in Oklahoma. Ralph Tyler I, and I'll always go I, II, III, IV or V. My son's [Ralph H. Tyler] the fifth. But Ralph Tyler I was sent by the president [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] down to Oklahoma during the riots, during the--I think it was the Brown--they called it the Brownsville massacre [Brownsville, Texas]. Or maybe it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, now, that's the one in, in Texas, yeah. Now, that was a--soldiers were harassed by the white citizens and shot at, and they went back into town in formation and shot up the town. I mean, it was a big shootout in town. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he went down both to report on that and to make recommendations to the White House on what should, you know, what should be done. I, I've never seen the documents. It'd be quite interesting to see his assessment of what went on. We don't have--we have--I guess no one's tried to get access to those documents if they still exist. Speaker 1: I think that they probably have. There's been even a play written about it, 'The Brownsville Massacre,' [sic. 'The Brownsville Raid'] by the same one who wrote 'A Soldier's Story,' [sic. 'A Soldier's Play'] Charles [Charles Fuller], can't think of his last name now. I can't think of the gentleman's last name now but there's a play written by a black playwright about the Brownsville massacre, they called it, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, he was, he was sent down there, Ralph the first. Story_ID: 360498 Speaker 1: So he was contemporary with Emmett Scott [Emmett J. Scott] of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee Alabama] and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington], and all that crowd (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure. Yeah, I mean it's good friends when you read anything about Booker T. Washington or you go to the thirteen volumes of letters at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]. Booker T. often times refers to Ralph, Ralph Tyler [Ralph Waldo Tyler] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, was he--he's probably a member of the National Negro Business League with Timothy Thomas Fortune and other people? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That sounds like that same, yeah--the group that they were in, yeah. So, now you said--did he take place--take part in the Niagara Movement as well? Speaker 2: He reported on the Niagara Movement. What his involvement, actual involvement was, I'm not, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, as a Booker T. Washington supporter, he probably would have not fit in very well with that group as such, you know, but they--he could have reported on it certainly, you know? Speaker 2: Certainly, I mean, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] drew a very strong line, as probably did Booker T. Washington in terms of who, who you were friends of. But he had some harsh words that I've read somewhere about my grandfather [sic. great-grandfather], but it was related to his relationship with Booker T. Washington and in his support of his efforts. Speaker 1: Yeah, those are the days when you didn't agree with somebody, you'd throw a piece, I mean a vegetable at, at a meeting (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Crowds'll do that in those days. They didn't see any harm in it. (Laughter) So, yeah, those were times when, you know, to take a public stand meant, you know-- Speaker 2: You drew, you drew your line in the sand. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, sir. Story_ID: 360499 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are there any stories that are passed down about, about--? Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately, he [Tyler's great-grandfather, Ralph Waldo Tyler] died at a young age. He died when my father [Ralph C. Tyler] was born, I think the same year my dad was born. He had a, a car hit him or something like that and he was sick for about a year, and then he died. And he, based on his age, he probably was only in his late fifties. Speaker 1: Now, what about his son, Ralph II [Ralph M. Tyler]. Now, he fought in World War I [WWI], right? Speaker 2: He was a soldier, fought in World War I, went to college I think it was Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and studied engineering. He's the one that went down to Langston College [sic. Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], subsequently to teach. And, let's see, he worked in public service in Cleveland [Ohio] and after leaving Langston College, and ended up having several different public service jobs around Cleveland. And one time served as a manager of the Majestic Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio], which was the hotel where African Americans would stay when they visited Cleveland. And my father tells me stories of having met Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, kids from 'The Little Rascals,' Lena Horne-- Speaker 1: You mean like Stymie and Buckwheat? Speaker 2: Stymie and Buckwheat, baseball players, black baseball players would stay there. So, during my father's childhood, he was exposed to a lot of these people where, where he'd work as a busboy and a bellboy at the hotel that his father ran. So it was quite an interesting time growing up. I mean both the curse of segregation was--also the beautiful side was the fact that there was more cohesiveness and knowledge of the African American community then there is at some levels in American society today. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your father grew up in this atmosphere around the hotel, and the celebrities coming in and out, and now tell us about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And black, and a lot of black political influences were surrounded him, and his father was a ward leader, and because he was a Republican in Cleveland that was a strong party, at least at that point in time in Cleveland history. And a lot of the black political leaders were also Republicans. The democratic movement of people, people transitioning from a--primarily from the South just started taking place. And, actually, a lot of it took place after World War II [WWII]. So, he was influenced by all those forces. Story_ID: 360500 Speaker 1: He went on to study engineering at Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], where he also served on the track team and was captain of the track team back, I think, in 1943. And-- Speaker 2: What was his event? Speaker 1: Long jump, triple jump, and sprints. Speaker 2: Okay. So he came along after Jesse Owens (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After Jesse Owens, yes. Speaker 2: Jesse Owens would have been in the thir- in the late '30s [1930s], well mid-'30s [1930s], I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah, right before World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: My father [Ralph C. Tyler] was during the war and, actually, he graduated in engineering after the war in 1947. But he also was inducted into the Ohio State sports hall of fame [The Ohio State University Athletics Hall of Fame] and the engineering alumni college hall of fame. When he was inducted into the Ohio State sports hall of fame--and this was probably about 1996, he made the statement in the center of the Ohio State football field in the middle of halftime game. He thanked Ohio State for giving him the award for being an athlete and honoring his accomplishments in life. But the most important thing he had received from Ohio State University, he said, was a college degree. And that's one thing that's been carried forth in our family every since Ralph I [Ralph Waldo Tyler] and Ralph II [Ralph M. Tyler], the importance of education. And of all the grandchildren, we were taking a general poll, and it's amazing how all the kids had gone off. And even if you were from Ralph or Waldo [Waldo W. Tyler] or Harold's [Harold Tyler] side or the McAfee side, all of them had college degrees. It was, you know, James' [James Seneca Tyler], James had to sort of force that down on his nine or twelve children. And it held true that all these kids had passed that on to their children, and it's, it's an interesting concept. When I tell people that I'm third or fourth--I'm fourth generation college educated, it's unique not only for African Americans but it's unique for any Americans to have that type of educational background. And I'm trying to push my daughters now to go to Ohio State so we can have another generation of college educated Ohio State alums in our family. Story_ID: 360501 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Mabel Webb Tyler and Ralph C. Tyler] met--how they got together? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's sister Marian Cotton, Marian Webb Cotton [J. Marian Webb Cotton], married a Hamptonian [graduate, Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] who went off to war, Anthony J. Cotton, who subsequently became a lawyer. And there was a social function being given in Cleveland [Ohio], and my mother was visiting with her sister and didn't have a date, so someone was playing matchmaker and had my father take this New York [New York] girl to the dance. And this was probably about 1948, '49 [1949], '48 [1948] probably, and he fell in love with her. At that time, falling in love with somebody who lived in New York City [New York, New York] and you lived in Cleveland, Ohio, and were a young, aspiring engineer, was sort of difficult to both communicate as well as date. But he eventually went up to New York to meet with my grandmother [Katherine Webb] and her--my mother's stepfather, and proposed marriage and said he wanted to take her back to Cleveland. So, here I am today (laughter) June 30th, 1950 and that-- whatever that time span is, my mother always tells me, I came along at just the right time and they got married, and they brought back to Cleveland this New York City, Hampton NYU [New York University, New York, New York] grad. And she got a job teaching school, and she taught in the school system for almost thirty years. And they had two children. I have a sister named Kim Tyler, who's a principal in the Cleveland public school system, and who's gone on to become a principal in the Warrensville Heights school system [Warrensville Heights City School District] now. And she's a younger sister, she's born October, I think, October 12th--October 18th, 1956, I think. Story_ID: 360502 Speaker 1: But my father [Ralph C. Tyler] went on after 1947 to become the first licensed African American civil engineer surveyor in the State of Ohio. And then--I think he got his professional license in the early 1950s. He graduated [from The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in '47 [1947] and so, I think, it takes five years to get your license, so, probably about '52 [1952] I guess. And he had a career that started with the state highway department [Ohio Department of Transportation] where, ironically, he had to start out working in the drafts room, where usually draftsmen would work not college educated engineers. But he put up with a lot of discrimination and second class treatment. Speaker 2: What--can you describe some of the treatment to be specific 'cause I think sometimes, young people, they listen to this, they don't know what we're talking about. Speaker 1: Well, just isolation from your colleagues at lunchtime and missing assignments. They couldn't corrupt computer files back then but they would corrupt your work products. They'd have picnics and you're not invited. In fact, the Cleveland Society of Engineers [Cleveland Engineering Society, Cleveland, Ohio]--I remember him coming home. He had bought a set of golf clubs from--what's, historically, one of the first black professional golfers? Speaker 2: Not [HistoryMaker] Calvin Peete, I know who you're talking about. It's not Calvin Peete but it's a-- Speaker 1: He lives in Cleveland [Ohio] now. Speaker 2: I know I know. Charlie-- Speaker 1: Charlie Sifford. Speaker 2: Charlie Sifford, right. Speaker 1: He bought a set of clubs--I'll never forget this. We were living in an apartment building and Charlie Sifford came over, and he had these clubs in the back of his car because he probably didn't make enough money playing golf so he probably had to have had some side jobs, one of them was probably he had access to clubs and Dad bought a set of golf clubs from him. And, he bought 'em and practiced 'cause they, they were gonna have a golf outing with the Society of Engineers and the state engineers who were working. And they wouldn't invite him to play because the club said they didn't want any black playing on their golf course. I mean there's subtle things, you know, like that, that would undermine him. But he became the first engineer, and then and became overall project construction engineer so he got out in the field which was much more of an integrated environment because both on the construction side, African Americans would run heavy trucks and labor, you know. And having him on the professional side was an interesting blend of how people had to affiliate and integrate. And he became one of the more popular engineers working for the highway department because of his ability to deal with diverse groups of people, Italians and Hungarians, and Czechs. And growing up as a kid, these people would come by my house and, you know, they'd have ceremonial wines or something made from stuff grown in their yards, you know, dandelion wine. I can remember that having happened. And, you know, when they'd do Italian, make Italian sausages once a year, a guy would always save some sausage and bring it by Dad's house. And our family would, you know, start going to Hungarian restaurants and do different things that a lot of my friends weren't exposed to but I became exposed to because of my father's relationships on these highway construction projects. So, it was--we grew up in a good, strong African American community but we had a lot of good experiences that would serve me over my life span in a very positive kind of way, and open my eyes to the light that judge a person by the content of their character--the same words that came from--versus the color of their skin. Story_ID: 360503 Speaker 1: Can you tell us when your father [Ralph C. Tyler] started the business [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean to sort of do a snapshot of his career he went on to become assistant highway director for the State of Ohio. He subsequently under the Carl Stokes administration--he and Carl were friends. He, Carl and Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] were very good friends from growing up here in Cleveland [Ohio]. And Dad attended Central High School in Cleveland which was the home of Langston Hughes and many prominent African Americans that grew up in the Cleveland area, Ken Clement, Dr. Ken, Kenneth Clement [Kenneth W. Clement] and many others. But anyhow, Dad went on to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] after Central High School. His career expanded when Carl Stokes became mayor, the first mayor of a major black-- Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]? Speaker 2: Yes. I was just finishing high school. And he appointed my father service director of Cleveland, which along with Carl being the first mayor, my dad became the first African American service director of Cleveland which put him over many of the, the various service departments in the city. So some of the same people that wouldn't hire him or wouldn't allow his work to be done properly, he--they ended up reporting to him. Speaker 1: That was an irony there. Speaker 2: Oh, it certainly was. Speaker 1: And is there a story related to that, that he told? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you a story of honesty and a story of integrity when he was first elected. It was Christmas of my senior year in high school, and a contractor for the city dropped off--and I didn't know who had dropped the TV off--had dropped a TV off in a big box outside our garage door with just a note Merry Christmas, no name on it, and I thought it was from my father. And we didn't have a color TV at the time. I thought, well, Dad got a color TV for Christmas. So I brought the TV in, hooked it up and back then we had rabbit ears. I put the rabbit ears on and was sitting in, in the family room, living room area, actually, watching this color TV. So when he came home, he said, "Where did that come from?" And I said, "They delivered it and th- it was in a box outside the garage door and I brought it in the house and set it up." And he called out, he said, "Mabel [Mabel Webb Tyler]," talking to my mother, and they huddled in the kitchen, and he got on the phone and he called this gentleman up and he said, "Come out to my house, it'll be sitting in the same place you left it." And it was contractor who wanted to compromise his integrity in terms of some practices. And, typically, this has been the kind of thing had gone on for years and years, but he wasn't gonna be compromised by getting a free color V- TV that would compromise his integrity. And-- Speaker 1: This is a familiar story, and for contractors, in cities, major and metropolises like Cleveland and Chicago [Illinois], people (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, it, it, it was, it was my first lesson, you know, in personal integrity and not compromising your value system and it's one that's held true to me for the rest of my life. Story_ID: 360504 Speaker 1: Well continue with his career and bring it up to date. Speaker 2: After that, Dad [Ralph C. Tyler] first affiliated with a firm Madison and Madison--Julian [Julian Madison] and Bob Madison [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison]--Architects and Engineers [Madison, Madison and Madison, Architects and Engineers; Robert P. Madison International, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio] and headed up their Chicago [Illinois] office. At that time, they were doing a lot of projects in Chicago and East Chicago [Indiana], and Gary, Indiana water plant contracts. And, in about 1978, he and I were talking--at that time I'd finished law school [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and had gone on to New York City [New York, New York] to work for Citibank, and he wasn't quite happy in his experience, his first private sector experience, and thought maybe he wanted to do something else. And we talked about maybe what we should do is--he should go out and become a consultant on his own. So he formed a partnership and formed his own company to do engineering work right here in Cleveland. Speaker 1: So what year was this? Speaker 2: It's about '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. And, I went--I read in the newspaper--I was reading The New York Times, there was a column and an advertisement talking about how to form your own consulting firm, so I bought these tapes, paid for dad to go to this seminar, and that's when he formed his own company. This synergy around that started. And it started out principally as a civil engineering surveying firm. And that was about twenty--twenty-six years ago, I guess, now. And, that was Ralph's company's name was Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S. [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio]. And it had about ten or twelve people at its highest growth pinnacle in late 1980s. It was known for good surveying and civil engineering work. We sort of came together in the early 1990s after a period of time where he had some health challenges. He had a stroke and a heart attack. And I came into the business thinking I was coming in to shut it down never really understanding or believing the fact that I was gonna end up working with my dad in the business, and leave Corporate America to form the company that we are today. Story_ID: 360505 Speaker 1: Let me just stop there in your dad's [Ralph C. Tyler] story and then maybe go back to now to pick your story up. And, let me ask you, when you look at your mother [Mabel Webb Tyler] and father's personalities who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I like to think the best of both. My mother is probably a bit more innovative and thinks out of the box, and is more likely to run sometime on emotional drive. My father was pretty calculating, not cold and calculating, but very sensitive, politically astute gentleman but more exact, I mean, typical of an engineer, very principled. So I'd like to think I picked up some of--some of both of their traits and--'cause there's a value in having a lot of both of their traits. Story_ID: 360506 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was living in an apartment building over on Somerset, 9904 Somerset [Avenue] in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] which is a neighborhood--African American neighborhood at that time in Cleveland [Ohio]. And there were a lot of young black families all of whom were college grads and either worked at the post office or worked in education, or like my dad [Ralph C. Tyler] worked in government, the veterans' hospital in medical research. There were young doctors who had just finished med school, educators--and it was a real interesting building because all these were people who had in many cases moved to Cleveland from other parts of the country, because Cleveland was a growing, thriving city where African Americans could develop their talents and kids could receive a very high level, quality education in Cleveland. Cleveland was known for its quality public education system. And, while segregated, it had many fine schools and many, many fine alumni. So the experience was a real positive one, the whole Glenville experience was a real positive one in terms of re- reaffirmation of not only your own self-worth, but your ability to do and accomplish anything. I attended Cleveland public schools until the eighth grade and then I--there was a exam given at a cafeteria one Saturday for kids and I took some exam, and I had no idea what the exam I was taking, and it was to select kids to go to private schools. And, when they asked me what school I wanted to go to--I, I enjoyed the [U.S.] military, you see, and I enjoyed guns--you see 'em around my office, a lot of old weapons from, actually, 1800s and earlier. But I chose to go to Howe military school [Howe Military Academy, Howe, Indiana] in Indiana, where I went for three years and-- Speaker 1: Is that near Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's on--it's on the turnpike going to Chicago. It's in northeast Indiana. Story_ID: 338743 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back a little bit to the early days and ask you, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, it was--it was a real positive neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio]. You know, if, if people considered it, it, it a ghetto then so bit it, it was a great ghetto because it was amalgamation of African Americans both from Cleveland [Ohio] and that had moved to Cleveland from different parts of the country in the South, and were all coming to Cleveland to spur on activities of growth and economic, and educational wealth and enrichment. Companies like Ozanne Construction [Ozanne Construction Company, Cleveland Ohio], which is one of the larger African American construction companies in the country, was an outgrowth of the Ozanne family. Leroy Ozanne, the company's founder and my dad [Ralph C. Tyler], who almost--th- they developed almost a brother-like relationship. And, Dad would help teach Leroy aspects of technical side of design and drawings and technical things. And, Leroy brought the reality from the contractor's side and it was real difficult decision for my dad to make, not to become a part of the Ozanne Construction Company or Tie Oak Construction [ph.], as they called it, because he had quote a good job, and back then good jobs for African Americans in many cases were those attached to government and retirement, and benefits, and since he was starting out with a family, he decided to go that route but their close relationship and bond never severed. Story_ID: 338744 Speaker 1: We grew up in an African American church, Mt. Zion Congregational Church [Mt. Zion Church; Mt. Zion Congregational Church United Church of Christ, Cleveland, Ohio], which had it within its membership some of the true African American educational leaders in the Cleveland [Ohio] community. Speaker 2: Now, tell me now, this is a Congregational church, where was it located in Cleveland? Speaker 1: It started out over off of 55th Street and, and at that time, it wasn't congregational it was just Mt. Zion Church. And the congregational affiliation came about, I think, in the 1950s. Reverend Richard T. Andrews [Richard T. Andrews, Jr.] was the minister, and his wife, Marjory Andrews, was the choir master. And the church was known for its music and both spiritual music, as well as classical pieces of music. So a lot of the people that had gone to various colleges around the country whether it'd be Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] or Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], or Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] could show off their talents and-- musically, and some of the finer music traditions that came out of the African American experience. And, I was just in New York [New York], in fact, with a fellow Charles Jordan [Charles N. Jordan, Jr.] who is the first black graduate from Hawken School which was a private boys school in Cleveland [Ohio] and we were talking about how many positive African American role, role models we had within the church, and what a great experience it was growing up in that tradition. Charles became assistant director of the New York Stock Exchange, and now is owner of Jordan's securities [Charles Jordan & Co., LLC] in New York City [New York, New York] and is a--graduated--after who graduating from Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts] went on to get his M.B.A. from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and has accomplished quite a few things in his own right. But growing up in Mt. Zion Church was another positive reaffirmation of your African American's both spiritual roots as well as historic roots and giving you role models and leaders to follow in all different aspects of government, politics, music, religion, education. It was just--it was amazing and quite something, and it's always played a role in my life. Although, I haven't been attending church as well as I should, my family now is Catholic and so it's slightly different for me right now. Story_ID: 338745 Speaker 1: You were asking me about my history a little bit. I came in the business with Dad [Ralph C. Tyler] after he had heart attack and stroke, and I was trying to buy a manufacturing company and my mother [Mabel Webb Tyler] said, "Well, can you help your dad out?" And I went to the hospital and he said, "Well, I don't care what you do with the company. I had heart attack, a stroke, I just need to calm down in my life and get the pressure off of me, and you can do whatever you want." So I went in with my personal understanding that I'd be there for six months, shut it down, and go back to doing what I had come to find out that I really loved, which was in the industrial manufacturing arena. And this was after, you know, the experience of having graduated from law school [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and undergraduate school at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and working for Citibank and then a company called TRW [TRW, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio]. I thought it would be a short term stint and I'd get everything shut down. And the company had actually gone into bankruptcy. And, when I got here, I found out maybe I had something that I was looking for and it was ability to lead an organization, and become successful with that organization. And I had a willing buyer because he didn't make me pay anything for it, and although it was bankrupt and I would subsequently use all my personal resources to pull the company out of bankruptcy, I-- Speaker 2: Or a willing seller you mean, your father, right, he was willing to sell it to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was, he was, he was a seller in a way, because he, he was still willing to mentor me in the business and from a technical standpoint you couldn't have found a finer engineer. And from a business marketing, financial standpoint, you probably couldn't find a better partner in the business. And I had--I'm not--maybe I'm patting myself on the back but at least it was somebody that he could trust and knew that he, they had his best interest at heart. So we started out, of the ten or so people we had, we fired all but two or three and started from scratch, and built an organization now that has a--well over a hundred people nationally, a hundred people in Cleveland [Ohio] and more than that nationally in two distinct corporations, one company that's actually still owned by my father or my father's trust, that's Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S. [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio] and RCT Engineering [RCT Engineering, Inc., West Palm Beach, Florida], a company that I own in Florida. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The experience has been--you couldn't ask for a better period of time of the six or seven years I worked with my father. Story_ID: 338746 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the biggest hurdle that you had to overcome in making this a successful--? Speaker 2: The lack of financial resources and the ability to secure good talent to work on projects, and get projects done in a cost-effective way. African Americans aren't traditionally accepted very well in professional service arena, and, so a lot of, and in a lot of ways you're, even in today's enlightened market, you still are a pioneer in educating people that you can do services just as well--professional services just as well as anyone else. And we still, even with the accomplishments we've made in development of people and project lists, and resumes, and hist- as to all type of both historical as well as current data that reflects our competence, every day you're still trying to go out and prove yourself professionally. And, my dad [Ralph C. Tyler] use to say, "You know, son, no one's ever gonna ask us to do minority engineering, so don't try to sell minority engineering. Sell the professional services that we have to offer and that you'll do it, and do it right the first time and if you get it, you make a mistake, you're gonna stand by your work, and you're gonna do it right the second time." And, he was very adamant about that kind of thing. And, while there are some good solid programs that are being attacked nationally, we still need to have strong minority business programs that encourage African Americans to become entrepreneurs and business leaders because that's the way you can have the political force and clout you need to have to be successful in this very competitive American business environment. Story_ID: 338747 Speaker 1: So you basically focused on business when you were in school and--right? And not--? Speaker 2: Well, actually, I went to college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I was gonna become an architect, which is like heresy in an engineer's house. Speaker 1: Now, let me go back even further--now, you said you went to Cleveland [Ohio] public schools, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now which ones did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to Miles Standish Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Named after the captain [Myles Standish] of the Mayflower, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I finished elementary school at Moses Cleveland [Moses Cleveland Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], which was the founder of Cleveland--who was the founder of Cleveland. And, ironically enough, he was a surveyor. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I, I atten- attended Charles Eliot [Charles W. Eliot Middle School, Cleveland, Ohio] for two years middle school, and then went on to Howe Military [Howe Military Academy, Howe, Indiana]. Speaker 1: So, were you a good, good student in the public schools? Speaker 2: I was better than average. I wasn't exceptional, I wasn't--I was a fun kid, a prankster, a kid that had a lot of fun in school. By no stretch of imagination was I an outstanding student, but I had a lot of fun (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I had a lot of fun. Story_ID: 338748 Speaker 1: What influenced your decision to go to Howe [Howe Military Academy, Howe, Indiana] for a high school, you know? Speaker 2: Well, that was the exam they gave, it wassort of a trick exam with kids who were halfway good students or were--or some of them were exceptional students. And these schools offered scholarships to kids, and my parents thought it would be--my mother [Mabel Webb Tyler], actually, thought it would be a--good for me to take my studies more seriously and that probably influenced me to say, well, I'll go to military school because there's much more discipline there and, and that discipline and order and spiritual exercise was, was very good for me personally and served me well. It serves me well to this day. I ended up, ironically, leaving Howe at the end of--during my junior year when I wasn't promoted in rank. Speaker 1: What happened? What was your analysis of that, what made you upset about that? Speaker 2: Well, I had accomplished all of the things both athletically and academically that allowed me to be promoted, and basically it was based on those of types of things that you'd get promoted in the school. And, that year I was, I was the company clerk which was a pretty good position, and they wouldn't give me my rank for my position. And I felt I was being discriminated against, and when I confronted the barrack head in Company D, he said I should be happy to be where I am and have the privileges I have. And, I thought, gee my parents are paying to send me here just like everybody else's parents, and I'm not entitled to a stripe. I've earned it. And if I couldn't get what I earned, and at that time I was actually number one in my class, if I couldn't get what I earned then I wasn't gonna stay there anymore. So, I basically called their bluff. My parents had moved to an excellent school system in Shaker Heights [Ohio] and there were girls there, and I'd become interested in the female sp- specie. And my father [Ralph C. Tyler] had said after I went to Howe, if I had an excellent academic average and had kept my nose clean, was a good kid, he'd be more than happy to drive up to school and pick me up, and bring me back home. So, I'd accomplished those things and I called my dad, and he came and got me. And I think the school never thought I'd leave, and I never thought I'd leave to be quite frank 'cause I really did love the experience--most of the experience. But on principle, I wasn't gonna be--allow myself to be subjected to that kind of racial indifference if you will. And I came back and graduated from Shaker Heights High [Shaker Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio], where a lot of my friends from the Cleveland public school system had since migrated, and had an interesting interracial experience in in that environment, going on to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in 1968 where I thought I was going to be an architect. In fact, I worked for a couple large architectural firms in the summer--into my summer--during my summer vacations. But came out and due to the war [Vietnam War], and I was gonna be a commission officer in the [U.S.] Navy. I wanted to get out 'cause I didn't feel as though it was proper to go fight in that war. And I got into law school [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], so I went to law school and second year in law school, I realized I really didn't want to be a lawyer. Story_ID: 338749 Speaker 1: Were you at law school at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Case Western Reserve University [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], and--but I also knew if I left law school, the war [Vietnam War] was still on and I'd be sent to Vietnam in all likelihood. So I finished law school. I worked for the State of Ohio for short while and then went on to New York City [New York, New York] where I worked for Citibank. A friend--actually, a friend of mine from Shaker [Shaker Heights, Ohio]--a tall interesting guy, a Caucasian gentlemen who became a very good friend of mine, Chip Carstensen [Andrew Carstensen], C-A-R-S-T-E-N-S-E-N, who made my experience at Shaker a lot brighter and--because he--because just for the general friendship and openness of both he and his family, invited me to come up to Citibank. He said 'cause they were recruiting and he thought, with my skill level, I could get a position at Citibank. So I--he was correct and I did work there for several years, and then was recruited by TRW [TRW, Inc.] to come back home to Cleveland [Ohio]. And it was funny, my economic goal when I finished law school was to make thirty thousand dollars before I was thirty years old--by the time I was thirty years old. Well, by the time I was thirty years old, I was working for TRW making about two and a half times that amount, and was living in Cleveland and bought a home, and started my family and moved on to some of--more of the best years of my life. Story_ID: 338750 Speaker 1: I married a beautiful woman, Zoe Maxwell [Zoe Maxwell Tyler], and we have four children; Sarah [Sarah Tyler Plummer] who went on from Hathaway Brown School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] to Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] and will receive her medical degree from Duke University [Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina] and this May. Ralph IV or Ralph H. [Ralph H. Tyler] if you follow initials or letters, he's a student at Miami of Ohio [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio]. He's a--he's going into his third year and will be studying abroad this coming fall term. And some of the gor- most gorgeous, athletic, intelligent twin girls in the whole country, Mariel [Mariel Tyler], M-A-R-I-E-L, and Katherine Tyler, who are high seniors at Hathaway Brown or now in the process of selecting what college they'll go to. And Mariel is a MVP of her soccer team, and they're state champs. And Katherine kicked the winning tie goal that allowed them to go into state championship. So, I'm, I'm, I am so blessed with a great family and a great wife, and great kids, mother-in-law and father-in-law. And, ironically enough, we married into a family that its last name is Morgan, and, as you know, its Garr- well you may know, it's Garrett Morgan the inventor of the stop light and the gas mask, and all that. So, its, its, it's an interesting-- Speaker 2: Oh so, they're the Morgans that are related to Garrett Morgan? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Gee, that's something, yeah. They were the great black, inventors of the 20th century, Garrett Morgan, right. Speaker 1: But I've been really been blessed and I always said if everything came to a screeching halt, and the company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio] came to an end today, I've had a great life experience so far and I'm looking forward to the rest of the challenges and opportunity that it presents. Story_ID: 338751 Speaker 1: Could you talk a little bit about your business philosophy basically? Speaker 2: Deliver a quality product service, have the customer or the client believe in what you're doing, have open and honest communications, be inclusive in the development and management of your firm. Inclusive means be more than quote just diverse, but to take the talents as you saw walked around this office building you saw people of color-- Speaker 1: Yeah I saw (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) black, white, Hispanic, Indian, Asians, Muslims, Christian, Jew, I mean we're proud of what we've done [at Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio]. We're almost like a min- a mini United Nations [UN], if you will, here. And we've accomplished so much in having people work together. I mean, we have first generation Romanians who got their green cards because we gave them opportunity to work. We have women in management. So, I think we've really created a smorgasbord, if you will, and sometimes if--you pay a financial price for that because you don't have some of the economic incentives that allow you to make as much money. But as long as we can keep our nose above water and do a good job, I'm not as concerned about the money. I've (unclear) in my back pocket as I am the people's lives that I touch. I mean, our administrative support staff, for example, many of them came from work training programs that gave mothers the opportunity to get their first jobs and have stable jobs, and be able to develop their lives with their children. And we have mothers around here that now own homes, are sending their kids to college, who may not be professional but they have the respect and support of an African American owned business that supports them and their challenges in life. And supports them in their opportunities to improve their life and the lives of their children. So that's as important as any building we build or any dollar figure we achieve to me. And, we're a firm that believes in the highest level of moral and ethical integrity in how we treat each other, and we're honest about that. Story_ID: 338752 Speaker 1: You were trying to clarify for me, when I first came, what you all do. You're not architects per se, you have architects that're employed here [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. We're, we're what, what is known as an E and A PMCM firm. All those letters mean we do engineering and architecture. We do program management and construction management. So we do everything from the design of a building to the management of the construction of a building, to the program management which is the owner's representation during the development of a project. And, while probably 90 percent of our work comes from the public sector, and that goes back to programs that allow African American and minority businesses to compete in an open and fair marketplace, to 10 percent that addresses the private sector with our largest individual client being General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan]. And last year we participated in the lead role of the development of the largest General Motors facilities in the United States, which is--was a consolidation of one of their major operations. Story_ID: 338753 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I'm--as a father of three daughters, I'm extremely concerned about, for one, the treatment and equal treatment of women in our society. But that is also reflected in what is having--happening to the African American male in our society. Now that you see alarming numbers of African American males in disproportionate numbers of African American males being incarcerated, and not achieving the educational levels of success that are needed to compete in a world economy. Excuses being, and I'm not saying there not--some of these excuses aren't legitimate, but excuses being drugs, fathers not living up to his levels of responsibilities. Sometimes that's reflected in illegitimate children but I think African Americans have had from the slavery times quote illegitimate relationships, but the kids weren't necessarily the kids that we see today who are parentless because they don't have two strong role models in the family to give them leadership and love, and guidance. And, it, it really is it's, it's alarming. When I talk to young women and I see the women in my company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio], they can't find meaningful relationships with men. And part of that is the sheer demographics in numbers, and sometimes it's a lack of opportunities but many case of--in many cases, it's a lack of good judgment because I'd love to fill this company with young leaders, black and white, and Hispanic and Asian, and Indian who can take this company and lead it into the future because I did this more as a help-your-dad-get-out-of-a-bad-situation, and we were able to cultivate it into what it is today. But, I think it would be great to have some young leaders who've finished college and are focused on taking companies like this or forming their own companies, and taking them to the next level because in the scheme of things, while we are a multimillion dollar business which is unique in the American, African American experience, we're at a very small incremental level of--in this service industry of what's being done. I mean, firms like URS [URS Corporation, San Francisco, California] have 22,000 employees or 25,000. Firms like Jacobs Engineering [Jacobs Engineering Group Inc., Pasadena, California] have 25,000--I mean, there just--firms like Montgomery Watson [MWH Constructors] have 15 or 20,000. So you see, incrementally, even though we're considered big and extremely profitable and, or wealthy or whatever, we're just a grain of sand in the industry. We need to take on the levels, both nationally and internationally, that reflect both our wisdom and our power--political power, and our intelligence and have it reflected in businesses that are more reflective of the highest level of professional accomplishments. And, while there're a lot of barriers to achieving those goals some of them being racist in their orientation, I think a world economy opens us to the ability to become a more meaningful part of the world growth. I mean, there's so much focus on Asia, and so much oversight of other third world markets. And we need to not only fill those gaps, but we need to lead those gaps. I have one of my senior people right now meeting with the head of Liberia because of the transitioning that's going over there and possibly the opportunity to bring some of the skills we've developed in the United States to the African continent (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The new president? Speaker 2: New president, yes. Speaker 1: Ellen Sirleaf [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf], right. Speaker 2: So, I think there is great, great opportunities, and while I'm disheartened by some of the things that are happening to the African American male population and female population because they become victims, we all are members of victimless societies unless we allow ourselves to become victims. I think that makes sense. Story_ID: 336804 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you, when you look back on all the years that you've worked up to this point, is--and everything you've done in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently now? Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't look at changing anything that I've done in retrospect. I play that out as what experiences I've learned, how will they affect what I do on a day to day basis today and tomorrow. There're both things that I'm extremely proud I was able to accomplish and proud that I was able to do, and there're disappointments, but that's a part of the life growing experience and if--if you dwell too much on the disappointments, you won't be able to accomplish things in the future. So that, I mean that--I hope that answers your question (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Story_ID: 336805 Speaker 1: We discussed off camera that you have something called familial tremors-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --did you want to discuss that, and how does that affect you? Speaker 2: Yeah, familial tremors is an inter- interesting neurological disorder which first, I'd like to say, doesn't impact one's mental ability to function or do physical things. As, as some of my golfing partners say, "My golf game isn't any worse and it isn't any better." But I use it as a handicap to get a few strokes off the poor suckers that believe (laughter) it impacts my game. It resembles Parkinson's in some ways. It's treatable, but, and you, you know, you always worry about over-medicating in, in treatments. And it's something that I've turned into an ADA [Americans with Disabilities], if you will, advantage because I talk to people about familial tremors at the beginning of any presentation I begin because it's a way of describing someone's ability to overcome a physical disorder and not allow that physical order to impact your day to day way you face and address your life. And it allows me to talk openly in front of my company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio] or my potential clients about our abilities to exceed in spite of the fact we have some type of physical disability. Sometimes these disabilities can be visible or other times some of the worst disabilities in life are those that are not shown physically, but addressed in an emotional way and in a debilitating way like alcoholism or some of the other syndromes that, that, that people have, bipolar disorders an, and much more severe things in life. And, it sort of opened my life to nothing is perfect and if this is what the Lord says I need to address or deal with, then I learn to deal with it and address it. It's not gonna impact my interest and strength in getting up the next morning and hugging my wife [Zoe Maxwell Tyler], and kissing my kids, and aggressively going after work and looking at new opportunities that face the future, because this is a step in my life career. I don't consider this the end of a successful business career at fifty-five. I consider just--this is just another integral step in my life and who knows what next steps I may take. Story_ID: 336806 Speaker 1: What are your future pl- I mean, you know, you plan to keep growing this business and to--? Speaker 2: Certainly, I mean, the Cleveland [Ohio] economy is a very difficult and strained one right now so, if anything, we're going through constraints of growth because of the economic environment in our community and the need for real strong leadership, and visionary leadership, and people's investment in that leadership for our future. I'm in the process now of trying to find and recruit good, young, talented men and women to head this company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio] in the future because this isn't something I'm destined to do forever, and we never can tell when forever is actually gonna be tomorrow. So, the important thing in sustaining the business and supporting all the lives--hundreds of lives that we support is having a leadership team that's young enough and strong enough, and visionary enough to take it into the future. I mean, I hack at a computer whereas my kids, and kids that are younger than them, live and make it a living, vibrant tool of their lives. And it's important to have those types of people in critical roles in the company, not just computer skills but both mental and analytical, and international skills that will allow the company to grow and not be constrained by a poor local economy. Story_ID: 336807 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, and when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, first, from a family standpoint it's probably critical to my immediate family--that my wife [Zoe Maxwell Tyler] and I were able to, able to establish with its trials and tribulations, as any marriage is, a strong family and a strong support mechanism for our children, and, hopefully, a good role model for our nieces and nephews, and cousins of a family that both loves, learns and prays together, and that's a role model to the whole community. Not to say you're better because that happened, but it establishes something that I think we need to have much more of in terms of both male and female role leadership in a family. From a business perspective, I think the ability of an African American to work with his father and to work with his community, we, we give out six or seven college tuition-based scholarships to minority African American, minority students in engineering and architectural schools around the country. And that's an outgrowth of a successful business [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio], that we can do those types of things. And it's really important that they know we didn't it from just hand- a handout, that, in fact, this is an outgrowth of a business who was completely bankrupt and had to start from the bottom of the barrel with nothing more than its prayers, its wits, its intelligence, and its ability to sacrifice so that we can make significant accomplishments and disprove the theory that African Americans cannot have a good professional service firm like this. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a, anything I have not asked you that you think we need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (Pause) No, not that I can think of right off hand. You know, I think we've talked about the elements of what make for a successful business from my vantage point. I think we've talked about the importance of religion, education, family, and we bring all those things into the spirit of how we operate this company. I can't think--I mean those touch on some of the critical values that we have. I mean 'cause I consider this a family-based company, and whether it even takes on greater corporate persona, I think the thing that'll allow it to survive in a stronger and cohesive kind of way is--are those core values. Story_ID: 336808 Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person who believes in God, who makes mistakes, who's accepting of others, who's heart is good, and who left the world a little bit better place because of the--in this case, the business interests that God has given me to provide a tool to work with the people that will work in our company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio], but probably first of all, as a good father. Story_ID: 336809 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sir, could you tell us about this picture? Speaker 2: Yes, that's an interesting drawing from one of my twin daughters that was done in the backseat of a car over--my wife [Zoe Maxwell Tyler] and I were--had discussions in the car about who's running the business and who was running this and that in the company [Ralph C. Tyler, P.E. P.S., Inc.; Ralph Tyler Companies, Cleveland, Ohio], and the twin said she's coming to--coming to the company to meet her dad to take over the business. And you see the exclamation coming out of me to saying, "To take over?" and someday, who knows, maybe one of the twins will take over the company. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in Central Park in New York City [New York, New York]. Recently, an artist came up with a concept of covering the park with these orange curtains-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's Christo [Christo Javacheff]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Christo. And I had the fortunate opportunity to walk through the park and view his displays of art, and truly it represent art as in the eyes of the beholder (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: This is a picture of Cleveland [Ohio]--former Cleveland Mayor Michael White [Michael R. White]. Mike and I went to Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] together, and I served as chairman of his election committee and transition committee when he became mayor. He had twelve outstanding years as mayor of Cleveland and brought a lot of leadership and vision to our community. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: No Tyler photo would be complete without a picture reflecting its rich Ohio State heritage and tradition. This is a photo with me, with Ohio State head coach at a alumni affair here in Cleveland. And he's brought both the Youngstown [Ohio] strength, and the Columbus [Ohio] vision to his coaching ranks. And he's a quality individual as well as a good coach. Tressel [Jim Tressel]. Done with a, like a Polaroid or something and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and tell us-- Speaker 2: This is a shot of my four children, my three daughters, Katherine [Katherine Tyler] on the outside, Sarah [Sarah Tyler Plummer] the taller one in the middle, and Mariel [Mariel Tyler] in the pink, and my son Ralph V [Ralph H. Tyler] or Ralph H. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we're ready. Speaker 2: This is a photo that--is resembles the fact and reflects the fact that anybody can make a magazine picture. And I did. And speaking of people, I been in Black Enterprise and a couple of other magazines but this was a nice opportunity to talk about me doing some work with a friend of mine, Herb Smith [Herbert C. Smith], who has an executive recruiting firm and I was helping Herb do some outgrowth and expansion of his business. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: This article talks about me taking over the leadership of my father's [Ralph C. Tyler] firm after his death, and displays part of my eclectic collection of art and masks, and guns, and spears all that allow me to survive in this rough and tumble business environment. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 2: Behind any good man is his beautiful wife and loving and adoring children, and even their ne'er-do-well dog. And that's a great family photo of my kids and they're as lovely inside as they are outside. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 2: This is a shot of my dad with the transit that he used early in my life, and which he used to launch his career as a civil engineer and surveyor. And it's a symbolic shot but it gives a rich treatment of his professionalism and his sincerity, and he was a guy with a quite a vision--quite a bit of ambition and talent. It's sort of reflected in this photo. We had in the conversation of the tape earlier about my dad working in the highway department and becoming the first African American field project supervisor engineer in District 12 [Ohio Department of Transportation District 12], and sort of in a, in a symbolic way reflects how African Americans were traditionally thought of in the highway construction industry. And, in fact, the transition to how professionals--and how, I mean, probably of all those three guys digging ditches right there, you know, the opportunities exist for them and their kids that they grow into prov-positions of management. And, I think you can tell from his smile sort of the generosity of his heart. He's not looking down at people, but he's looking at them and with pride for the hard work and diligence they're putting into their project..