 Story_ID: 19969 Speaker 1: Susan L. Taylor, S-u-s-a-n, L., T-a-y-l-o-r. Speaker 2: Okay and I want you to state your birth date and today's date and your position. Speaker 1: Oh, what's today's date, do I know? Speaker 2: It's August 9th--oh, is it the 8th? It's 8th, I'm sorry, March. Speaker 1: March 8th, born 1-23-46 and today is March 9th. Speaker 2: Is it 8th? Okay. Speaker 1: --8th, March 8th Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: March 8th and what else? Speaker 2: 2001. Speaker 1: Oh, 2001. Speaker 2: And your position? Speaker 1: My position is Senior Vice President of Essence Communications and Publication Director of Essence Magazine. Story_ID: 19970 Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: That's really interesting, I'm wearing it and mostly I wear black, but I love berries and oranges. Speaker 1: That's nice. Speaker 2: And I sign in purple as an author, so that's-- Speaker 1: That seems nice. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Salads, I love salads. It's the dressing, really. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I love the sunshine on my shoulders, summer. Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere in the black world where's there a beach, the Caribbean, our motherland. I've just discovered Bali and Thailand. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: All for one and one for all. Story_ID: 19971 Speaker 1: I know your middle initial--name is Lillian and I was wondering where that name actually came from? Speaker 2: My mother's [Violet Weekes Taylor] best friend who introduced my parents and she came from St. Kitts, which is where my father [Lawrence Taylor] is from. So her name is Lillian Murray. Speaker 1: Now that's what I want. What do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: What I've investigated. You know, my father was a very closed individual and my mother always thought he was a braggadoccio when he talked about Taylor's Range, and coming from, Taylor's Grange, rather, in St. Kitts and that his family had money and my mother was, of course, "Sure, right, I'm sure not." And after my father passed, when I say a very withdrawn and very within himself and brilliant person, we never knew his birthday. We thought it was Christmas until he died. He was actually born on Valentine's Day and with his sort of stoic demeanor, I guess he found it very, very difficult to say that he was born on Valentine's Day. But what I investigated, but you know when I went home, was that--I found, first of all, my family. None of them that I know are still in St. Kitts, but because I was representing Essence [Magazine] and I was on television I've just put the call out to anyone who knew my family, who knew Annie Taylor, who was my father's sister, to be in touch with me. And I got a note from the nurse who was taking care of my aunt Annie just before she died and told me that I had a cousin up in Canada, Annie Taylor, Jr., as they called her. So I was able to contact her and she and I traveled back to St. Kitts together and she took me into the home that my grandfather built which was an exquisite home that is now a church. They had donated it to the Seventh Day Adventists and it--no, the Jehovah Witnesses. It overlooks a park that used to be a racetrack and my father never lived in that home. My father's parents were not married, I don't think they were, and I think that was a shame for my father. But my father really came from a wonderful family. I suppose his father took care of all of his children and when I look at my father's passport his profession is jeweler. I discovered that my father's brother was actually a jeweler in St. Kitts. My father was born in 1898, so and my father was probably the youngest of all those children. What I know of my grandmother is really nothing, my paternal grandmother. Her name was Maude Richardson and that's it, you know. So there are the little details that I've managed to put together about my father, but little. Story_ID: 19972 Speaker 1: Would you say your father [Lawrence Taylor] was then a typical West Indian man in many ways or, you know, what--you said he was, you know, stern. Speaker 2: I think it's more than just typical. I think that there was some, let me see is that a typical--? Probably given the time of his birth, you know, Victorian in his bearing. Always, you know, with his hat on walking through the streets and tipping it at people and certainly in his store, very disciplined and opened his store on 116th Street in Harlem [New York, New York], on the East side of Harlem, and I think that he was the first, you know, a person of African ancestry to have his own business in East Harlem or in that business community of East Harlem that became a bario during my time, Spanish Harlem, and a person who wore a tie, you know, and a jacket every day in his boutique, women's boutique he had. And in the summer's it would be an open-collar shirt, but I've never seen my father take a day off, you know, miss a day at work. Speaker 1: That is my fault, I am sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: Thought I turned it off. Speaker 2: So my father, you know, was a very disciplined, focused person who opened his shop every day at 10:00 am, precisely, who worked from Monday through Saturday night, who I never once saw take a vacation or a day off. He loved baseball, so if the baseball game was on Sunday and he could get to the [New York] Giant's stadium, well you know, Ebbets Field out in Brooklyn [New York] then he would go, but other than that my father just really did very little things to pleasure himself, he worked. Story_ID: 19973 Speaker 1: And your mother [Violet Weekes Taylor], what do you know about her background? Speaker 2: A lot, much more about my mother because my mother, you know, came to this country when she was sixteen years old with five siblings--four siblings, one had died in Trinidad. They came at different times. My mother came here in, oh dear, in 1921. Her mother [Rhoda Weekes] came in 1916 and my grandmother came by herself, a young woman still in her twenties after having given birth to six children, divorced her husband [Arnold Weekes] and came here to make a new life for her family and sent for her own mother and her children in pairs, you know. And when I look at what my grandmother and her family managed to do here, a lot of it was illegal. They were in the numbers business and out of that business came my grandfather's--uncle's liquor store, Seabright Wines and Liquors on 118th Street off of Lenox. And my godfather's liquor store, Innes's Wines and Liquors and (unclear) bar and a whole host of things that my family owned on the West side of Harlem [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 19974 Speaker 1: I'm often curious about people of Caribbean descent. You know, there's always the belief that they, you know, were more entrepreneurial. Did you ever have a sense growing up about a difference in, you know, the family structure and all of that? Did any of that ever come into play, your West Indian heritage I'm just saying? Speaker 2: You know what's interesting, I think West Indians have, here in the United States, have a certain arrogance that they are more motivated, more entrepreneurial, more focused than African-Americans and very often see African-Americans as being, you know, lazy. And what I would remind my mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] of, you know, or any Caribbean who says that to me today is that you have to understand that the most motivated Caribbeans came here and you left back home a lot of people who mirror the people you see on the nightly news and you read about in the daily papers who don't represent the truth of our African-American experience. So anyone who just, you know, rolls up his or her sleeves, manages to put together their resources and gets on a boat, that's what it was at that time, you know, and even today a plane, and come through Ellis Island and just go through all that one has to go through, leaving everything that is dear and familiar to your heart and to come here and make a new life. And, you know, you have a limited amount of time, nothing to fall back on. You're motivated, you're aggressive, you've got to do it, and I think that's the spirit that has driven Caribbean people and all immigrants who've come to this nation. Story_ID: 19975 Speaker 1: Now what were some of your earliest memories growing up in your household? You have one--no, you have--I know there were foster children, but there's one sibling? Speaker 2: One biological brother [Lawrence Taylor Jr.] who's older than me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were the second child other than the foster children [Lillian Baker, Otis Baker, Donald Atwood]? Okay. So can you tell me--share with me your, you know, some of your early memories? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, you know, my memories are textured with so many different kinds of emotions, gratitude for parents who really didn't have a loving relationship, but who stayed together, as my mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] said, because of the children. I feel grateful that there were resources that maybe a lot of people in my community didn't have, not that we were even middle-class. I mean, I guess we were for that time, but, you know, my parents were disciplined. They were older. My mother was thirty-seven when I was born and my father [Lawrence Taylor], you know, was forty-eight, so they were solid. They were settled. I grew up in a Harlem [New York, New York] that saw heroin rough-shod through the community, run rough-shod through the community and really mow down many of my friends' parents and older siblings. I feel grateful that my grandmother [Rhoda Weekes] had this wonderful home, a thirteen-room home, in Englewood, New Jersey that looked like a mansion to me because I grew up sleeping in the living room in a bunk bed and my--I had the bottom bunk and my brother was on top. At, you know, in our tenement, a three-room apartment in Harlem and going out to mother's house in the summer with her wonderful, big Buick and going to the beaches, you know, and lakes and, you know, getting on my bicycle and having the freedom to really fly and not have to, you know, watch myself as I did in my Harlem neighborhood. It was just a real joy for me and my grandmother made me feel very, very special. Special in a way that my parents never made me feel, you know. I think both of my parents had their own internal struggles that prevented them, both of them, probably very much in pain and feeling wounded from not having the demonstrated love of their own parents. And, you know, they passed that down to me and my brother, who didn't seem to need it like I did, and my brother's very much like my parents, very circumspect, very organized, very disciplined, very honorable, very wonderful. I mean, I grew up in a household where I never heard a curse word, where nobody drank, nobody smoked, you know, where there was not a lot of company. There weren't very many people coming in, so there was something always pulling me outside because I always felt that I was apart from the family and very different from the family members. There were some things that happened to me in my early experience that made me feel very ashamed. I've always hungered for love and for affection and wanted to be daddy's girl and I didn't have that kind of connection to my family and I found myself looking for it outside of my household and very often in very unsafe places with--right into the arms of the little boys in my Harlem community, you know, and my family discovered my little, you know, bad behavior, I put that in quotes, and really I think a wall closed. A wall came down or was built up between my family and me. They were on one side and I was on the other. And it's kind of the hurt in my heart that I held until I began to understand it and that was the motivation to go back to St. Kitts and to really dig deeply into my mother's experience so that I could understand them and understand why they didn't touch, not only me but each other, you know. Story_ID: 19976 Speaker 1: You went to Catholic school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to public school first, P.S. 57 and then off to St. Paul's and then we moved out of Harlem [New York, New York] in the second half of the sixth grade out to Queens [New York] and I went to Catholic school, graduated from there and went to John Adams High School in Queens and did not go to college [Fordham University, New York, New York] until, you know, maybe a decade and a half ago. Story_ID: 19977 Speaker 1: Tell me what the young Susan was like? You know, we all have, you know, it's during our formative years or even our young years, you know, we sort of dream of things or we, you know--I know you say that there was a disconnect, you know, just as you were coming in the room I was telling Paul of all my disconnects with my mother, so what was that young person like? Speaker 2: I always wanted to know what was out there, what was across the street and around the corner and over the hill. And I had a measure of freedom, you know, 'cause I've always been tall and I've always been independent and I wandered. You know, I wandered through my community. I wandered through my neighborhood [Harlem, New York]. I can't say that I had any great ambition when I was a youngster or that I dreamed of being, you know, anything actually. I just really kind of--I think I was a lonely child, even though I was in the middle of a bustling neighborhood. I felt rather alone and I think that that colored a lot of my life, but that's what made me hunger for the connection that I knew I couldn't have, would never have at home. I looked for that connection, you know, in my friends and in other family members and just throughout my community. How would I describe my childhood I think was--I don't have horror stories to tell and for that I'm grateful. You know, I don't have stories of sexual abuse and, you know, physical abuse. What I felt before I began to understand it was that I was emotionally, you know, devastated because I didn't have what I think is the grounding that every human being needs, and that is a clear demonstration of love, you know, that you understand as a child, that you are primary in your parents' lives and I didn't feel that. I felt, you know, secondary, tertiary, somewhere out there on the periphery but certainly not at the center of their lives. And that, I think, colored everything for me, Julieanna. It made me distracted in school, you know, so that I wasn't ever focused, really, on my school work ever, you know. I wasn't ever focused on one thing. If I go back I'd say, "Wow, I wish I had stayed with ballet," or some craft, something that would have disciplined and trained my mind. What my parents [Lawrence and Violet Weekes Taylor] gave me was a real sense of the fact that I could become entrepreneurial, that I could live my life on my own terms and that I had to behave in a certain way, you know. And those are the values that I hold, that I had a responsibility not only to me but to maintain my dignity for my family and for my community. Story_ID: 19978 Speaker 1: You mentioned some disappointments, were they with your father or were there--the relationship between your parents [Lawrence and Violet Weekes Taylor] or what were the things that you said that were crisis driven? Speaker 2: You mean the things that--? Speaker 1: That impacted you. You said earlier that there were some things that happened that, you know, put a wall between you-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was an early sexual experience. It was me, you know--I can't say that the little boys, the little boys were out there with their hands ready and I was stepping right into them. And as I think about some of the things that I did, you know, it wasn't even that little boys had to come to me. I was hungering for a connection and so, you know, I mean I did a lot of touching and feeling and kissing that was, as I thought about it then--oh my God I thought it was so horrible and so inappropriate and a neighbor discovered me on the roof of my building one day, you know, with a young boy who lived in my building and he came down and told my mother. It was the worst day of my life I always thought. I wrote about it in my first book 'In the Spirit'. I didn't go deeply into it but, you know, I wrote about it and said, "Oh, I remember when Mr. Bailey knocked on the door." "Ms. Taylor I have something to tell you." I knew that my life was going to end and I begged her not to tell my father and my father gave me just a whipping that night that I'll never forget. And as I think about that, Julieanna, and it's that experience has colored my life so and saved my life because as I grew up and moved into my teenage years and I watched all the girls around me becoming pregnant, you know, I was a virgin until I moved out of my parents' home, until I was eighteen with a diaphragm in me with a boy I chose. A man I chose to be my lover, my first lover and to--because I was in love with him and I know now and I knew then that if not for those early sexual experiences that shamed me and shamed my family, that I might have been reckless in my teenage years, but I was so committed because there was no way, absolutely, positively no way that I could come into Lawrence Taylor's home and say that I was pregnant, so. Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you had that--but how old were you? Speaker 2: I think when Mr. Bailey discovered me on that roof I was about nine years old, yeah. Story_ID: 19979 Speaker 1: What do you have of your parents? You know, we all have, you know, what your father [Lawrence Taylor], what your mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] when you look back on it? Speaker 2: I have some of the things of both my parents that I wish I didn't and a whole host of values and skills and strengths that I'm glad, you know, were imparted to me. I think their discipline, their focus, their tenacity, their strength, their single-mindedness when there is, you know, a goal. What I do have that they don't have, I think, is a tender heart and a caring spirit, not that they weren't caring but a loving spirit and that I am a toucher and a hugger and warm person and it's a great need of mine, you know. And, you know, I just believe that everything is in divine order. Not having that as a youngster made me a more loving mother. It made me conscious of telling my daughter [Shauna Taylor King] every day, "I just love you. You're my pumpkin." Of holding her and hugging her and walking through the streets of New York City with her, taking her with me on my travels of just really keeping her central in my life and letting her know because my parents loved me, they just didn't impart that love in a way that I needed it to be imparted, you know. Story_ID: 19980 Speaker 1: What did you gain from your interaction with your grandmother [Rhoda Weekes] besides, you know, it being a wide open space and a big house and-- Speaker 2: My grandmother, Rhoda Valeria Weekes from Trinidad, born in Barbados though, was just the glamour girl, you know. She was glamorous. She was entrepreneurial. She was bold. She was vocal. She was almost the antithesis of my mother [Violet Weekes Taylor], who was very contained in her own house and my grandmother was on a plane in 1953 going back to Trinidad and visiting Venezuela and had this ring, actually that I wear on my thumb, was my grandmother's diamond ring. At eighteen, she gave me my first fur, it was hers that she wasn't wearing anymore and she gave me that, you know. So she was really a very vibrant, a very alive person and I think I got a sense of style from her and also the knowledge that there's a great and very grand world out there to be discovered and enjoyed. Story_ID: 19981 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that influenced you in school or maybe it was just sort of being the community that was the influence, you know, at that point, right? Speaker 2: My school experience I didn't see as really nourishing one, you know. I was taught by Irish Catholic nuns who, I don't think valued the black girls, you know, and boys in their classes. It was the Italian and the Irish kids and, you know, especially dark skinned children who weren't, you know, brilliant, so I didn't feel valued in any of my primary school experiences. In high school [John Adams High School, New York, New York] there was one teacher who stands out, Mr. Perez, you know, who just--my history teacher, who just let me know that I had something so very special and Mr. Perez was a motivator and encouraged me and a person I'll just will never forget. Speaker 1: And so here you are, you are eighteen and you are in love at this point, right? And you're--did you finish--finishing school at this point? Speaker 2: Actually, I graduated from school at seventeen, moved away from parents' home at seventeen, and fell in love again. I'd been in love before, you know, I was a teenager, of course. At eighteen, there was George Smith from the Bronx [New York], who swept me off my feet. Story_ID: 19982 Speaker 1: You know, in relative terms you're young. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, but so you go out on your own. What is that whole experience like? Speaker 2: This is wonderful. My friend, Pat Martin, who was a year older than me, year and a half, had her own apartment with a friend and when her friend got married she invited me to be her roommate. I couldn't wait to go. So I tried to leave right after high school, right after I graduated and then I was just seventeen and a half and my mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] actually called the police and they stopped me from moving and then about a month and a half before my eighteenth birthday I just said, "Mom, I'm gone," packed up my things, I don't think I ever unpacked them actually, and moved and my mother was really devastated, you know. She felt that I was leaving her with the burden of the foster children that were in the household. By that time my father's [Lawrence Taylor] business in Harlem [New York] had failed. We were living in Queens [New York]. Harlem was destroyed by drugs and all the businesses were folding and think that that was really my father's greatest pain. He couldn't speak about it. My brother [Lawrence Taylor Jr.] had a paper route. It was my brother's income from the paper route and my mother's income from being a foster parent that was keeping the family going, you know. And my father just could not talk about the pain that he was in or that he needed some kind of help or anything and he just retreated even further and the division between my parents grew. The chasm just grew ever more deeply. And so my mother felt that I should've been there. "Now that you're out of high school and you're going to get a job and you have a job," I was working, "that you should be there to support," you know. I worked in my father's store. I grew up working in my father's store. I don't remember when I started selling stockings and making change and greeting people and at thirteen my mother said, "If you want to have clothes to go back to school you better get a job." As I said I've been this tall since I was twelve or thirteen years old. I'm 5'9" and I put on my little pumps and my little shirtwaist dress, my ponytail and went down Chock Full-O-Nuts, got a job. [Baseball player] Jackie Robinson interviewed me, that's what they had. Jackie Robinson, vice president, I guess, of human resources interviewing people who would be waiters and waitresses. So he interviewed me. I got the job. I worked there just for a short period of time. I got fired. I didn't have the maturity; I was thirteen years old. I was smiling at everybody and happy but wasn't moving the coffee fast enough and went back home to my Queens community and began working in the community in the tailor shop and did that all through high school and I had to pay my mother rent. I was so angry with her, that she made me pay her eight dollars a week, but it was the best thing she ever did, you know, because it taught me that you have to pay your way in this world and she needed that eight dollars, you know. It didn't seem like much to--it probably doesn't seem like much to--it seemed like a lot to me and it probably mattered in her life too as I look back on it. It was a good thing and so I just continued to work, you know, from the time I was thirteen years old. So when I moved out of the home, my mother lost that eight and probably more dollars since I was working full-time after high school and she really and truly was angry at that, you know. Story_ID: 19983 Speaker 1: But you felt a sense of freedom. You were escaping. Speaker 2: They were very very--my father [Lawrence Taylor] was very restricting, not my mother [Violet Weekes Taylor], you know. I couldn't have a boyfriend. No young man ever crossed that threshold, ever, ever, ever when my father was there except the night of my prom, but because we kept our apartment in Harlem [New York] and my father was going back and forth and would only come home on the weekends when he had his store, I had a very active social life and my mother was always open to me having, you know, boyfriends and my mother, when I think about it, was just extraordinary. You know my mother, when I was thirteen, fourteen, I had a boyfriend that was nineteen and then twenty-one. These are guys with cars and my mother actually let me go out with them. And she said, "I know you. If I don't, you'll go anyway and I don't want you to lie and these are the parameters." And, you know, and I wasn't having sexual experiences with them beyond a whole lot of touching and hugging and kissing, but I knew how far I was going to go. My mother trusted me, you know, and those early sexual experiences, touching, you know, before I should've been maybe at, you know, eight and nine and seven and six. I don't even remember when it started in Harlem, so I was very clear about how far I was going to go in any relationship, you know, with a boy or a man. Story_ID: 19984 Speaker 1: --Eighteen out here, you know, and I'm just wondering what is that whole experience like? You know, you've moved in with a friend, you know. You're free at last, what does the Susan Taylor of that time sort of do? Speaker 2: Out on my own, you know, exquisite freedom and the parameters were there because they had been imposed very clearly by my parents [Lawrence and Violet Weekes Taylor] and I stayed within those parameters because there certainly was, you know, drug use and a whole host of things going out there that, you know, I just stayed away from. And my roommate and I, Pat Martin, had a wonderful apartment together in Queens [New York], not too far from my parents. And then she got married and another friend, Zorene, moved in with me and then I moved back into the city and I had my own apartment until I got married at 20 to my daughter's [Shauna Taylor King] father, my first husband. And living on my own was--I mean, just--I always felt mature, you know. I just always felt capable of taking care of myself. I always felt a measure of independence and, you know, being on my own and having my rent to pay and all the supplies to make sure I had in my household had really taught me why my mother needed my $8, you know, from every paycheck. And I'm glad that I had those years before I got married, that I didn't go directly from my parents' home to a marriage. You know I always wished that I'd gone off to college, you know. It wasn't what I wanted to do at the time. I just wanted to be away. College wasn't something that was encouraged in my household. It was really graduating from high school, graduating from high school, getting out there and getting yourself a good job or beginning your own business and just going for it and that's basically what I did. Story_ID: 19985 Speaker 1: I thought I wanted to be an actress and so I started studying acting right after school and wasn't a great actress but the parts would come. And there I was auditioning for the Negro Ensemble Company and became a part of the second company and, you know, working on 'As the World Turns' on CBS and did two ads for Smirnoff and then I interviewed for a play called 'The Dozens' on Broadway and got the understudy to Paula Kelly and that was a turning point in my life because there I was working early mornings on a film, 'John and Mary' with Mia Farrow and Dustin Hoffman, running down here to Broadway and working in a very cold Broadway theater preparing to go on Broadway to the main theater, watching Paula Kelly in this three-character play starring Morgan Freeman, Al Freeman, Jr., and Paula Kelly. I could never get the inane part in my head. It was a little comedy and it was absolutely foolish and she was brilliant in the role, in that she never skipped a line, she made the character come alive, she gave dimension to the character that the character really didn't have. I would sit there and I would say to myself, "If ever she gets sick I'm in trouble because there's no way that I could ever remember this part." And I think that was moment when I really began to understand the importance of following your dream. Growing up in Harlem [New York] and going to the Cosmo Theater and looking up on the screen and seeing Dorothy Dandridge and Carmen Jones swept me off my feet. And I think it was that film and her gorgeousness and talent that made me say, "I want to be like her," but I'd never been in a play. You know I had no theatrical experience and I just, you know, graduated from high school and went off to learn how to become an actress. And having the experience of acting taught me that, you know, this is not what I wanted to do. Didn't have the discipline to sit down and learn someone else's words. Even today as I speak all over the country and the world, I mean, I'm never speaking from a written text. It's, you know, the message that is in my heart and so that's why I couldn't get the information in my head and I've discovered I've always had a memory challenge, you know, even as a youngster. So I wasn't able to do that and decided that, "Lord if you ever let me out of this without embarrassing my family and myself and creating absolute financial ruin for the producers if Paula Kelly needed a day off and they need me to step in, I promise that I will follow my dream and my passion." The play closed on opening night and I was relieved, saddened for the actors but joyful for myself. Story_ID: 19986 Speaker 1: And I think, you know, within a few breaths I enrolled in cosmetology school with a vision of creating a line of cosmetics for women of color because there was nothing for black women then, very little I should say, but not that there was nothing. And I was married to a hair dresser who had a marvelous salon in Harlem [New York] and we decided that we would create a line of cosmetics, I would do that he would have the salon and we opened up a new business. I graduated from the beauty school, did that while I was pregnant, and my marriage broke up when my daughter [Shauna Taylor King] was six weeks old. I moved back to my mother's [Violet Weekes Taylor] house, my father [Lawrence Taylor] died the year before, and I went back into that very painful marriage, but really with a closed heart at this point because my husband was unfaithful to me when I was pregnant and he broke my heart and not that I was even deeply, deeply in love, but it was a very vulnerable time. He was the one who insisted on having a baby and I mean even, "Oh you don't know if you're a woman if you don't have a child," and I decided, "Okay I'll get pregnant," and there I was with a baby without him, you know. Well, being pregnant and without him and so when I moved back home he came courting and promised that things would be better and I thought it was easier living with him rather then living with my mother and so I went back into that relationship and only stayed for a few months, long enough to launch my cosmetics company, 'The Joy in Essence', this was 1970, and then a very painful situation arose and I just decided that I was out of the marriage. And I left the cosmetics company and my daughter and I had our own apartment and that's when the struggle began and that's the struggle that, you know, I was engaged in. Trying to keep the roof over our heads and food on the table and Essence was a fledgling publication. I was $500 a month as a freelance beauty editor and that's when I started teaching models how to apply makeup and that was just a time of great growth and spiritual development for me. Speaker 2: Susan, let's talk about just how you found out about the Essence experience, but even before that can we go back, was there anything you learned when you were starting your cosmetics line? I'd like you to give them the name of the cosmetics line, but was there anything that you learned in that experience because really at that point was--Fashion Fair wasn't in existence? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. So you were really the-- Speaker 1: There was Flori Roberts and there was Astarte. Speaker 2: Okay. So tell me what, you know, what-- Speaker 1: And Barbara Walden. Speaker 2: Okay, what were you thoughts then about that? Speaker 1: You know what, I believed that I could create custom blended makeup because there was a salon up on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx [New York] that didn't have shades for black women, but that all the white women up in the Bronx could come and get their cosmetics custom blended. So I never saw doing any kind of mass distribution. What I wanted to do was have my salon where people could come when they could come and get their foundations matched perfectly to their skin. People said to me "There's no way that you can do this, a cosmetics company," but then I had saved my money from my acting career. "You can't do this with $5,000," and I did, you know. I went and did my investigating and I found that I could do private label cosmetics. I found those private label distributors who had the products that I wanted, the natural--I put that in quotes--skin care products, fruitcake, grapefruit, you know, astringent and papaya facial washing creams and just wonderful, wonderful line and I created my label and the company's name is Nequai, named after my daughter. Her name is Shauna Nequai Taylor King, now married, and was Nequai Cosmetics and found a chemist who was so excited to try to work with golden pigments because most black people have an undertone of yellow, of gold, and not the sort of pink undertones that were being used. We also have blues and some other colors but primarily it's a golden undertone. And starting from that base I was able to really create shades that were not in existence and the chemists were excited about the challenge and just got engaged in it with me and created the pigments and we opened the shop and I'll tell you, it was such a success. I made my money back in a week because the built-in clientele was there. They were coming to my husband to get their hair done, you know. And I had flyers out everywhere and people just flooded the shop and the money just really came rolling in and I came to the attention of the Essence editors and they invited me to be the beauty editor. Actually, no I came down and applied for that job, so that went very well. Story_ID: 19987 Speaker 1: Now how did you hear about the Essence job (unclear)? Speaker 2: It was a young man who--my friend, Peggy Ruffin (ph.), had introduced me to and he was a photographer and this day he took us out and he was taking photographs of us and he said, "You know there's a job for a beauty editor down at Essence and you might want to apply," and I said, "Oh, I think I will." And, you know, when you're 22, 23 you just think you can do anything and that's what I did, never having any literary experience. I had never written anything beyond high school composition, came down to Essence. We were in a little brownstone at the time down on 30th Street off of Park Avenue and Ida Lewis was the editor in chief and sat there in Ida Lewis' office. My husband and my daughter [Shauna Taylor King], my daughter was nine months old. She was out in the car, they were waiting and I was confident. I had my own cosmetics company and didn't need the job and told her if she gave me a chance that I would be the best beauty editor that Essence could possibly find. And a few months later she, you know, called me up and gave me an opportunity to come. Speaker 1: Now how old was Essence at that time? Speaker 2: Months old. The first issue of Essence was published May of 1970 and this was November of 1970 when I began actually working with Essence as a freelancer. Speaker 1: You know, I just want to ask this question because I've heard a lot of stories about the start of it. Where did Essence get its money ultimately? Didn't they go to different, the founders actually went to different people, right? Speaker 2: They were looking for, and I wrote the history of that in the 25th anniversary hard covered book that documents that they were looking for nearly $3 million, and just could not get it. They couldn't get that venture capital and it was really pieced together. Freedom National Bank came to the table. There was some Mesbics that put in bits of money. Jackie Robinson was very instrumental in influencing Freedom National Bank, the black owned bank here in Harlem [New York] that was in existence then to guarantee, I think, it was $30,000 that they gave. So Essence opened its doors with about $165,000, you know. And I'm just so proud to say that we've never ever missed paying anybody, you know. The paychecks always came on time. And we've grown to this, you know, multi-million dollar company and 49 percent of our company was just purchased by Time, Inc. last year. [2005 Time, Inc now a majority owner]. Speaker 1: It's really an amazing story. Even the start, I mean the same thing when I hear you talk about your cosmetics company I'm thinking, custom blend that's just new. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, it's the thing of the, you know, 80--you know, it's become more and then the, you know, mangos and things like that. You don't hear, you know it seems like a more relatively new phenomenon-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the last 10 years, so and, you know, at the time that Essence began you know black women were not all, you know, were sort of bottom of the pile, sort of, in terms beauty, and (unclear). Speaker 2: To other people, you know. Speaker 1: Other people. Speaker 2: --but always to us--I mean we were mixologists, you know, going into the little five and 10 cent stores and buying whatever shades we could find and mixing them together and always finding, you know, something to beautify. It's so much a part of our African culture. You know, we are very much into the aesthetic. That's how Madame C.J. Walker could become the first black, you know, the first female millionaire in the nation by just selling beautifying products for black women. Speaker 1: So you're here, you know, you're here, you're the fashion editor and what world does that sort of open up? You know, you're a person who academically, you know, that not--you don't necessarily pursue your writing and this is, right? You decide you're going to--you're--wait, how does that work, that's what I wondered? You come on as the fashion editor-- Speaker 2: As beauty editor. Speaker 1: --as beauty editor, I'm sorry. So are you to cover things that are happening in the, sort of, in the black beauty arena? What was the discussion? Speaker 2: What I was supposed to do as beauty editor was actually deliver information about beauty and products and what was new and ways that we could, you know, take the best care of our hair and our skin and our body to our growing audience and then also to create the covers and to infuse--to be the bridge between the advertising, you know,community and the magazine along with our advertising staff to bring those dollars into the publication. I saw then how everything that I had learned before had come into play. You know, growing up in my father's [Lawrence Taylor] store, learning how to present myself, learning how to sell stockings, you know, trying this acting career, which made me, you know, have to get in front of the camera and do things that, you know, present myself again. Even though I hadn't gone to college I always had a measure of skill with speaking correctly and my family insisted on that and they were trained in the British, you know, school system in the Caribbean, so that was imparted to me and there were some very, very generous people at Essence in those early years who took me under wing and wrote my copy for me and taught me how to write that copy. And Marsha Gillespie, who was the managing editor and then became the editor in chief in the magazine in 1971, she did, or '72 [1972], and Marsha just, you know, said to me when I said, "Oh, I don't know if I can write." She said, "If you can speak, you can write. You're going to write this beauty copy." And Marsha was my editor and she would fix it up and that taught me, you know, how to write the beauty copy. And that extended to the fashion writing responsibilities once I became fashion and beauty editor and then as the company grew we were able to hire writers to do that specifically. Story_ID: 19988 Speaker 1: Ed Lewis, our publisher, one evening said, "I need to have dinner with you. We have to talk." I was like, "Ed, I can't have dinner. You know, we're going go to the Cody Awards," it was the national fashion, you know, designer awards. "We'll go to the Cody Awards, that was our annual date, but I've got to go home because I've got to take care of my daughter [Shauna Taylor King]. I've got to get up early up in the morning. I've got shoots. I've got to get her school," and he insisted. I said, "This must be important." So one evening we're sitting at dinner and he said, "You know, it's not working at the publication and we really want you to become the editor-in-chief [of Essence]. We have some challenges there." Marsha Gillespie had gone on and there was an editor that was between us that I never name, and I said, "You've got to be kidding." I mean, Susan Taylor, no college education, no literary background, no, you know, journalism training. "Me?" And he said, "Yeah, we're going to make that offer to you." And I went home that evening, and this is why I think it's so important for us to surround ourselves with people who believe in us and who see things in us that we may not see, our talents and skills. I called up my guy at the time. The man in my life is a lawyer, he was a lawyer, still is, and has an MBA from Columbia [University, New York, New York] and I said, "Mel, this is a joke, you know. Ed Lewis is thinking of me for the editor-in-chief's position." He said, "You have exactly what black women need." I said, "I do?" He said, "You can do this." All I needed was that vote of confidence from him because Mel, I believed, was brilliant. You know, I came into Ed Lewis' office the next day, I put my hands on either side of his desk and I said, "I'm ready." You know, it took him months. It was the long, arduous time of waiting, maybe four months and then he made the decision that this was the moment he was going to do it, you know. Some of the staff members quit because if you know how a magazine is structured you--you have in this case you have publication director, that's me now, editor in chief, that's where I was, and then you have maybe managing editor, executive editor and you've got senior editors, the fashion and beauty editors, food editors, health editors are over here somewhere, so I was promoted from here to here and the folks who were here were not happy. You know, so some of them left. And some of the people in the community were really outraged and called Ed Lewis and said, "How could you? How could you turn over our literary jewel to someone with no literary background?" Ed Lewis told me that Marsha Gillespie had said to him some years ago when she was leaving when he asked her, "And what about Susan?" She said, "Susan's not ready yet, but in time she will be." And he said that time just collapsed, you know, and it was just a year after she left and he gave me that opportunity. And I tell you, this high school graduate was smart enough to surround herself with the smartest people I could find and to really fight for the money to pay them well and to support them and together, you know, we linked arms and aims and just worked really hard to build the magazine that we're looking at today. Speaker 2: Susan, but, you know, you make it seem so easy and I'm just saying team building is not an easy, necessarily easy thing to do even among the best and the brightest and so I'd like you to just to address how you were able to assemble that team in some respects because, you know, at the beginning you're like this daunting test, you know, you've got it, and then it's the reality of making it happen and I would just like you to share a little bit of that. Speaker 1: You know, I think that passion and enthusiasm just opened the way. And I had the same kind of impassioned spirit that I had for my cosmetics company [Nequai Cosmetics]. People said you couldn't do it, we can do that, you know. People said, "Oh, how can you, you know, create a magazine? I mean, how can you really build Essence?" Nobody would say this to my face. They said it to Ed Lewis. They might've said it behind my back. I really wasn't out to prove anybody wrong. In fact, I said to Ed Lewis, "If this doesn't work out can I go back to my beauty editor and fashion editor's job?" because I was perfectly satisfied, you know, in that dual position. I loved it and didn't feel as though I had really fulfilled my goals there. I hadn't reached them. You know, I really--there was some other things that I wanted to do with the magazine and say to black women. Story_ID: 19989 Speaker 1: What I did was recognize that there are a lot of talented people out here who would never reach their potential in white publishing because of racism and sexism. And Essence [magazine] continues to benefit from that. You know, you've got these highly skilled people who were motivated, but who are unrecognized and very often who are insulted, whose ideas are discounted, whose skills are questioned and it means that black organizations, African American owned organizations can benefit from those highly skilled and well-trained people because the training has never been here at Essence. It's always come in. I've learned so much from the people we've hired. Audrey Edwards was the editor who came here from Family Circle [magazine]. You know, Stephanie Oliver, Marsha Gillespie had brought from Glamour [magazine]. We brought people in from the New York Times, people from Newsweek and Time Magazine and we just built a great, great team and we all grew together. You know, I had skills that they didn't have and they had skills that, you know, I didn't have and we had gifts to exchange. And it's really been the mission. The mission is the guiding force here at Essence. It really is about the empowerment of our people and that's what I feel everyday when I come to work. You know, how lucky we are. This is what I say to our staff, "How lucky we are to be able to show up at work every day and work on our own behalf." And this is what this is about. I mean, there's always a beautiful image on the cover and we're giving wonderful, wonderful treats and places to travel and beautiful fashion and all kinds of ways to beautify and skills that will help us to be better parents and, you know, have better relationships, but the real goal is the empowerment, the forward movement of our people. Women, through Essence Magazine, even though our more than 7 million readers include men, and through all the other platforms, the Essence Music Festival, the award show, Essence Hosiery, talking to men, our children's book, talking to children. So it's the guiding mission, you know, that goal of empowering black folks throughout the world now with the internet that just has always given me the motivation to get up and keep going. I'm as enthusiastic today as I was, you know, 30 years ago. Speaker 2: Tell me in those first 10 years what lessons were you learning? What things did you learn in the early, you know, from like, you know, 1970 to 1980 or, you know, what were you learning during that time about your audience, about, you know, what things to do right, what things you could change, you know, approaching the advertising community. What things were you learning? Speaker 1: I think the primary thing that we learned was that having a great magazine, and I'm talking before I became editor-in-chief from 1970 to 1980, the first 10 years, having a great magazine was not enough. Having a loyal and passionate, you know, audience that we were serving was not enough, but the advertising community was still going to disregard us and disrespect us. Ed Lewis, you know, went to one of the major cosmetics companies and said, "Your fragrance is number one among black women. You should be advertising in Essence." And he was told that, "Oh, we fear that if were ever advertised it to black women it would lose its prestige," you know. Black women wouldn't want it anymore because it was brought directly to them. Now they believe that it's for white women. And if it were delivered directly to black women they probably wouldn't want it anymore and further, white women might not want it anymore. So that was the kind of blatant racism that we're struggling against. You know when John Johnson with Ebony had been out there even before us and just gave us all the respect in the world for what he had created, you know. Story_ID: 19990 Speaker 1: Do you remember the, you know, some of those defining moments? Speaker 2: You know there still are those defining moments because we still don't have all of the categories of advertising that we absolutely should have. If you look at what black women spend on fashion and see the dearth of fashion advertising in Essence, you know, we say, black people have to become conscious consumers and this is one of the things that we're hoping to teach through the magazine. Well one of the co-founders, Clarence Smith, really created the black female market. He created a market where there was no market and it was by picking up that bag in the magazine and, you know, going onto the Madison Avenue at that time, going to advertising agencies, talking about the value of the market, talking it up, talking it again and again and again about what they were missing, what advertisers were missing. If you want to move product you need to know that there's an audience here that's growing increasingly politically aware and that is really looking at those manufacturers and producers of products that are speaking directly to them through the media that is important to them. We went to conventions and conferences and industry gatherings or we would meet the players and Ed Lewis was doing something very different on a higher level even. He was meeting CEOs of companies and creating those relationships. So as, you know, editor in chief at that time my role was really creating that relationship with the audience and keeping the magazine growing. When I became editor in chief and Clarence was doing it on the advertising end and Ed at the very high corporate level. And what was your audience telling you because, you know, you were, you read a lot that people wrote. They communicated to you. What were they telling you at that time? Because this was a community that was also finding its own voice in many ways too. Speaker 1: You know, black women have always felt that they own Essence and they do. When we hit the mark and we do it well, they are so proud and they tell us. When we exceed expectations and I think, you know, we've done that with the Essence Awards and the Music Festival and with the magazine, maybe not every issue, but we've done it. We hear from our sisters and our brothers. When we miss the mark, when we disappoint our people, when we don't do what they think we should've done as well as, you know, our folks believe we should've, they let us know. You know our people even before there was an internet and fax machines have been very, very proactive and interactive and there is a relationship that we have with our audience. It's a very intimate one. There was a time when I read every single letter that came from readers, you know, so that I would know what was really going on, what was in their hearts and minds. The way that I have stayed connected is to travel. I travel and I speak. I'm everywhere in the country. Speaking, but also listening. Listening to the things that, you know, black women and men are saying about their own lives and what their needs are and what their aspirations are. So what our audience has said to us is that we need nourishment. You know, we need the things that are really going to make our lives better. We need to be affirmed. So when you look at Essence and we're going to do this at an even better, you know, on a higher level as we grow the magazine. Monique Greenwood, our new editor-in-chief, is doing a magnificent job. We at Essence want to show the rainbow and always have. You're not going just to see, you know, all light-skin women or all dark-skinned women and not everybody's going to have relaxed hair or braids or [dread]locs. So, I mean, there's so much to consider. There's always the rainbow of beauty. We have to honor women's bodies. We need to do a better job of showing, you know, just the range of black women's bodies. This is critical stuff. Also I think that magazines can do indelible damage to women and I think that they have by showing just one narrow ray of what is beautiful and what it does is it says to the 99.9 percent of the women to whom that little narrow standard does not apply, that you're not beautiful, that your hips are too big, that you're, you know, your hair is not long enough or blonde enough, and your skin is wrong, and, you know, your breasts are too small or too big. And what we know is that each one of us, this has been my message through Essence from the time I was beauty editor to this moment: "Each one of us is a divine original. Get to know and love and honor yourself." It's what I have to say to myself so that I don't compare myself to all the brilliance around me that each one of us has her or his own brilliance, know that, honor that, be passionate about giving that and growing that. Story_ID: 19991 Speaker 1: Essence Magazine's beginning growth and development parallels the growth and development of women and specifically African American women. And when Essence began in 1970 it's when black women and women's organizations began growing and developing and Marsha Ann Gillespie, you know, as editor-in-chief was invited to come and to speak and she started traveling the country. Now when I became editor- in-chief in 1981, I had a young daughter [Shauna Taylor King] at home and I don't think I was anxious to get up and go out. And Ed Lewis said to me "You have to get up from behind your desk because New York City is not a microcosm of the country and in order to really know what's beating in the hearts of black women you have to be out there." And so, I think, because of my column and also because of my role, I think anyone who heads up a women's publication is invited to come out and be a part of women's gatherings, you know, so I began going out and speaking, very nervously I might add, and people began inviting me more and more and I realized the value of it and that I could get more work done on an airplane than I could get done behind my desk. Behind my desk, it's answering phones and having meetings and saying yes and no all day long, you know, and running to the art department. At home is when the reading gets done. On an airplane is when you can think critically and do your reading and really, you know, think about the product and the growth of it. So I have really--I was so shy, so shy in the beginning to get out and speak and it's something that I enjoy doing more than anything now, you know. I just really look forward to that intimate connection that I have with not only black women but a lot of people throughout the nation. And it really has been the primary source of my growth, traveling and getting to see--and writing books. Because when I speak on a university campus or for an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner or an Urban League dinner or at a women's conference it's at a big downtown hotel and it's outside of our community, you know, or a college campus that's outside of our community very often unless it's, you know, a black college campus or an urban one. But as an author when I've gone out and I've gone into bookstores and I go into our bookstores in the middle of our community and I always when I'm, you know, doing television and radio, inviting people to come. So even if you can't buy a book just come and say hey, and it's just been incredible to just really see sisters and brothers who otherwise I would never have seen because they don't have the money to buy the ticket to the dinner and that are on the mailing list of the university. So it has really put me in touch with just all of the sectors and segments of our community and I just feel more ready than ever now to serve our people through all of the newly available platforms. Story_ID: 19992 Speaker 1: Now, how are you handling balancing a young child and, you know, and getting out because that, you know, it's own thing to say--first of all you've got this big, new position, you know, and then he's [Ed Lewis] saying "Get out of the nest," and you've got a young child [Shauna Taylor King], you know, that I think it is also important that you nurture and you have talked a lot about in terms of her being your anchor and, you know, so I'm just wondering how you handled that? Speaker 2: Well, its interesting-- Speaker 1: This is the days of women also--I remember I was a young lawyer then and people were acting in some bizarre ways in the '80s [1980s], you know, about balancing career and, you know, and work. Speaker 2: You know, even though we didn't have that term in the '80s [1980s], the term "balancing," and we just rolled up our sleeves and we did what we had to do and I think it did take a physical and spiritual toll on us without us knowing it, but on the other hand we're the first generation, first generations I should say, of black women who were talking about self-care, you know, and nurturance. It was not part of our mothers' and our grandmothers' nomenclature and not their language, you know. So I was lucky enough to have my mother [Violet Meekes Taylor] still be alive when my daughter was growing up. So if it was a weekend she could always go and stay at my mother's. I was lucky to have my first husband, my former husband only lived, you know, twenty blocks from me and he was in a wonderful relationship with a woman who I absolutely adored and my daughter, Shauna, could go and stay with them if I had to travel overnight. When it was summers she would go with me and she was my little helper on the road and that was an incredible experience for her, you know, to be on college campuses and to go to dinners. And I can remember receiving an award one night from the National Coalition of 100 Black Women and I was scheduled to speak to the National Black Bankers, the Urban Bankers in San Francisco [California] and I had to get on the plane and the program was going late and I had to leave the museum right here in New York City [New York] and I said to my daughter, "You have to receive the award for me," and she probably was about, maybe, thirteen years old. And she got up on that stage, they told me, and gave my little acceptance speech, you know, not one that I had written down, and received the award and a friend of mine, you know, took her home to spend the night, well she was going to spend the night with her anyway that night. Story_ID: 19993 Speaker 1: Can you take four stories, I don't care what they are, but things that have happened to you during this sort of 30-year odyssey, either people you've met or things that were maybe--funny anecdotes or things that you learned from, can you just share four of those for us? Speaker 2: Four stories, I think the one that was probably a most exciting one was the day that I became editor-in-chief and things changed here drastically and some staff members--everybody was surprised. Some staff members, as I said, were unhappy and they left and what I did was pull together a new team and when that first issue came out that was, you know, my vision and that was guided by the new team. There was total amazement here at Essence because it was the difference between night and day. The magazine just looked so fresh and so new and so fabulous and the readers responded in a major way and the circulation began to soar. People who had called Ed Lewis up, he told me, and told him that he was a big fool for naming me editor-in-chief apologized. People who didn't have the courage to tell me to my face that they thought that I couldn't do the job called me up and said, "You know, you didn't have my vote of confidence but I want to tell you the magazine is exquisite." And as we move forward and we look at what happened to it over the years--and I almost have to say it was team effort. I just, you know, make that a real point. Speaker 1: Who was on the cover then? What was the cover about? Speaker 2: Wannakee [model] was the first cover and I created a cover line, a big cover line--Essence never had that before and it said, "Be a winner." You know, and my editorial "In the Spirit" debuted in that issue. It was June of 1981 and I was really writing about winning, having the winning spirit and understanding that it's imbued in you. That God is an important part of--God is a part of your life. There's nothing you can do to separate yourself from God. Go for it. God's got your back, you know. Not the language that I used then but that was, you know, in substance what I was saying. So that was really, I think, a real glorious moment for me, a wonderful time. Story_ID: 19994 Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela, Nelson Mandela. My husband and I, my husband Khephra Burns and I, were sitting in our living room and we watched Winnie Mandela and Nelson Mandela walk out of prison holding hands. I felt a connection to the family because Zenani Mandela was in Boston [Massachusetts] in school and she's the daughter and we had reached out to her and she, in this very office, sat with her husband Mussie and gave us an exclusive interview about her father that she'd given to no other media. We were invited to go back to South Africa with them when he was released. So there we were sitting and watching Winnie and Nelson walk out of prison, a day later my husband and I flew to Boston and got on a plane and flew to London [England] and then to South Africa. Armstrong Williams was with us, Stedman Graham was with us and we walked into the Mandela household in Soweto. Winnie Mandela had been covered in Essence before, and a very bold and spirited journalist, Jill Nelson, had gone undercover with her husband--with her brother, rather, who is a documentarian, Stanley Nelson, and had done an interview with Winnie Mandela who was under house arrest. Both of them could've been arrested and thrown into a South African prison and we ran that interview in the magazine and I would send her magazines, so she was connected to Essence. We walked into her house, she was doing dishes and she put down the dishcloth and the dishes and she said, "My sister, you've come home," and she embraced me. Nelson Mandela was just around the corner in this small dining room, sitting there with Walter Sisulu and two or three other men and I walked in there with a little briefcase that some of the brothers in Brooklyn [New York] had hand crafted for him and some of my favorite books, Chancellor Williams, "The Destruction of Black Civilization" and a whole host of other important works that I thought that he would want, you know, to have for the building of the new South Africa and I presented him with those books and he took them and I just--it was the high point, the absolute high point of my career. Story_ID: 19995 Speaker 1: The Essence Music Festival, we're 25 years old and George Wean who had created the first outdoor festivals, music festivals, the Newport Jazz Festival through Bill Cosby came to our CEO and chairman, Ed Lewis, and suggested that Essence have a music festival in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Ed Lewis brought it to me and his partner Clarence Smith and we said, "Yes, we could do it." And I said, "Well, you know we just can't do music, we have to add something to that, a spiritual component. We'll party at night and then we'll bring all our folks together during the day for empowerment sessions and I'll invite the major speakers that I know from all around the country and we'll fill, you know, the dome in the middle of the day and we'll just have these empowerment sessions and give people the wisdom and then we can party at night." Again, branding at Essence, so it's never just about partying, but it's a party with a purpose. I'd been to New Orleans, might've even seen the super dome. It's the largest indoor arena in the world. And I'll tell you I'll never forget that day when Ed Lewis and I stood in front of that super dome and looked up at this enormous edifice and saw our name, you know, just in lights on the side of the building. Essence, the Essence Music Festival and we were going to fill that dome that night. And then that night when we were sitting up in the skybox and we looked down and there might've been, oh, 60,000 people who had come from everywhere, not just throughout the country. They came from the Caribbean. They came from Africa. They came from Europe and we were there all on the same beat, all moving to the same beautiful vibe and that we've done that since that year because we only--we were going to do it as a one time event celebrating our 30th anniversary and our supporters, our readers, the folks who attended said "No way, you have to do it again. You have to keep doing it." We've never had one incident, not one negative incident. No cursing and shouting or anybody getting drunk. People know they're in Essence's home and that they're going to behave appropriately. The hip-hop community comes. We have hip-hop on the stage. It's all the many genres of black music, so what I love is looking at babies in arms and grandparents and all the generations in between, you know, and that is one of the things that I think that Ed, Clarence and I would say that we are most proud of. Speaker 2: Isn't there a Chicagoan involved with that? Valerie-- Speaker 1: Valerie produces-- Speaker 2: In Essence Awards? Speaker 1: --she produces the Essence Awards, right. And has a portion of the Music Festival too. She's one of our producers. The Essence Awards, you know, the brainchild of Karen Thomas who's here at Essence, who's our director of marketing and sales promotions. She came to us years ago and said, "Oh, you know, you really should do an award ceremony for black women." We were kicking and screaming. It's all we can do to keep the magazine going, you know what I mean. We're all overwhelmed. We're going to do this and she got on our cases and we decided we would do it. The first one was a dinner, a dinner in Los Angeles [California], you know, at the Biltmore Hotel. From there we moved to Chicago [Illinois] and Oprah Winfrey, she hosted the second Essence Awards in Chicago. It was wonderful, at the Chicago Theater. The third one was in Atlanta [Georgia] at the Atlanta Convention Center and that was hosted by Marvin Winans, Wayans, excuse me, Marvin Wayans, and--Winans, Marvin Winans--and I want to get that right. Speaker 2: Is it Wayans? Wait, the comedians or the singers? Scott Winans. Speaker 1: Winans. Speaker 2: Yeah, Winans. Oh, he would kill me and I love him so much. We know this is edited. You'll get all of this out of there. The third one was hosted by Debbie Allen and Marvin Winans at the Atlanta Convention Center. And then the next year it was the 25th anniversary of Essence, that was 1990 and we decided that we were going to move it back to New York [New York] and we would do it at Radio City Music Hall and from there, and in 1991, we went to television. And to be able to pull together an award-winning primetime television special that brings onto the stage and shares with the nation, not only celebrities who were doing great things and we, as you know, we're not tributing people for having hit movie or being a great actor only, you know, or for being a marvelous singer. We're looking at the work that they're doing for our community and to put on that same stage with celebrities, people who were doing the critical grassroots work of really community-building, people who the nation had never heard of, people who were unknown outside of their community and for the show to draw the kind of audience that it does is just a great, great reward because it's a way of saying to the nation what we're saying through the magazine and at the Essence Music Festival, that with hard work and discipline we can solve all of our personal problems and our social problems. So those have been just really, really exquisite moments for us. Story_ID: 19996 Speaker 1: It's a small moment, but it's a very large one for us, for, you know, the editors [of Essence]. There's war on the newsstands right now. When Essence began some 30 years ago there might've been, I don't know, 150 publications fighting for newsstand space. Today there are over 5,000 that are trying to find their way on the newsstand. And the industry has been consolidated so that you don't. You had hundreds of distributors and now you have like six or seven. So it's really difficult to have a presence on the newsstand and a report just came out months ago that of the 15 magazines that enjoy the largest growth on the newsstands throughout the nation in the last decade, Essence is number 11, you know, and that is an awesome, awesome achievement given that we don't have the resources that the larger, you know, publications that are owned by, you know, major media companies have and they put lots of promotional dollars behind them and that really just speaks about what black women and men feel about Essence Magazine and Essence Communications and it's a very, very proud position to hold and it means a heck of a lot in our industry. Story_ID: 19997 Speaker 1: Tell me what those responsibilities are and what you, you know, what this new role as publications-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm Publication Director for Essence Magazine and I'll be Publications Director for the company because what I'm going to do is start other magazines. So in this new role what I do is I oversee Essence Magazine and I promoted Monique Greenwood, brought her in four years ago from Fairchild Publications, where she was the editor- in-chief of children's business and she moved into the fashion editor's role here and then the lifestyle editor's role, then she was the executive editor and a year ago she became the editor-in-chief. So in my new role what I do is, I still keep my eye on the book and Monique is totally, you know, fabulous and smart and a wonderful journalist, so, you know, we work together. But primarily she's taking responsibility for the magazine and is doing an amazing job. What I'm looking at are the other magazines that we're going to start and really looking at transforming the company and the culture and positioning us, along with Clarence [Smith] and Ed Lewis, through the office of the chairman for incredible growth. We're going to take Essence to the billion dollar level and in order to do that we have to plan more strategically then we ever have. We've got to bring in new talent. We've got to change the culture here at Essence and begin to put in place a system that allows us to communicate better and more efficiently and faster. We're going to really decentralize and put decision-making power. Have that power just spread throughout the company. And my role right now is going to be to work very, very closely with the globalization of the brand, to look at how we're going to get our message to our sisters and brothers throughout the motherland. How we're going to really have a greater presence in the U.K. [United Kingdom] and in Canada and in the Caribbean. How we're going to use the internet. I'm working in the same capacity with the internet that I am with Essence Magazine, overseeing the team, talking about strategy, working with them on how we're going to deliver our messages, and how we're going to grow our company. So that's my focus right now. It's really focusing on the growth, externally, and internally on how we behave, how we configure, our mission statement, and setting goals along with Ed Lewis and Clarence Smith and helping the team to reach them. Speaker 1: Now how do you see the internet as sort of integral. You know there were at first--I mean now media publications have dived into them, well some of them. Well, you know, you look at Ebony, they haven't really dived in, you know, when you look at their site, but I'm just saying, how do you see the internet as sort of playing? Is it an ancillary thing or is it an intergral or is it a separate business unit? Speaker 2: I think the internet is going to be a major part of, you know, Essence's future in many different ways. It is a support to the magazine. It's another way of communicating with our readers in a very fast and efficient way. And it's interactive communication, which is very exciting. It's a way that we can create a communication with people who are outside of the magazine. It gives us the global presence that we've wanted. We can now communicate instantly with people all over the world. There's also an e-commerce portion of it that we're looking at and we're very serious about that and that's where we are going to be targeting a lot of resources and what we're doing now is really putting in place our marketing plan and trying to understand what those things are that we might be able to market over the internet. The other piece of it is, is the social piece and it's really being a major player with our partners, AOL Time Warner [now Time-Warner] in bridging that digital divide and it's something that we've been focused on for a long time. And we can talk about, you know, getting computers into every school, but we have schools that don't even have books in our community or who have old books, that have old books with pages missing. And what we're going to do is use the resources that we have, that we're enjoying now because of Time Warner buying 49 percent of our company and also be able to use the resources of AOL and the expertise of AOL to really drive the bridging of the digital divide [2005-Time-Warner now the majority owner of Essence Communications]. We want to be right there, making sure that it happens in the right way. We don't think that white leadership should be doing this. We speak the same language as our people. You know, it's important that the leadership in black community and communities and certainly here at Essence remain bi-cultural. As I look back on my own experience, you know I'm glad that in retrospect that I didn't go immediately off to college, that I had my struggle as a single mother, that I lived in the black community, that I, you know--and so comfortable in my neighborhood, that I am comfortable walking along 125th Street by myself in the evening, going into drug rehab centers, going into homeless shelters, and I'm comfortable going onto the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] and petitioning for our people and to the White House and insisting that the things that families and communities need to stay stable and to be self-supporting are given. So that the internet is going to be a major, major piece of how we communicate the Essence message and, I think, how we also, you know, enjoy more resources. Speaker 1: Now that's--this one question I have for you is that, in this day right now where a lot of traditionally black businesses are being either, you know, taken over, bought out, there's a concern in the black community a lot of we're losing our own, but you talk about it just in a way of strategically positioning and I was wondering if you could sort of address that? Speaker 2: You know I know that there is great concern, you know, in the black community about black media losing its independence, its voice as we see white media companies, large ones, come and buy out black owned ones. A single product--black--a single media company can't survive. Essence needed a tremendous infusion of capital to be able to do the things that we want to do and ours is a partnership and the control is here. They bought 49 percent of our company and we structured it that way. And our plan--We're responsible to our people. There's a real mission and a goal here at Essence and every day when we show up it's really about the people. And Time, Inc.--and AOL Time Warner [now Time Warner] is really clear about that. And our challenge is to be responsible to the mission. To use, our publisher calls it "All the little things they have in their candy store," but to use the resources, they have resources over there that make my head spin. We've never seen anything like this. And this is going to make black America better because that's where we're focusing and whatever we do here at Essence, the first consideration is this: Is it good for our people? If it's not, we don't care how much money it will reap, we're not doing it. We're not doing it. So I just really want people to rest assured, let me say as long as I'm here, you know, as long as I'm involved in driving the mission of this company forward it's going to be about the people and doing the work of the people and for the people. Story_ID: 19998 Speaker 1: So Khephra [Burns] and I, yeah, we got married in 1989 and it's a delicious thing. You know I just know, and this is what I talk about when I go out a lot too, that there are so many wonderful brothers who are looking for connections. We think that there are only women who are looking for connections, you know. There's so many wonderful people who are looking for connections and what we have to do is move beyond the accoutrements, move beyond what we thing a person should be bringing to the table, you know what I mean, to be our mate. My husband is younger than me. He's five years younger than me. If he was sitting here in the room I'd probably wouldn't say this but Khephra didn't come with a pot of money, you know what I mean, and great celebrity and he didn't sweep me off of my feet. I have my own money, you know, I can sweep myself off of my feet. I enjoy my own company and Khephra is my partner and my friend and we enhance each other's lives. We make each other better, each other stronger, each other feel more stable and secure in the world. And I just thank God every day that I recognize that, that I wasn't looking for somebody to take care of me, you know. My mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] saw the sweetness in this man. He's a sweet, sweet man and very, very intelligent. He's bookish even. Khephra is--he's encyclopedic in his knowledge and I've respected the fact that Khephra is a person who wants to sit at his computer everyday and do that work and may not be focused as I am, you know what I mean, on driving something forward and moving aggressively and it's really perfect. He is so secure within himself that when we walk into a room with people who are like, "Oh this is you, Susan, and I'm so glad to meet you," and they ignore my husband, well I don't let people do that. I make people respect him and acknowledge him. It doesn't bother him. He has that kind of inner security and like he says, you know, people always ask him, "How does it feel to be married to Susan Taylor?" He says, "It feels good and I know she feels good being married to me." You know, because he was feeling good about himself before he married me. Story_ID: 19999 Speaker 1: --about you meeting Khephra [Burns], you know, and how that even happened? Speaker 2: Khephra and I had known each other because we were in the same, I guess, writing, social, creative scene here in New York City and one evening a mutual friend, Terry Williams, he said tell them--because he was looking for a relationship he should invite me out and he called and he invited me out and talked me to death on that first date, but I said, "This brother is brilliant. He's absolutely brilliant. I'm going to have him in my life as a friend," and he called me every single day after that, every day. It's Khephra Burns again on the phone. "Hi, Khephra." And one day I was working on a presentation to our advertising team and I said "You're a writer, come and help me," so he came to my house that evening, stayed with me until 3 am helping me put that together and when he was leaving, I got on my tiptoes and kissed him on the forehead and I said, "Thank you so much." It was his response to that that opened my heart. Because Khephra comes out of the, like, the cool jazz world, you know, so you never know what he's thinking and he's just very contained and he's just brother beautiful. Khephra backed down the hall, he turned around, he clicked his heels and he said, "Ah, she kissed me," and disappeared around the corner. I just said, you know, I like that brother and we just, you know, our union just grew and grew and grew because I saw that Khephra was really interested in my life. My mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] was very ill at that time and was having strokes. He would go and take care of my mother. I think the relationship really deepened one day when I was in California and I called my mother back, it was a Friday evening, and I said, "How are you?" And she answered the phone like a girl. My mother was always depressed, "Oh, I'm doing fine. Eleven o'clock at night I have company." "Who's there?" "Khephra." I said, "What is Khephra doing?" "Oh, he just came to watch TV with me and to spend the evening with me." So, you know, with all of my other relationships I don't know that I made always the healthiest choices, but I don't believe that we make any wrong choices, it's all good when we look back, you know, on them if we learn our lessons. I chose wisely this time because I looked at someone's heart, you know, to the heart. The goods are really on the inside, you know, and we always look to the packaging, so I am deliciously happy in my marriage to an exquisite human being and I just, it's very much one of the things that I love talking to black women about, you know, finding our peace and our sweetness so that we'll know how to treat that angel, you know, when that angel comes along. Speaker 1: But you also probably, Susan, had grown a great deal internally. You know when you look at the difference from when you were first, you know, what 20, when you got married and this time. I'm sure there was a different person inside. Speaker 2: Absolutely, you know the first time I got married for all the wrong reasons. I was looking for daddy. I was looking for somebody to take of me. My first husband was 20 years older than me. He was highly successful, you know. He had resources that just, I went from being a struggling single woman to a upper middle-class housewife, you know, with all the appointments that I needed around me, but the marriage was empty, you know, and it fell apart. And during that time, those 19 years, you know, when I was a single mother I learned a heck of a lot. You know, I learned how to love myself. I learned how to honor myself. I learned the importance of keeping, you know, my spiritual life at the center of my world and making that first. I learned that when you love yourself that you attract loving relationships, you know. And that love is a magnet and it also attracts crazy people. It's like you have to be discerning, you know. I learned how to date myself and how to romance myself and how to take care of myself and that I didn't need, you know, anybody in my life to take care of me, that I was enough and that a relationship was the icing on the cake, not the cake itself. And that helped me to move into that relationship with joy. I brought my joy with me, you know, rather than looking for the relationship to bring me the joy. Story_ID: 20000 Speaker 1: What did parenting really teach you and what, when you look at your daughter [Shauna Taylor King] and now your granddaughter [Amina King], what does that whole experience sort of tell you in many ways? Speaker 2: Every time I say this my daughter says, "Mommy, please don't say that. You make me think as though something is wrong with me." I learned everything about parenting after she left the nest. I rushed her. I pushed her through life because I had so many competing pressures, you know. And I always wanted her to be two stages ahead of where she was, you know. When she was three I wanted her to be 10 so she could be more independent and I would have more independence and free time and when she was 10, I wanted her to be 16 so that she'd be readying to graduate from high school and going off to college and when she did graduate and went off to college my heart broke because I missed it. I missed the experience of being present for all the different stages of her development. I spent too much time at work. I spent too much time building Essence and not enough time with her. And if I knew then what I know now, I could've taken that work home, but I think it was a measure of insecurity that I felt, you know, maybe oh, goodness I got this job without all of the credentials and I have to show everybody that I'm really working hard and that I'll be there. And my daughter spent a lot of time alone as an only child and living in a community in the middle of Manhattan [New York] where she couldn't go out and play. And when she did go out and play she played with me. You know, I taught her how to jump rope and ride a bike and how to roller skate and ice skate. And my daughter and I are best friends, are absolutely best friends and she trusts me with her life because we were so close. I raised her. I haven't had thought about this until this moment, in a one bedroom apartment, sleeping in the living room and she slept in the bedroom, you know. So she was only always a door away and I loved, loved having a daughter and being a mother and enjoyed her and her friends during, you know, their teen years. What I learned though, I think primarily as a mother, is that people lie to you when they're afraid to tell the truth and when I learned how to create a space in which my daughter could tell the truth without being penalized and chastised, she grew, I grew, and, you know, both of us just flourished and it's a learning that I have taken into other parts of my life. The way that I work with the team here, if you need a day off tell me in advance, don't worry about calling up and saying "I'm sick this morning." We'll plan for that day. You know if you made a mistake don't try to cover it up, let us know right away so we can fix it. Don't scream. I don't allow that here and it's really what I'm trying to create throughout the entire company. That's the culture we want, one that honors everyone. Being a grandmother, I have never known this kind of joy in my life. When I look at my little Amina's face, she calls me sweetie. "Hi, sweetie. Sweetie, I love you. I'm coming to see you." She's three years old. Having the time and the energy and changing my position was the best thing I could've done because now I can pick up and go to Atlanta [Georgia], which is where my daughter and my son-in-law, Bernard King, and my granddaughter are and spend time with them and give the kind of nurturing and, in your face, in my arms kind of love that I wasn't always able to give to my daughter. Story_ID: 20001 Speaker 1: Your mother [Violet Weekes Taylor] passed away, right? And you tell a very beautiful story about that. I mean, you spent time with her, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I would like you to sort of recap that. Speaker 2: My mother wasn't a person who allowed you to touch her and every time I would try to kiss she'd, "Oh, get out of here with your kisses, you don't mean it." "But I do. I really want to kiss you." And I would always joke with her and my father [Lawrence Taylor]. I wouldn't get off my father's lap when I would visit home. I was 19, 20, 21 until he would kiss me and same thing with my mother, "I'm going to sit on your lap and when you're tired of me sitting here you'll give me a kiss and I'll get up." But when my mother began to have strokes all of her defenses began to crumble. She became my baby. She allowed me to hug her and touch her and take care of her and as my mother's health began to slip, my holistic community gave me all kinds of rituals and practices that I brought to my mother's bedside, massaging her feet with olive oil, you know, putting fragrance, usually violet, and rosemary and sweet fragrances at the center of her temple and under her nose because sense of smell is the last one to leave and I played sweet music, you know, by her bedside and I spent an incredible amount of time with her and I was able to hug her and love her and touch her. I can remember when I would walk into the room after my mother had had a major stroke and she would look up and she would say, "Oh, Susan, it's you." My mother never, ever once greeted me like that, you know. And, I mean, I was there for my mother as she was making her transition and so I feel very much at peace and I got to have, believe it or not, the exquisite relationship that I craved my entire life. I had it in those last few months of her life when I really had the opportunity to just be, that's all I ever wanted was to be with her without the criticism, you know. Story_ID: 20002 Speaker 1: Susan, you're a very spiritual person. I mean, it comes across in everything you do and say and your whole demeanor and how did a child--a person, okay, who as a child felt so disenfranchised, how did she find, so--her spirit that's, you know, that it has become such an integral part of you and one that you have since, you know, had influence on others. Because people sometimes are tormented their whole lives and never find the true spirit, so I'm wondering, how you did successfully find your spirit? Speaker 2: God gives us what we need to understand that God is alive inside of us. God gives us the experiences we need to come home, to find our way home. My life had fallen apart. I was working at Essence making that $500 a month. My marriage had fallen apart. It was the low point. I didn't know how I was going to pay my rent, how I was going to feed my daughter, Shauna [Taylor King], I didn't know how I was going to make it through the night. I was so anxious that the anxiety turned into a physical pain. I was having difficulty breathing all week and by the time Sunday rolled around I thought I was having a heart attack. I called my husband, who lived only three or four blocks away from me, to come to my house that Sunday morning, to pick up my daughter, and take me to the hospital. I had $3. He took me to Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, where I said they have my first record. I was born there. And I sat in the emergency room, as people do when they don't have money to go to a private physician. I was examined. The doctor told me I wasn't having a heart attack but an anxiety attack and that I needed to slow down. And I remember saying, "How can I slow down when the earth is moving beneath my feet?" So I left the hospital and I started walking up Broadway and I looked up, it was about 3 [p.m.] in the afternoon, and I saw a marquee outside that read "United Palace, church service 3:00 pm." This might've been about 4:30. A force pulled me into that church. I was raised Catholic. I went to Catholic schools. I was raised never to go into a church without my head covered at that time and certainly not the way I was dressed that day. You know, in a leather jacket and jeans. I sat in the back of that church and I heard a sermon preached by a Reverend Alfred Miller, who I only met face-to-face maybe six years ago, but it changed my life. He said that with your mind you control your world and that anything you believe about yourself is true. God is not far away from you. God is within you. God is alive in you. He said it again and again. God is alive in you. I had passed that church many a Sunday, had driven past, but I didn't have money to buy gas, you know. If I'd had money I would've taken a taxi even. My car was broken, didn't even have money to repair it. If I hadn't had the physical challenge I wouldn't have been on that side of town. You know, I would've passed that church as I had many a Sunday, so all of those things had to be in place, I came to realize, in order for me to hear that message. If I had a sweet man in my life I probably wouldn't have gotten out of bed that Sunday morning. I felt as though I was at the edge and I wasn't sure that I had the will or the courage to hold on. I gathered up all the pamphlets in that church and I walked home that day holding onto the 3 dollars so that I could buy milk and cereal for my daughter. And as I walking across, I guess the Macomb Dam Bridge that leads from Harlem to the Bronx [New York], I just kept saying what the minister said, "God is alive in me." But I said it with a question mark at the end, "God is alive in me?" I'm going to discipline my mind to behave as though that is true because I have nothing to lose. I was so depressed I didn't want to get out of bed. I went home. I started to count my blessings. Okay, I don't have money. That's all I was focused on, what I didn't have. And that sermon helped me to look at what I did have. Oh, I was healthy and my daughter was healthy and I did have a roof and I did have job. You know, and I could use my talents and skills to do something else and I asked the divinity, "What should I do?" I asked the inner core of me, teach. Go on down to Ophelia Devours modeling school and teach the models how to apply makeup and fix their hair. Applied for the job and got it. My attitude changed. The next thing I knew Marsha Gillespie was asking me to become the fashion editor. My salary went from oh, $500 a month to, I think, $12,500 a year. Our lives began to change. I've always come back to that message. I come back to it every day. It's why I write 'In the Spirit.' It's why I named my column, "In the Spirit." It's the truth that I'm still trying to understand and live, God is alive in me. God is alive in us. There is nothing to fear. There's no doubt. There's nothing to doubt. There's nothing to question. You won't understand it. You can't understand it. You don't have the capacity, none of us do, to understand that. Believe in something that you can't see. The peace that you can't see is more powerful than anything in the physical world and that's what I've dedicated my life to trying to understand and to articulating to our people. Story_ID: 20003 Speaker 1: And about our people, what are your--do you feel positively about our future? What are your thoughts, I mean, honestly about where we are and where we could be or where we, you know--well, I want to know what your thoughts are? Speaker 2: I feel so positively, you know. I look at the negativity, it's all around me and I can see it. You know, I go through our communities and I see the decay and what drugs have done and that's essentially what happened. You know, those of us who could flee the inner cities, we fled. And, of course, people are trying to come back. And what we did was we left behind a lot of single mothers and a lot of poor people and they lost a lot of their role models. So in a sense middle-class black America abandoned working-class and poor black America. Unfortunately, I think that we're going to have struggle more before we really get on course and begin to move ourselves forward in some major strategic way. I have an issue with our leadership, with the leadership of all of our major institutions, sororities, fraternities, and social organizations that we need one mission statement that we all adhere to and that's what we should be focused on. And when I go on college campuses I am so hopeful because we have coming the most highly skilled, committed group of young people since the '60s [1960s]. Young men, young African American men who are talking about going into inner city schools as primary school teachers, young men and women who want to be nurses, who want to be doctors, who want to work on behalf of poor, struggling black people. People who want to be social workers, you know. So I'm hopeful because I know that there's a deep caring among middle-class and more affluent black people. We just haven't organized ourselves in ways that have allowed us to give our resources to our people to uplift them. And now I think those connections are being made and those things are going to be put in place. I know that this is what Essence is looking toward doing and I see these connections being made all over the country because I think what people are recognizing is that we're all in the same boat and that if those who are in the bottom berths sink, eventually we all will. And I think we're all coming to the truth that there really is enough here in the wealthiest country in the world for all of the nation's children, for all of the nation's families to have what they need to thrive. But as I said, unfortunately I think that our community, and not only us, I think people all over the world are going to have to suffer a lot more before we come to the truth that we're really here to learn how to love. That's why we're here, to practice loving and caring for each other. We want to come back to the attitudes that our ancestors had. There's a critical need over there, I'm going to take care of that need. We have enough to share. Those people over there don't have food, they can come and sit at our table and eat with us tonight. Drugs made the difference. It made us fearful of one another. We have grandparents who fear their grandchildren. Parents who fear, you know, their children because of drugs. Heroin and crack separated us from each other and what we have to do is be bold enough to demand, to demand that this government stem the flow of drugs into our communities. We've been successful, this government has, in keeping Cuban cigars out of the United States for 41 years. If we can do that, we can keep heroin and cocaine out of this country and out of our communities but we have to insist. You know, and conscious white folks and Latinos and Asians and black folks have to insist and we haven't. Story_ID: 20004 Speaker 1: What if you could rewrite the Civil Rights Movement would you in any way or aspect of the things that happened, would you? You might say "No, I wouldn't rewrite any of it," but I'm just curious. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I would rewrite it. I would rewrite it so that so many young people, so many brave, beautiful people wouldn't have lost their lives and that they would be here to see the fruit of their labor, the marchers, those who held onto those counters, you know, in five and dime stores and who walked those picket lines and who faced the hoses and the dogs and police guns. I wish that they didn't lose their lives. I wish that they could be here to see the institutions that have been built because of their bold-spiritedness and their dedication. You know, I wish that the struggle didn't have to be waged as long and as hard, you know, as it did because the struggle didn't begin with Civil Rights Movement. We've been struggling for our human rights since those first Africans stepped off, you know, those boats onto the shores of Jamestown [Virginia] in 1619. You know, and the Civil Rights piece of it is the piece that really has been documented the best. But, oh yes, I would rewrite that movement in a major way. Speaker 1: Now, reparations, do you have any thoughts about reparations? Speaker 2: I do. Reparations are in order and we're going to put that idea before the nation. We've already done it through the magazine, but this year we're honoring Randall Robinson, who wrote the magnificent book "The Debt." And so on the Essence Awards this year people will hear Randall talk about the importance of reparations in the video presentation and also from the stage. America is the wealthiest country in the world because of the free labor that people of African ancestry gave to this nation and you don't have to be an economist or a mathematician to figure out what can be built over hundreds of years of free and unpaid--not unpaid, underpaid labor. And what seemed to be provided was an inexhaustible supply of labor that just kept coming. Some historians imagine that as many as 100 million people were taken from the motherland and maybe only 10 or 12 percent of us made it to the continent, you know, North America and the Caribbean and South America. So many were taken and it's not right that black people suffer and struggle after having created such bounty and wealth. And I mean that on both sides of the Atlantic. When we look back at our motherland in Africa and we read the newspapers and we see all the negative stories that are told about, you know, AIDS running rough-shod through the communities and the kind of violence that we see is taking place there and how the leadership is not really leading in ways that they should and we look at them as being despots and all of that. All we have to do is look at this nation, think about what America would be if over 300, 400 years an outside entity came here and began siphoning off all of America's young people. America would be in a similar situation to the one that, you know, our motherland is in right now. So there are reparations that need to be made here in the United States to Native Americans and to African Americans because Native American cultures were absolutely destroyed and no matter what we rename this, no matter what we call it this was Native American territory and there is a 'Trail of Tears' that exists, you know, that needs to be cleansed and that needs to be apologized for and reparations need to be made to Native people and to African American people and to African people. Story_ID: 20005 Speaker 1: Are there African American women that, you know, that you would say that were your role models or that you greatly, greatly admire and I'm wondering who those would be and why? Speaker 2: Oh, there's so many sisters who have inspired me, even outside of my family. My greatest inspiration was my grandmother [Rhonda Weekes]. I'm inspired by the love that I see Maya Angelou give. Maya Angelou will invite me and a few other people to dinner, you know, get off her bus that she's using now to travel across the country because she's not flying, and just give herself away to us for five hours. We're falling asleep and she's still trying to love us at the table. I mean, I have never seen anybody love so exquisitely, you know, and so open heartedly as she does. She never says no. I am inspired by Ann Fudge, who, up until recently, has been the president of Maxwell House and a senior VP [vice president] of Kraft and who just recently left Kraft only a week or so ago, Ann Fudge has very clearly set her personal parameters in place and takes care of herself. I might spend a weekend, as my husband [Khephra Burns] and I did recently, at her weekend home with her husband Rich and herself. If you were at my beach house on Friday, the fax would be going, the phone would ringing, and I would spend most of the time on the telephone with my staff at the office, not Ann. And Ann was running something a lot larger then I am, you know. She really has set those parameters. She takes care of herself and she has her life in balance. So she's my role model for that. Dorothy Height for the intellect. Dorothy Height is 86 years old and she's probably trying to reach me right now to give me some orders, to tell me what I have to do. She remembers her fax number, phone numbers, mine, you know, amazing. She has an amazing mind. It's encyclopedic and recounting what happened during the Civil Rights Movement. Will give you dates and times and who was there and what they said. Will tell me what I said to her last year that I have forgotten. Oprah Winfrey for having the courage to stand behind what she really believes in and to put out there on television some of the ideas about spirituality that a lot of people really think are inappropriate in a broadcast medium in prime, not primetime, but during, you know, high television viewing hours. Oprah for trying to heal the nation and the world, I love and admire her for that. Story_ID: 20006 Speaker 1: Susan, what do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a person who didn't waste her time here and just used whatever the gifts are that God has given me to make life better for people who are struggling needlessly along the margins, that's my--the legacy that I'm leaving, that's what I'm working toward. Speaker 1: And anything else? Speaker 2: Anything else I want to be remembered for? Speaker 1: Or any part of your legacy? Any other part of it? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as one of the people who really helped to move black America forward. Story_ID: 20007 Speaker 1: That's a social evening, my husband and I, Khephra Burns, making our way actually into the Miami Ballet. Speaker 2: Do you remember about what time? Speaker 1: This was three weeks ago. Speaker 2: Three weeks ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor with her husband, Khephra Burns, at the Miami Ballet, Miami, Florida, February 2001. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20008 Speaker 1: Well, this is in Nelson and Winnie Mandela's yard in Soweto [South Africa] and outside of the gate, the fence, there are probably 10,000 people waiting to see him, the community and maybe half of those people were journalists from all over the world and they all only wanted to speak to one person, Nelson Mandela. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor (center) with Winnie (left) and Nelson Mandela, Soweto, South Africa, 1987. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20009 Speaker 1: --photograph of that wonderful journey to South Africa with Stedman Graham there on the right and Armstrong Williams, my husband, Khephra Burns and me and Nelson Mandela. And Alexis Duveaux and her partner. Alexis was the writer of the wonderful piece that we ran and that she wrote on Nelson Mandela when we made that trip to South Africa. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor (center) with (from left) Alexis Duveaux, Duveaux's partner, Nelson Mandela, Taylor's husband Khephra Burns, Armstrong Williams, and Stedman Graham, Soweto, South Africa, 1987. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20010 Speaker 1: Flanking me are the co-founders of 'Essence' to my left, Clarence Smith. On the left, rather, Clarence Smith and on the right Ed Lewis and, of course, the beloved Rosa Parks. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor (standing, center) with Clarence Smith (left), Ed Lewis (right), and Rosa Parks (seated), ca. 1992. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20011 Speaker 1: There I am with my dear friend and colleague, Max Robinson, who was the very first, first. Huh? Speaker 2: It doesn't look like him there. Was he sick at that point? Speaker 1: We didn't know it but he might have been. Speaker 2: The first African American to be a national anchor, to anchor a national news show, ABC. Speaker 1: [Susan Taylor with Max Robinson. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20012 Speaker 1: These pictures got over there because some of my staff put them over there. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And these people sent me these photographs like this. I don't know who they are. Speaker 2: (Inaudible). Okay. Because I thought you were younger there, too. Speaker 1: I am but I don't know who they are. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor with sailors. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20013 Speaker 1: Beloved Amina Suzanne King, named after me and my grandmother, my great-grandmother, Amina Suzanne King. Speaker 2: Can you spell her first name? Speaker 1: A-M like "Mary" I-N-A. Speaker 2: (Inaudible). Speaker 1: Look at that pumpkin. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor's granddaughter, Amina King, ca. 1999. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20014 Speaker 1: Back stage at the Essence Awards, the year we honored the beloved Dr. Betty Shabazz [Malcolm X's widow] and those are her daughters all around her with me. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor (second from left) with Dr. Betty Shabazz (center) and Shabazz's daughters at the Essence Awards. From the collection of Susan Taylor.] Story_ID: 20015 Speaker 1: Here we are at the Essence Music Festival and from left to right would be. Start on this side. Left to right, my daughter, Shauna Taylor King; her husband, Bernard King; and me and Lauryn Hill and my sister, Lillian Baker. Speaker 2: [Susan Taylor (center) with (from left) her dauther, Shauna Taylor King, her son-in-law Bernard King, Lauryn Hill, and her sister Lillian Baker. From the collection of Susan Taylor.].