 Story_ID: 75220 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Indira Hale Tucker. And ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Doris Topsy-Elvord, and it's D-O-R-I-S, T-O-P-S-Y, E-L-V-O-R-D. Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 17, 1931 in Vicksburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired at the moment (laughter). I've had various former occupations, but I am now retired. Speaker 1: Okay and you, your past, I guess, public service was as a city council? Speaker 2: I was a city councilperson for eight years and Vice Mayor of the City of Long Beach for four of those eight years. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is November 22, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at 1048 East 45th Way, Long Beach, California. Story_ID: 75221 Speaker 1: Now, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that we always ask before we get into depth, you know, and they just require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is string beans and collard greens. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple and red. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Autumn and winter is my second favorite time of the year, but autumn is my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere away from Long Beach to see other parts of the world and other cultures. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You can get anything done if you don't care who gets the glory. Story_ID: 75222 Speaker 1: All right. Let's talk about your family origins. Do, do you know much about the origin of your family or, or your family history? Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Lee Rose] was the eighth of eight children, and she had seven brothers. And her seven brothers all died before they were in their twenties. She was told they died of pleurisy, but in later years we found they all died of sickle cell anemia. I did not know any grandparent, and my mother was raised by her great aunt in Helena, Arkansas, and she was the only girl and she had--I'm sorry she had one brother who lived almost as long as she did. My mom was like eighty-five or eighty-six when she died, and her brother was eighty-two when he died-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the other six brothers died early. Speaker 1: Okay. Before we get into detail about them, I wanted to know if you had any idea what your ancestors were doing back in the nineteenth century or, or do you know--are there any African traditions passed down through the family or any information about the origin of your, your family. I mean, how far back can you go? Speaker 2: No I have no, no history that, that I'm aware of because my mom did--was not able to pass it down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Due to the fact that her mom died--my mother did not know her mother. Speaker 1: But, your mother was born in Helena, Arkansas. Speaker 2: Hele--my mother was born in Vicksburg, Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Vicksburg, okay. Speaker 2: --and when she, when her, when her mother died her father sent her to Helena, Arkansas to be raised by her great aunt who had no children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, so is your father's [Clyde Julius Walker] family from Helena [Arkansas]? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, their originally from North Carolina, but they migrated to Helena, Arkansas and that's where my mother and father met when they were in high school together. So, they met there. Speaker 1: Now that's another question we generally ask is how did your mother and father meet, so? Speaker 2: They met at Eliza Miller High School in the ninth or tenth grade, and when they graduated from Eliza Miller they, they got married, and I'm there only child. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your--the names of your parents and their dates of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mary Lee Rose. Rose is her Maiden name and although she married several times she never used her husband's name. She was a pioneer. She always used her maiden name. My mother was born January 14, 1914, and my father was born in November 1913, and his name was Clyde Julius Walker. My mother's name was Mary Lee Rose. Story_ID: 75223 Speaker 1: Okay. Did you mother [Mary Lee Rose] give you a reason as to why she never took her hu, husband's name? Did she have a philosophy about that or, I mean, you know a policy that she (laughter)--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: My mother was a very independent woman. She didn't see any need to access any other name other than her maiden name and on bank accounts and that sort of thing she always held her propet, property separate from her husband, from my father, from my stepfather. She bought property and always just utilized her own name. I don't know where she got that from. I don't know if her aunt told her that or whatever, but she always did that throughout her life and encouraged me to do the same. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, have you followed--you haven't obviously followed suit with that have you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, but, but your name is-- Speaker 2: Doris Topsy-Elvord. We do have, we have some accounts, but I have always, you know, retained that theory. Speaker 1: Separate accounts. Speaker 2: Separate accounts right. Speaker 1: Not, not the name, you know. Speaker 2: Not the name, no, but separate accounts. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: My children's last name is Topsy, so I have three sons and their last name was Topsy. So even when I married Ralph Elvord I kept the name Topsy because people knew me by that name. Speaker 1: Yeah, the name Topsy comes from-- Speaker 2: Bombay, India, from east, from India. William and Thomas Topsy came here on a merchant marine ship, and they met two beautiful women from Texas and never went back. They became naturalized citizens, and so the name Topsy is not a slave name, not an American slave name. The name Topsy is an East India name. Speaker 1: Okay and that and you were married to-- Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--Topsy. Married to--(unclear)--Topsy, the children's father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, that explains that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And people do have that que--I know I had the question in my mind, I said where, where, you know, Topsy come from. Speaker 2: Right, it's-- Speaker 1: I can only think of Harr, Harriet Beecher Stowe. Speaker 2: Uncle Tom's Cabin. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And my children were raised to, to understand that their name was not a slave name and be very proud of it. Speaker 1: So, it's a name from East India. Speaker 2: East India. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: From East India. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and the only place you here of Topsy now is in, in some of the islands there are some Topsy's and, but other than that it's from India. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 75224 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your, some more about your mother [Mary Lee Rose], you know, you told us about the kind of person she was on some level, but you know, what did she do for a living and, and tell us some more about her? Speaker 2: In, in 1940, my mother worked at a Jewish hospital in Vicksburg, Mississippi and the hospital burned. So, in 1940 for the three-month hiatus she went home to Helena, Arkansas, and she read in the paper where there was a prominent Jewish family who wanted a nanny to accompany the family to Long Beach, California. Well, that sounded like paradise to her, Long Beach, California. So, she asked my father [Clyde Julius Walker], you know, could she apply because you had to have had two years of college. Now this family had a chauffeur, a cook, a nurse, and they wanted a nanny for their three children. They hired my mother, and she came and left me with my father and my aunt for the summer. They were going to go back to work in September and they left. My mother and the kids came on the train, the nurse, the chauffeur, the cook, and the family came in a car. They came to Long Beach and they stayed at the Villa Riviera Hotel, which has a penthouse that looks like a castle. They came in at night. On the third day, my mother and the children were on the beach and one of the children ran inside and my mother attempted to get the child out because the child had sand all over his feet, and the doorman put my mother out and told her to get out. And she says, I live here. He says you do not live here and you cannot come in here. And so after a little interaction one of the children ran up on the elevator and told their parents that they wouldn't let Mary come in. My mother said the next day she never saw that doorman again. They fired him on the spot. That's how rich that family was okay. My mom was off on Sunday and Monday, and we were Catholics. We even had a priest in our family from the south. We were Catholics there in, in Mississippi. And ironically the Catholic school in Mississippi was not segregated. They had a lot of Italians, a lot of Chinese, and a lot of African Americans and a lot of any other, but it was only one school and one church, so I had never gone to a segregated school, even in Mississippi. Speaker 1: This, this is in Vicksburg? Speaker 2: In Vicksburg, Mississippi, right, St. Mary. Story_ID: 75225 Speaker 1: So, my mom [Mary Lee Rose] was off on Sunday and Monday, so after the second week she started wandering around Long Beach [California] on her day off, and she found St. Anthony, which is five blocks from the Villa Riviera where she was living. And she went there and she went to mass and she noticed they had a school, and she was thinking wow I'd truly like to bring my husband and my daughter here to California and go to this school. She investigated a little bit and Monsignor Dolan who was there discouraged her. We don't have any room for students. Well, my mother was not accepting of anything other than what she wanted. So, she got a little more information. She talked to her, her, the people who had hired her and that she was here with, and they encouraged her to stay if she wanted to. They said, Mary, at the end of our summer if you wanna stay we'll give you your ticket back home on the train and two month salary and we'll find you a job with our friends here. Toward the end, they did just that. My mother notified us that she thought she'd stay, and they found her a job working for Maxwell jewelry store. The owners of that, they were her relatives, Mrs. Modesta's (ph.) relatives, and my mom worked for them for about eight or nine months and she stayed here. She wrote to my father [Clyde Julius Walker]. He said he would not leave Arkansas. He was going to go back to Mississippi, and my mother said I don't wanna raise my daughter there, and she stayed and never came back except to get me two years later when my great aunt died. She allowed me to stay there with my great aunt who, who stated that she'd have a heart attack if my mother came to get me and my father en, encouraged me to want to stay there, which I did not. I wanted to be with my mom. But, anyway, at the end of two years when my great aunt died my mother came back and got me and then she again encouraged my father, look I've saved all of this money you need to come with me. We can make a life here. He had a sister there, and that was his only relative and he was not willing to, to leave there. And my mother came and she found a better job as time went on, saved her money, and was able to buy into a business here in Long Beach. In fact, during the war [World War II], she was one of the first owners of a, a restaurant with a liquor license and all of the soldiers and sailors came there. And there was a time when we cleared three of four thousand dollars a week in the '40's [1940s]; that was a great deal of money in the '40's [1940s] to clear. But, I need to tell you I still only got fifty cents a week until I was a senior in high school, and any money I got I had to work for it. She did not believe in, in spoiling children. Story_ID: 75226 Speaker 1: Now let's go back and talk about your father [Clyde Julius Walker] now. What kind of person was your father and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: My father was a graduate of, I believe it was Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: In New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: In New Orleans. I believe it was Dillard and he went at various times and he finally graduated from Dillard and then he went--when he went in the Service, as I stated before, he's a--I'm not sure if I did state before he was a master sergeant during War World II. Somehow or other he learned to fly a plane as well, and when he came back after the Service he bought a plane with someone else and they dusted crops. My father was highly intelligent, but he was just hooked into staying in the south and would not ever leave there, and he stayed there until the day he died. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Keep going. Speaker 1: He stayed there until the day he died. So, after some years my mother [Mary Lee Rose] finally, although she hated to do it, divorced him and was able to remarry. In the Catholic Church, it takes a long time to get a divorce, and so she got an annulment actually and remarried. Story_ID: 75227 Speaker 1: Were you and your father [Clyde Julius Walker] close? Speaker 2: No, because he--I never went back to see him, and he would not come and visit me. We would write each other, and I had a great deal of respect for him because my mother [Mary Lee Rose] made sure I did, but he--I invited him to my graduation from high school, and he did not respond and he said he did not respond because he felt bad and he had no need to feel bad. My mother always told me just the greatest things about my father, and I remembered him to the point where I was like ten years old, you know, and I kept in contact with him through his sister and, but he just wouldn't come, and so I never saw him again ever. And when I graduated from St. Anthony [High School, Long Beach, California] I invite, I sent him an announcement and he did not respond. And that hurt me on a personal level because I felt he didn't divorce me, you know, but I didn't, I didn't disrespect him. I had a lot of admiration for him, and I admired him a great deal. Story_ID: 75228 Speaker 1: How long did he [Clyde Julius Walker] live? Speaker 2: He lived until he was about seventy, about seventy. He remarried and had another son [Benjamin Walker], and his son, his son is the same age as one of my children. And from the time he that son I communicated with that son and sent him Boy Scouts, books, sent him Car and Driver magazines, and we are as close--he can--my, my brother who is the age of one of my sons can start a sentence and I can finish it. He lives in Springdale, Maryland. The first time I went to his house it was just like walking up to my house. We have the exact same taste and everything, and I'm, I'm twenty-four years older than him. Speaker 1: Are you a lot like your father and is this an indication that you're a lot like your father? Speaker 2: Yes, we both are like our father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Both, both are like our father. We, we're dedicated, we speak our minds, and we, we like ourselves and we're independent. Speaker 1: How old were you when your father, when your father died? Speaker 2: I was in my forties when my father died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Ben was there. His name is Benjamin Walker. Ben was there and he wrote, he wrote--Ben, Ben had access to my father every day, although my father and Ben's mother divorced, my father was there with Ben and he had access to him every day and he encouraged Ben to, to leave, go the service and my brother, Ben, became a Navy SEAL [Sea, Air, Land Team], and he's now a transit engineer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 75229 Speaker 1: Let's go--I want you to reflect back on your childhood, I guess in, in Vicksburg [Mississippi] and Helena [Arkansas] and, I guess, and, you know, Long Beach [California], and give us some idea of some, of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I don't remember much about Vicksburg. I just remember that I went to Catholic school and I went early because my cousins went, and the nuns and priests just let, let me kind of tag along. So, I learned to read early, to do math early, and just in general do things prior to actually going to school. My uncle, my mother's [Mary Lee Rose] only brother, and who, who was a deacon in the Catholic Church, and all the children, his children later became teachers and nurses and court reporters. So our family was into education. All I remember is just being surrounded by nuns and priests and church and all kinds of people. I never knew there was a difference in people. The only difference when I came to St. Anthony [Parish School, Long Beach, California] was that I was the only African American and somehow that never sank into the head of Monsignor who was at St. Anthony. He said I couldn't come. My mother got on the red line and went downtown, had an appointment with the Archbishop and got permission for me to go to school. But when I went there, he gave me a test and he hadn't given anyone else a test, he forgot I came from a Catholic school. We were ahead of St., we were head of St. Anthony, so zipped through that test. But he held it against me until I graduated. He never liked me, but the nuns and the children at St. Anthony always protected me from Monsignor, and it just became a joke. The children at St. Anthony were wonderful. They were all white. They had not been told anything. They had no preconceived notion about who I was and what I did. They just accepted me as I was. I thought I was cute and smart, and I reacted that way and they reacted toward me based on how I treated them and in turn they treated me with all kinds of respect. I never heard a derogatory word until I got to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I didn't know the difference between being a negro. All I thought was being a Catholic or a Protestant. It was a very protected environment. Story_ID: 75230 Speaker 1: When you were here in Long Beach [California] did you live in a black community here in Long Beach (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I lived--the black community was between 10th street and Pacific Coast Highway and between Alameda and Long Beach Boulevard and practically everybody lived in that environment. But, the people in that area did not use derogatory terms about race. So, I think I was maybe in the ninth grade, maybe eighth or ninth grade before I ever heard the word nigger. And when I heard it, I thought it meant Protestant. I swear to God. I did not know what it meant. A boy whose parents were in the Navy tried to jump rope with a girlfriend of mine whose brother is the director of Little House on the Prairie, the, the show, and we were, we were throwing the rope and he wanted to jump and we wouldn't let him in. So, he called Teress (ph.), who was blonde and blue-eyed and me nigger lovers. And he said it in such a way until we knew it was something bad, but we didn't know what it was. So, we beat him up and the sister brought us in and asked what was going on and we said he--I said he called us nigger lovers and we're not Protestant. And she kind of snickered and put her hand over her mouth and said okay you guys go wash up and Doris I need to speak to you. So then she took me in her office and said Doris do you know what a nigger lover is, and I said a Protestant. And she said no, it's not a Protestant. I'm gonna write a letter to your mother [Mary Lee Rose], and she sent a little note home to my mom and my mom looked at it and she said what happened and I told her. She said oh I'm going to school tomorrow. So, we went down and Sister asked my mother to please explain to me what a nigger was. Mr. McBride, Mrs. Lipscomb, and all those people who lived in our neighborhood I never heard that word. I lived in a black community, but I never heard the word. I went to Christ Second Baptist Church and sang in the choir on Sunday; I never heard that word. And when they explained it to me, I just shrugged my shoulders. I didn't know it was supposed to hurt, and it didn't. It never did because I only respond to Doris. I'm Doris and I was told never to respond to anything other than Doris. That's the honest to God truth. I was so gullible. I lived in a very protected environment, and when I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] and started bopping around from group to group, you know, going to Seder services, going with the Jewish kids, going with the Asian kids. That's when I first heard that I was supposed to not do that. I still did it. Story_ID: 75231 Speaker 1: So, when, when you were growing up then in this community here in Long Beach [California] you all had those residents of the community had effectively changed a pattern of culture, you know, in a lot of black communities around the country. I mean, the way we hear that word branded about now, you know, in music and everywhere and it's pervasive, you know, white people are calling each other, you know, this word. And you all seem to have at that time to have changed the culture, I think for the better--(unclear)--. Speaker 2: Truly. Speaker 1: --and, yeah. Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I, I could think maybe we were too protected, but when I look back at it in retrospect I think it was just right. Speaker 1: Do you think that people in your community didn't use that word based on the fact that they were coming to California and making a fresh start and some place new? Do you think that had something to do with it? Speaker 2: I think, I think they came from such hostile environments, from Louisiana and from Mississippi and, and places where your very life was in danger that they didn't want the children to hear it and of course again the places I went, 8 o'clock mass at St. Anthony, 10:30 at the Christ Second Baptist Choir, the church didn't use it. It was the people I was surrounded by who did not use it. I'm sure somebody did. I just didn't hear it because it was very stringent. My environment was very controlled, very controlled and probably was a good thing. When I heard it, it didn't hurt and when I heard that it was supposed to hurt, I became hostile to the word, but it did not hurt me because I don't, I don't respond to it. Story_ID: 75232 Speaker 1: Now was the black community very close-knit in those days? Speaker 2: Extremely. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody knew everybody's business. I mean, it was the kind of environment that if you went into a store and you took an apple, when you got home it was hell to pay because the store clerk knew your mother and your father and called and told them you took the apple. And everybody was responsible for everybody else. It was wonderful growing up in Long Beach. It really was. It was fabulous. Story_ID: 75233 Speaker 1: What, what were some of the activities you took advantage of here in this, growing up here in Long Beach [California]? Speaker 2: We had a Wednesday's girls club at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and we would all walk to that. On Sunday after church, we would all go the movies and go to the Pike. It was called the Pike. They had a Ferris wheel. It was wonderful, down on Long Beach Pike. There was also a spit and argue club. I think that's where I got my first taste of politics. Speaker 1: A-- Speaker 2: Spit and argue club. Speaker 1: Spit and-- Speaker 2: Argue club. The former name was University by the Sea. It was down on the beach, and you could go down there, pay a nickel, ring a bell, and spit and argue for anything for three minutes. And I used to go down on Saturday and watch people argue about everything, from politics to, to just any, anything and that's when I got my first glimpse of wow you could say whatever you wanna say and no one could interrupt you for three minutes. At the end of the three minutes, the prompter would ring the bell again and you would pay another nickel, but the informal name was spit and argue (laughter). It was fabulous. Long Beach used to be called "Iowa by the sea". Most of the people here were from Iowa, and they'd have an Iowa picnic and there would be thousands and thousands and thousands of people from Iowa. Iowa was strange bunch of people. I don't believe there are hardly any African Americans in Iowa, but when you came in contact with them they acted as though you had always been with them. They weren't concerned about you, and we weren't concerned about them. And we were relegated to our communities in a sense, but I didn't know that because I wasn't in our community in the daytime. I was out of the community in the daytime on 6th and Olive. And I went down there by myself, came back by myself, but I controlled the environment around me even in St. Anthony because I was in charge as far as I was concerned. And that's the way the kids acted as though I was in charge. I decided who could play with me and who could be in my company for the day and who I would speak to tomorrow because my mother said I could, and I believed what she told me. Story_ID: 75234 Speaker 1: Your mother [Mary Lee Rose] had a very strong personality it seems. Speaker 2: Five feet, 95-pound ty, tyrant (laughter). Wonderful woman. Very, very wonderful woman. In 1955, she said she was gonna go to the World Series to see the Dodgers play, and she was gonna go to a championship fight with Joe Louis and so she left, went on the train, didn't know a sole, made her reservations in the Theresa Hotel and went. Anything she decided she wanted to do she would do it and she taught me to do that as well. To see the world, there are other cultures, other people, and don't just stay in one spot. Get out and learn, come back, and share. Story_ID: 75235 Speaker 1: Did, did you have an opportunity to, to travel much when you were a little girl? Speaker 2: Not when I was a little girl, but since I've been an adult I've travelled to all the continents except Antarctica because they're there, and I loved history and I love geography. And so when I'd read about something I want to go see it. Speaker 1: What were you favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: History, geography (laughter), and English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved English, history, and geography. Speaker 1: And were there particular teachers that you remember that were especially helpful to you or encouraging? Speaker 2: Sister Mary Gerald was one. She taught--ironically she taught, it--she taught math, but she also taught history, and she made every country seem fascinating. And Sister Leonella was the principal, and she was very strong... woman and we would face off. She would provoke me to stimulate me and after a while I understood that, and she taught me to ask questions and I got into trouble many times by asking those questions. One time I asked Monsignor in apologetics class how could Jesus be a Jew and a Catholic? And he said what did you say? And I said how could he be a Jew and a Catholic? And he told me to get up, leave the class, go stand in the hall on one foot, and I was a senior and the rest of the class went ahh Doris is not gonna be able to graduate. And I just looked at them; I knew better than that. So, I went out and stood and Father O'Callahan, who was a fantastic priest looked like Clark Gabel--in fact, he was so handsome we would go into confession and confess to mortal sin just so he could hear our confession 'cause he was so fine, okay. So, he came and asked me why are you standing in this hall, and I told him. He said what did you ask, and I told him. He says well let me explain. At a tim--there was a time when Judaism was, when being a Jew was like a nationality and you could be a Jew and a Catholic just as though you can be an African Ameri, a Negro and a Catholic. And I said is that all there is to it. I said why didn't Monsignor say that? He said because you had the audacity to ask. I said well how am I going to defend my religion and have the answers if he can't tell me? He said Doris he can tell you, but he didn't want to tell you, and you need to know there are going to be many people in life who can tell you many things who want, want to tell you who, they won't want to tell you. Speaker 1: Okay, we have to change tape here. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 75110 Speaker 1: We're rolling again, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell us something about John Stroger [Jr.] [HM]. He's the Cook County Commissioner. You said he grew up across the street from you. Speaker 2: Grew up across the street in Catholic Hollow was the name of the area we lived in. Catholic Hollow, H-O-L-L-O-W, okay. Speaker 1: And that's in Helena-- Speaker 2: Helena, Arkansas. We lived right across the street from--John Stroger and I lived right across the street from each other. When I came to Long Beach [California] over the years we would write letters back and forth, send Christmas cards until he grew up. I knew when he went to Chicago [Illinois]. His sister and I were in the same class, and her name was Cleo Stroger. She grew up went, became a teacher and taught at Piney Woods in Miss, is it Mississippi? Speaker 1: Piney Woods--(unclear)--. Speaker 2: Piney Woods, right, and used to send me pictures from Piney Woods. We stayed in contact all our lives until she died a few years back. And when John Stroger came out to Long Beach he wanted to have a place for his niece to get married. I arranged it. We met, he, he gave me his home address and, and phone number. In fact, I have some cards here from him. He has always remained John Stroger. He is very helpful and very kind, and he has remained the same, just gotten taller and bigger (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a wonderful man. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Small world huh? Speaker 1: Yes it is, it is. Speaker 2: In fact, I'll give you his address and phone number before you leave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 75111 Speaker 1: But, well tell us about now, now when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [St. Anthony High School, Long Beach, California] did you know what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: I knew what I wanted to do, but my mother [Mary Lee Rose] had a different agenda. I wanted to--I actually wanted to, to be perhaps even a social worker or go to Europe and work on the service of the government or something. My mother had always wanted to be a lab technician, and she in the hospital, she worked in the nutrition department by the way in a Jewish hospital, but she always wanted to be a lab technician, so she guided me toward that. Well, by the time I was into my freshmen year I knew that's not what I wanted to do. Slides, blood, lab, that's not me. I'm a people person, but I stuck to it until I was a junior and then one day I thought I'm not doing this anymore. Came home and told my mother and stepfather; they hit the ceiling. If you don't finish this and you drop this, these courses, we will not support you; we will not give you another dime. That's the way it is, that's the way it is. I came out, got a job, stayed out sixteen years until I found out what I wanted to do. Meanwhile I got a job at the Youth Authority, California Youth Authority, State of California. I left there and went to the Sheriff's Department, and then I realized what I wanted to do. I had a really good job, made really good money, got married, had three kids, went back, start--took seventeen units, units a semester for several semesters. That was hard with three kids, okay. I got a part-time job, got my degree, a few years later went back and got my Master's. But it was easier because I knew what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 75112 Speaker 1: Now before we--I wanna back track a little bit to the speech contest. This is the story I heard before we got--and I think we whizzed by that. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the speech contest. Speaker 2: I read in the paper one, one-- Speaker 1: This is when you were--this is right after you graduated from high school-- Speaker 2: Right after I graduated from high school [St. Anthony High School, Long Beach, California] and as-- Speaker 1: --and you were in college. Speaker 2: College [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I think I'd been in college maybe two months and I came home on the weekend and saw in the "Press-Telegram", the "Long Beach Press Telegram," that there was an oratorical contest being sponsored at Long Beach Poly High School [Long Beach Polytechnic High School, Long Beach, California] and they wanted something on the Constitution and citizenship of, of the United States Constitution of the American flag or something of that ilk. So, I told my mom [Mary Lee Rose] and dad I was, I'm gonna write a speech that said it's Friday, the, the test, I mean, the orator, the oratorical contest is Sunday. I'm gonna write it and I'm gonna win. My mother just rolled her eyes, and I stayed all day in the library on Saturday, wrote the speech, went that Sunday, memorized it, timed it, and there were about eight or nine people in it, and I believe I was the only black person in it. The principal of Poly's name was Mr. Just (ph.). His daughter, Mary Katherine Just was entered in it as well. I entered the contest, and I won it. And I was so thrilled. I think, think it was $200 and a trophy, and I was just so excited because the next, the next heat was going to be in Seattle, Washington, and I was gonna get to go. Well the next day I got a call and they had changed the rules. They said you can keep the money and you can keep the trophy, but you're in college. And I said it didn't say anything about that. Well, it's a high school contest, and I said but it doesn't, does not say that. It doesn't say that you can't be in college. Well, we just think it's unfair, so that would make Mary Katherine Just, the principal's daughter, win. I was very upset, and I took the money and the trophy back, and they said no you have to keep that. Well, I was very upset about that. But meanwhile there was a gentleman, a Caucasian gentleman, who was in the audience and he came up to me and he said that's the most fabulous, relevant speech I've ever heard. Who helped you with it? I said nobody. He said may I see it? And I had a big old yellow tablet, and I just handed it to him and was talking to other people and getting congratulations and hugging people. I turned around about two minutes later, and this gentleman was gone. And I asked everybody who was that? Who was who? And they said I don't know he left in a big old car. What was his name? Nobody seemed to know his name. I was just really devastated, and I came home and I came home and tried to put the speech back together, but, you know, I'm, I'm sure I lost some of it. About four weeks later I got a great big package from the Library of Congress in a blue binder and there was my speech published in the congressional record. And that was a congressman who had taken my speech. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I'll have to get that for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't remember, okay. He was a congressman, and I was just dumbfounded. I called up at the paper and I told the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (I think they were the sponsor of the oratorical contest) and they were just amazed and I have that speech right now and if you would read it you would think I wrote it yesterday because nothing's changed. It was called a Constitution in Citizenship, and what it emphasized was you take the American flag and you take the components, the stars, the stripes, the red, the white, and the blue, and as I sta, stated in the stars, it's not complete unless everything is in it, unless all the diverse people are in it, unless the bloodshed and, and the trials and tribulations mean something, then the flag's not complete. So, it sounds as though I just wrote it yesterday. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were seventeen then. Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 75113 Speaker 1: So you, you gave us a kind of fast forward view of what happened next (laughter), but can, can you go--what, what did you do after that contest. You, you were at school-- Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was a freshman in college [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and-- Speaker 2: And I went to, I went on and, and pursued chemistry as a major until I was a junior-- Speaker 1: Then you-- Speaker 2: --and then I dropped out. Speaker 1: --dropped out. Okay. Speaker 2: I stayed out about 16 years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was much easier--Imagine this it was much easier to go back and get my degree in sociology social welfare with three kids and a job and a husband then it was going to school studying something I was not interested in. My mother [Mary Lee Rose] always said you'll never go back. And I said I will when I find out what I want to do. So, when I got my degree I gave it to my mother. I handed it to her; see I told you so (laughter), and she goes chip off the old block. She was ver, very proud. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was very proud of it. She was very proud of that. Speaker 1: All right, so when you--now, now you, you got married during this period of time too? Speaker 2: Yes, I got married and had three children. I had one in 1954, I had one in 1956, and then one in 1960. I have three sons, and I have five granddaughters and one grandson and one great granddaughter. That's how I got my girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 75114 Speaker 1: You had, you had been working for the City of Long Beach [California] while-- Speaker 2: I worked for the ci-- Speaker 1: --while you were going to school. Speaker 2: No, I worked for the California Youth Authority, okay, and then the Sheriff's Department. That's how I really found out what I wanted to do, helping people in corrections. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, now what did you actually do in corrections? Speaker 1: The first job I had at the California Youth Authority I supervised extremely delinquent children. They were--if they had been older they'd be in prison. The Youth Authority is a prison, but it's for youth. Speaker 2: They were guilty of capital crimes? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. I supervised Lana Turner's daughter. I supervised the young lady whose life--she kills- Speaker 2: She shot her stepfather right? Speaker 1: She stabbed him to death. Speaker 2: Stabbed him to death. Speaker 1: We had hardcore criminals there, and you worked on the--I worked on the girl's unit from 1:30 to 9:30; that's all day and half the night and that was very, very hard. And I just learned to be very fair and firm and consistent. In fact, I had a girl who kept up with me all her life. She was 15 when I met her, and when I retired from the probation department in 1988, she was at my retirement. She'd been in prison, she had corrected her life, was now helping other people, and she said I was the only constant in her life. She'd go to the Youth Authority, she'd come out. When I worked at the county jail for the Sheriff's Department, I looked up one day and there she was. When I was a probation officer, no matter what office I was in and what city I look up and she'd be there. She would track me down no matter where I was just to let me know she knew where I was, and she told, stood up that day when I retired after all those years and said she was the only constant in my life. She never ever allowed me to be less than what I could be. She was Caucasian; I was black. She brought her children and her grandchildren to see me, and they said we've heard about you all our life. It's amazing the impact you have on young people, and you don't know it. She would act up one day before my days off so I'd have to lock her up and whoever you lock up you have to let 'em out. So, she'd act up on Wednesday (I was off on Thursday and Friday) and I'd lock her up, and when I'd come back on Saturday I'd have to counsel her and let her out. She told me the reason she acted up was because when I locked her up she felt safe, and I was the only person that made her feel safe and she had no parents. Isn't that amazing? Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: That's amazing for three years. Story_ID: 75115 Speaker 1: Tell me about some other experiences? Speaker 2: Well, I worked in the women's county jail, Sybil Brand [Women's Prison], the women's county jail. I worked on Terminal Island, which was, which is out here in Long Beach [California]. Speaker 1: Terminal Island. Speaker 2: Terminal Island. It's--Terminal Island is- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sounds like a television program. Speaker 2: No ter, it's--Terminal Island was a place--it's a terminal for oil, okay, and there's some land out there and so there was a women's county jail out there for, not the hardcore women, but the women who had misdemeanors mostly--women who had misdemeanors. And so Mrs. Sybil Brand is a philanthropist; she's a real person. So, she used to come every Wednesday to Sybil Brand and I was out there as a procurement officer. I ordered everything the women ate, wore, and even handled some of their money and made script for it. So, she used to come and talk to me a lot. So, when they decided to open the new Sybil Brand, which was a place that was unimaginable because it was so advanced in thought. The women had curtains at the window. They had beautiful bedspreads on their bed. If you were in the honor dorm, you could stay up half the night and watch TV, and the officers are not allowed to come in unless they knocked on the door in the jail. So, Mrs. Brand wanted me to go to Sybil Brand, named for her, in LA [Los Angeles, California], and I said not for this money. I'm, I'm ten minutes from here. So, she made them devise a new classification for me if I would come to Los Angeles and set it up. And what she wanted me to do was set up the colors of dresses that the women wore to make the count easier. Every day at 3:15 you'd have to count every inmate in the jail and if the count was one off, the jail would shut down and you'd have to start all over. I came up with an idea if we put each dormitory in a different color of dress, no matter where they were the count would come out right. If you're in the laundry were brown, you in the dining room you wear pink, you in the beauty shop you wear yellow, and so you would just count the colors, and that's what we did. So that was a suggestion of mine and that's what worked. I ordered their food. I--when I got to, when I got there I didn't have to handle the money much anymore, but occasionally I'd have to handle the money. If women came in with coins and old dollar bills and things, I would take those and put them in, in the safe along with the captain. So, in doing all that I realized, gee, I really like to work with people who are having difficulties. Maybe I could make change, help them make a change, and that's when I decided what to major in when I went to college and that's why it was a snap. After I got my Bachelor's, then I went back after I saved some money and got a Master's in criminal justice administration from Chapman College in Orange [California]. Story_ID: 75116 Speaker 1: All right now what happened next after you got your Master's? Speaker 2: A Master's is something I just simply got for myself. It was not--I was a probation--oh when I got my Bachelor's degree I was very fortunate. I worked as a student deputy probation officer in the Long Beach office while I was at Cal State Long Beach [Long Beach, California] getting my Bachelor's, and the office took a liking to me and encouraged me to take the deputy probation officer two exam, which means you never have to go to juvenile hall and you, you become the same thing they are. The people who were teaching me they were deputy probation officers too. The exam came up about every three years. I took the 2 exam, got an ninety-eight and was hired off the street, and that was it. I was at the same level that my teachers were. They said I didn't need to go the juvenile hall because I'd worked in the Youth Authority and then worked in the jails, which was true. Story_ID: 75117 Speaker 1: So, I was advanced when I went to, to, became a deputy probation officer. I don't know how the probation department knew, but they used to give me unusual caseloads. All sexual offenders, all pedophiles, all violent criminals, all dope addicts, and then they would just say you make it work. They put me in a pool where there were nothing but men, and they gave me all pedophiles. I decided I was going to hate them and I said I couldn't work with them, and my supervisor said you will work with them. And then I learned as I went on that I did not hate them. They're very sick people. But, I had to, I had to devise the program for them. Then they gave me all drug addicts and nobody had any, any success with them, and my supervisor--I said can, can I develop my own program? He said yeah. So, here's what I did: Dope addicts always have an excuse, they can't get a job; they don't have a car; they don't have any money; they need cigarettes, so what I did was I went and begged sixty jobs, everything from grave diggers to dishwashers out in the community. I got myself a job bank. Then I went to different stores and begged up on cases of cigarettes, every brand of cigarette now on demand. I had 'em stacked in my office. Then I needed money. We had ninety-six deputy probation officers, I asked them to loan me five dollars each to start my bank. I had a bank, okay, and then I got two community workers to work with me to go and test urine on the jobs of the offenders. I got a man to go with me and a woman to go with me, because once I get you this job I'm not gonna allow you to come into my office to be tested because you're gonna say you missed the bus or you couldn't get there. I'm coming to your job. I'mma take a man to take you in the john at your job and we're gonna let you urinate in the bottle. I'mma get a woman to let you on your job, we're gonna go to the restroom and let you urinate in the bottle. We gonna take the trunk with us and drop it in the trunk, so that the, everything is, is fine. Story_ID: 75118 Speaker 1: So, first I called them all in, well Miss Topsy, you know I would love to make it this time. I sure don't wanna go back to prison, but how am I gonna get a job? Choose one. What would you like to do? You gonna get me a job? Choose one. Okay. Well God I, I don't know what to say Ms. Topsy how am I gonna get there? Oh, by the way I begged up on about 250 bus passes too, every route. Take one for a month. Free? Free. I, gee, well you know you, you sure have done a lot for me if I just had lunch money. How much would you like to borrow? You can borrow up to 40 or 50 dollars, but you got to give me for every 10 dollars I, for every 5 dollars you borrow from me you got to give me a dollar back with your first check. Wow, well I tell you Ms. Topsy you taking all, all, all, all the wind out of our sails. You know I need cigarettes. Which brand would you like? Oh my God so you taking away all of their excuses. Now they don't know what to do. Well when I am I supposed to test? Here's the, here's the thing. I gonna give you a color and I'm gonna give you a number and every day you have to call in. I'm never gonna call you and I'm not gonna have my staff call you. You're going to be Pearl 12. You gonna be Emerald 6. So every day call this number and it will say Pearl 12 come in to test or Emerald 6 come in to test. If it doesn't say that you don't have to test. But, it doesn't mean I won't be on your job to test you because I'm coming in the car to test you. I would go to test them sometime on Friday and they think I can shoot up this weekend, I can smoke all the pot I want to; 5:30 on Saturday morning there I am at your door, good morning time for you to urinate in the bottle. Now, with all we have done to make sure that you succeed if you have a dirty test you going to jail, get your toothbrush 'cause you going to jail. There's no doubt about it. But guess what, I'm not gonna let you stay in jail. After three days, I'm coming to get you out and put you back on the job 'cause see you want three hots and a cot and I know you're happy to have three hots and a cot. That's what they say in jail. But, that's a no, no you going back to work. Now everybody who gave me a job for these inmates promised to stay with me six months to a year no matter what they did as long as they weren't violent, okay. I had a thirty-eight to forty percent case load success. It was unheard of 'cause I took away all the excuses. Some of 'em hated me and some of 'em really hated me. Speaker 2: Some hated and some really hated. Speaker 1: Some really hated. Yeah, there was nobody who just really liked you, you know, because you took away all their excuses. But, I tell you what, over the years I had a lot of girls who were named Doris for me and the ones who succeeded would bring, bring their wives and their parents back in my office and say you're the only one who forced me to do what I needed to do. I told 'em I'm gonna carry out the judge's orders. I gonna carry out the court's orders. You can work with me or you can work against me, but I guarantee you, you will have no excuses. That's what the system needs to do. When I got into probation, we were into the three R's. Rehabilitation, reentry, and retribution. Retribution, rehabilitation, reentry. We don't do that anymore. Now just lock 'em up and when they come back out they're the same people. We need to go back to the three R's. Story_ID: 75119 Speaker 1: What's your opinion on why things slipped back to the just lock 'em up and warehouse 'em philosophy. Speaker 2: It became a cottage industry. One night five or six men sat down and said wow the economy needs to be reinvigorated what should we do? Let's create a new in--let's create a new industry. Oh, Bob don't you own a concrete company. Yeah. Ben don't you own a iron company? Yeah. Okay let's build some prisons. You got the concrete, I got the iron, but where we gonna get the prisoners from. Oh let's legislate some laws that are divisive. If you use crack cocaine, you go to prison for twenty-five years. If you use powder cocaine, you may or may not go. So, we have to have some people to go to these prisons. We have to have free labor to make these, these tags for your cars and so, oh but guess what we--these are the animals, oh we need somebody to watch to the animals; that's a new industry. We'll get a bunch of guards. What will they look like? They'll look like what every your want 'em to look like. So, they created a whole new industry. It came all the way down. You see everybody was involved, but the people who are locked up, and that's what the industry is all about. That's why there's no interest. There's no money to be made in rehabilitation. It's the industry, and the indus, industry prevails because at the highest system in the land, in the courts there's no int, interest. So, if you keep somebody for 25 years you know you got a job at twenty-five years. Mr. Crowe if you're watching the animals for twenty-five years you get to retire don't you with all the benefits. I'm sure that's what happened. Speaker 1: It certainly seemed like what happened though in small towns all over America. I know it's true in Illinois where we're from that entire farm community's economy has been reversed-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you know because the farmers are now watching people in prison. They building prisons and-- Speaker 2: And they continue to build them. Speaker 1: All the attendant industries that keep it going, food service-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --maintenance, plumbing, everything, you know. Speaker 2: Absolutely. That's exactly what happened. And anybody who knows anything about corrections, I know it, and I've been saying this for years. People don't like to hear me say it, but I know that exactly what happened. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the United States has more people locked up than any other country in the world. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And see then you have the realtors who sell you the land, you have the people who build the prisons, you have the people who, who, who, who provide the keepers for the zoo. Story_ID: 75120 Speaker 1: But, you know, people even in minority communities will argue that isn't it better to have people locked up and off the streets than in our community causing mayhem? I mean, you hear it all the time. Speaker 2: Isn't it better to rehabilitate people and make them productive in society than have them locked up for what. You've given them no incentive to be anything but an animal when you lock 'em up. Let me just say this to you I don't know if you know that the majority of the prisoners who are in prison who are also in college or universities are African American men. The majority of them are African American men. They are getting more degrees than anybody else. That's frightening for the majority of the community because here you have educated black men in prison, if they come out they're educated. So, then you set up parole boards to make sure they never come out. They got degrees, but they're never gonna come out even though they're educating the populous inside they have no probability of getting out. And if they seem to be one or two can come out, they're being provoked or killed; that's very frightening. Finally, we got wise and said well if we gonna be in here twenty-five years we might, might as well get degrees. What for, what for? Story_ID: 75121 Speaker 1: There's a man on death row whose up for a Nobel Prize, you know that. He started the Crips [Stanley "Tookie" Williams]. He's up for a Nobel Peace Prize. Speaker 2: No I didn't know what--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yes, he's on death row and even the warden has said this man should not be killed. Speaker 2: What's his name and tell us about him? Speaker 1: I cannot remember his name. It was just in the paper last week. He's up for a Nobel Peace Prize. Speaker 2: What did he do, I mean, to-- Speaker 1: They said he was involved in murder and he was one of the people who started the Crips. The next person that you, you would televise will know who that is. Speaker 2: The Crips is a gang in-- Speaker 1: Crips is a gang. Speaker 2: --in the Los Angeles area-- Speaker 1: All over, all over. Speaker 2: --(unclear)--now it's all over yeah. Speaker 1: Now it's all over, but he decided-- Speaker 2: There are Crips in Richmond, Indiana, yeah and-- Speaker 1: Yes. He got a degree while he was in there. He started a peace movement and a movement to teach young people not to get involved in gangs, and even the warden has gone to bat for him and said don't kill him. He has this ground swell of people saying he should not be killed, but they gonna kill him. He's grown more powerful in there, and he's not the image that they want to see because he has been rehabilitated. He's up for a Nobel Peace Prize. Speaker 2: We're gonna pause here and change tape. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 75122 Speaker 1: But, so, oh I wanna back track a minute to the sex offenders and expense and in terms of rehabilitation I've often heard it said that they can't be rehabilitated, is that true? Speaker 2: I had thirty, thirty sex offenders and I was the first woman to ever be given a case load of sex offenders primarily and I had them come in, in segments of five and I spoke to each of them and I read their files. And there was one thing that just pervaded their, their case files and that is their interaction with parents when they were children. A lot of them was subservient to fathers or had absent fathers and had no male figures in their lives, and if they did have female figures they were either very, very dominant or ignored the child. So, I tried to figure out what to do with them. I had--they had to come every week to therapy in the office. I didn't allow them to go to therapy outside of the office. You come in here, I'm gonna sit and I have the therapist come to the office. First I'd have ten, then twenty, and finally all of them together. And I, I learned not to dislike them because they start--I have men call me from a telephone booth across the street from a school shaking and crying, Ms. Topsy please come pick me up I'm near a school, please come and get me I'm near a school. What are you doing there? I don't know. I just wound up near a school, come get me. And I'd go pick 'em up. Speaker 1: These are the pedophiles. Speaker 2: These are the pedophiles and take them home. I'm not sure they can be--it's, it's, it's compulsive behavior... it's compulsive behavior and impulsive acts, and they just have this need--it's not sex. That's the only thing they can control is a child, someone they perceive as weaker than them. It's not about sex. Most of them cannot perform with a woman or a man. Many of them are gay, but all of them are certainly not gay, and they would like to, but their need is control and they're angry and a child is a thing that they see that they can control. I really don't think the majority of them can be cured because I don't think we know enough about it. I don't think we know enough about it at all. Speaker 1: No one's found the key to this yet, I guess, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Some of them can control their behavior to a point where they're not overt, but I really don't think they can control themselves to a point where it's safe. Speaker 1: I've often wondered if there was a--should, should people like that be released from prison or, or, or, or control? Speaker 2: Sure. I think they should be released from prison because they just--yeah, I think they should be released from prison. Once you serve your time, you should be released from prison, but supervised and make sure that they're not around children and if they are around children that they closely supervised certainly. I don't believe anybody should be locked up and throw away the key unless they've done something that's so heinous and then they definitely should, but if you are sentenced to six years I don't think they should keep you for sixty years because you're looking at pornographic literature. I mean, how many people look at it every day that we don't know about. How many people are involved in it that we didn't think were involved in it? Speaker 1: I hope less than we think (laughter). Story_ID: 75123 Speaker 1: However, I've always, isn't it amazing although I'm a very staunch Catholic, I've always been suspicious in that aspect of our religion. And when my children were growing up, my boys were growing up and wanted to be altar boys I always went with them. I would not allow them to be with the priest alone. And I never, I was never sure why. I just didn't, and I questioned them. I made them go with their cousins. All of them had to go together. Speaker 2: Did you hear stories or hear from students when you were in school about, about-- Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: --that, that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Never. It just seemed kind of unnatural to me. I got in trouble again one time by saying--I said I thought maybe the good Lord contributed to welfare and I got in trouble because they said well what do you mean? I said well you know the apostles who were married why did he say leave your family and follow me. Whose supposed to take care of them? And you know all these people were sleeping in caves under one blanket, I mean I really got into trouble. I mean, I'm sorry to say this, but I got into trouble and I used to say you know Jesus was the original hippie. He would wear long robes, flowing hair, and, and sandals, and they used to say--I, I was told you know many times that there's something wrong with me, but I had a lot of questions. And, and whose supposed to take care of these women with their families while the apostles were gone? Why would Jesus take the head of the house away from the family? I never could understand why priests and nuns couldn't marry. You can serve both. So, I've always questioned my religion. I'm a Catholic, and I believe in Catholicism to a degree, but I've always questioned some things about Catholicism. I question the fact that you gonna tell me that I'm gonna live and do right all my life and when I die if I'm not a Catholic I'm going to hell. Get a life, I don't believe that. You never proved to me that Jesus was a Catholic anyway, you know, you didn't. So, I was, you know, kind of an outlaw in many ways (laughter). I'm sorry, but I was. Speaker 2: That's good. You know, that's, that's interesting. I mean do you find that--I just wonder do you find that--do you feel a need to try to reform the church on some level or? Speaker 1: Can't do it. Speaker 2: You can't, okay. Speaker 1: You can't, you can't reform the church. It's ingrain and it's irrational on my levels. It's just that faith. You're not supposed to question anything and when you do question they call you a heretic. When you question things, and there's no obvious answer, well you gotta believe. The Lord gave me five senses, free will, and understanding. I need some answers here. You have to give me something, something. I wonder 'cause my mother [Mary Lee Rose] was a very strong woman. She didn't question the Catholic religion, and she would get on me about asking questions. I said well you taught me to be in, independent, and I'm asking these questions. To the day she died, she went to mass every Saturday evening and she didn't go to Protestant churches; she let me go. She didn't go, okay. But, I need answers. Story_ID: 75124 Speaker 1: And do, do you, do you attend mass regularly? Speaker 2: Not regularly. I go to mass. I go to church. I go to Protestant churches as well, but I'm, but I'm a Catholic. I mean, I believe to a degree in Catholicism, but I question things. And I believe that I'm free to do that. Speaker 1: Well you know it certainly didn't, didn't start out, start out exactly as it is right now. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, it's always changing. Speaker 2: And I did see instances where young men would go to become they were altar boys and then they'd go when they got in the eighth or ninth grade they go and stay in--they'd live in home, in, in all boys' schools. And then over a period of time I noticed they, they, they appeared, their genders appeared to change. And one on 'em was my godson and I questioned him many times, and his mother told me don't question him. I said I'm his godmother; I wanna know what, what's with him? And then he would always hold his face down and not wanna talk about it. And I ask him are you being molested? What's that mean, word mean? Come on you're an A student in the Catholic school you know what that means. Oh, know, but in the end he was and he tried to commit suicide some years later. If you can't trust your priest who says he is your father, your surrogate father, who can you trust? Speaker 1: Well many people now are calling for some fundamental changes in the Catholic Church. Speaker 2: There needs to be. I think we have a lot of pedophiles hiding in the Catholic Church. That's a safe place to be, a very safe place. I think pedophiles gravitate toward the Catholic Church. It's safe. Story_ID: 75125 Speaker 1: I think lesbians gravitate toward being nuns to some degree, but not nearly to the degree that pi, pedophiles gravitate toward the priesthood. And I think the majority of the women who might be lesbians who are nuns weren't lesbians when they went there. Speaker 2: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 1: That's a lifestyle you can learn. Speaker 2: It's a part of the culture you think of being a nun? Speaker 1: I--no I don't think that's part of the culture. I think after you get in there and you've passed your five-year vows and you feel you cannot come out and you realize you might have made a mistake and you would like to be loved by a man and have families and all, you just wanna be loved by somebody. And, and I know about eight women who did come out, who did come out and came back to, to our society and they all married and had families, and they said they realized after two years. But, when you take those final vows after five years (they give you five years to take 'em), then you feel locked in or that you gonna die and go to hell with your eyes wide open, whatever that means, okay, so, so you feel locked in. Some of them just came out anyway, like in The Nun's Story. Remember that movie The Nun's Story with Katharine Hepburn? Speaker 2: I, I-- Speaker 1: You need to see that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you ever see that, you'll understand. But, they came out and asked penance. They have lots of children. Once they get married, they gotta make up for lost time. They have six, seven, and eight kids; that's penance to me to have that many kids, okay, okay (laughter). That's a bunch of penance, okay. But anyway, they just have a bunch of children to, to mea culpa, mea culpa, you know, just that sort of thing. Story_ID: 75126 Speaker 1: Now, now another aspect of Catholicism are you a part of or--I know you're certainly aware of black Catholic groups in the Catholic Church, I mean, groups of black pe, people in the form, you know, organization that sort of thing. What do you think of those? Are you a part of any of those? Speaker 2: I have not been a part of them, but I tell you what when the Pope mandated the per, the first justice and peace commission, Pope John Paul [II], we had a Bishop here, Bishop [Carl A.] Fisher, he was a black Bishop, and I just met him one time going through the line and shook his hand and congratulated him on being a Bishop in this province and he said to me could you stand right there and I stood aside and afterwards he said what is your name, and I told him. He said the Pope has mandated that we form a Justice and Peace Commission under the, for, for the Archdiocese of Los Angeles, and I'd like for you to come to my office and talk to me about it. I'd like you to represent us. And I'm think I don't know him, he does not know me, and I went and talked to him and he appointed me to it, and I served on it for four years under Archbishop [Roger M.] Mahony who is now Cardinal Mahony. And I have letters and pictures that they've written me over the years, and I served on that, justice and peace for diverse people within the Catholic Church and a coming together so we don't remain so divided and that we need to look at our laws and look at our ways to implement harmony in the Catholic Church. So, that was amazing. And I served on that for four years. Speaker 1: Okay, did you, did you, did you have a sense of progress with, from that, I mean did you--do you think you all made some progress? Speaker 2: We made some progress and we--that's when I first learned about Apostolic Catholics, you know the banjos and the, I mean, they got down in the church. I went to a couple of their--I think I could, I could come to this church. They wore African robes. I had not seen that. It was in Compton. It was in, it was in Carson. It was in Los Angeles, I mean, it was marvelous. And I felt a sense of renewal. It wasn't so stayed and so ritualistic and then I found groups that could talk about everything, all kinds of Catholics and, and it, it revitalized me. Story_ID: 75127 Speaker 1: Have, have you ever met Father Stallings, George Stallings in [Washington] D.C. who split from the Cath, Catholic Church? Speaker 2: I've read of him, but I have not met him. I think I'd like to. Is he the one that--didn't he adopt two children, is that the one? Speaker 1: I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Okay, I mean, he, he, he had--one priest adopted two children who were-- Speaker 1: I think that's Father Clements [Father George Clements, HM] in Chicago. Speaker 2: That is Father Clements in Chicago, that's, that's who it was that adopted two children. Okay, but I've heard of Father Stallings; I just have not met him. Speaker 1: I think his church pulled away from the Catholic Church. They established their own. Speaker 2: Okay. You know once a priest always a priest. There are many probation officers who are pri, ex-priests. But, you're not an ex-priest. Some of my best friends were PO's, PO's, probation officers, who were, had formerly been priests. They come to service organizations and they come, they become social workers, probation officers, parole officers, serving, and they are still priests. They still can bless you. They can give you the last rites of the church. They are married, they got families, but they're still priests. They just can't have a church. Once a priest, always a priest. But, once a nun, not always a nun; isn't that odd? Speaker 1: In what sense, what sense though? Speaker 2: Well gender. Speaker 1: Oh the nuns don't--oh they, they are officially--they, they not officially still priests when they drop out--(unclear)--. Speaker 2: They are, they are priests. I mean, if, if you're hurt they can give you the last rites of the church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They can come and visit you. They're not supposed--they don't have a church, but they are still priests. Speaker 1: I see, I see. But a nun, once a nun drop, drops out-- Speaker 2: She's no longer considered a nun. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She can't teach in a Catholic school. Speaker 1: Yeah, what you raise is, you know-- Speaker 2: A gender bias. Speaker 1: Yeah, gender bias in the Catholic Church, exactly, right. Speaker 2: That's true, that's exactly what it is. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: Nothing's changed (laughter). Nothing has changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 75128 Speaker 1: Well, let's see where do we go next? We, we would wanna--oh, tell me about some of the issues in the City of Long Beach [California] cause you were here during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, I guess, and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --activities of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know, Dr. Bush and Mr. McBride [Ernest McBride, Sr., HM] and other people. Speaker 2: Is Mr.--when I came along--(unclear)--possibly 600 people were here and as I stated most of us knew each other. There were only certain places you could live in Long Beach. Ironically, the high school, Poly High School [Long Beach Polytechnic High School, Long Beach, California], which is in the inner city, has always been the best high school in the city, and most of our leaders, black, white, pink, or green graduated from there. In fact, our mayor graduated from there. And it was the only school that white kids bused into. It sits right here on Atlantic Avenue dead in the middle of the inner city, and it has a history of being the best academically, the best as far as sports, just the best. It's--they think it's something in the water (laughter) that you drink at Poly. This is a story I was in Washington D.C. visiting the President of the United States and there were like fourteen or fifteen people we were in his presence and this man kept giving me these, these furtive gestures who was part of the president's cabinet. And I'm thinking what does he want. So, finally inches over toward me and said may I see you when this meeting is over and I said certainly. So, after the meeting was over we walked out. He inches up to me and said how is Poly High doing? I used to play basketball (laughter). He was a Caucasian fellow. He says you know I still have parents who live there and whenever I can I get back and go to a Poly game. I mean no matter where you go Poly is the school. They have--they put more people in the NFL. Academically it's the highest. It's a distinguished school, and as I stated before there is always a waiting list of five to six hundred Caucasian students trying to get into Poly from every part of this city. Isn't that ironic? Speaker 1: Now just for the record what's the full name of it 'cause everybody calls it Poly High School. Speaker 2: Long Beach Polytechnic High School. Speaker 1: All right--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Long Beach Polytechnic High School Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's an amazing school. You catch--you go to football games and there are people ninety years old come to the football games with a Poly cap on and a Poly T-shirt on a cane. Speaker 1: How old is this school? It is, is it--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: It's 103 years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A hundred and three years old. It's an amazing school, and once you at Poly student you're always a Poly student. Story_ID: 75129 Speaker 1: And it had--Dale Clinton [HM] helped to develop the inter, interracial committee there when we had some troubles in the '60's [1960s] and the kids started to fight and there were a lot of things going on and she and Mary Dell Butler helped to put together an interracial council, so we would not lose that school and we had whites, blacks, Asians from all over the city came together to preserve that school [Long Beach Polytechnic High School, Long Beach, California]. Consequently, Mary Dell Butler became a school board member. She was--she had six children of her own, and she was very much of an activist along with Dale Clinton. And when I was in office, I was able to get a school named for Mary Dell Butler. She's the only African American Woman, only African American that a school in Long Beach is named for, okay. Mr. McBride [Ernest Mc. Bride, Sr., HM] I got his home declared a cultural site. It can never be torn down, and he's the only living person in Long Beach [California] of any nationality of any color whose home is declared a historical site. So, those are two things I'm most proud of. Story_ID: 75130 Speaker 1: Just briefly, you know, discuss the importance of Mr. [Ernest] McBride [Sr., HM]? Speaker 2: Ah, Mr. McBride is a phenomenon. Mr. McBride is a 93-year-old man who was ninety-three last week whose very insightful. He's articulate. He has great memory. He remembers incidences that his children don't even remember. He was able to get through the Freedom of Information Act the fact that Edgar J. Hoover tracked him for years trying to declare him a communist, which he was not. He came here and was instrumental in, and he and Mrs. Zelma Lipscomb in, in, in founding the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He worked tirelessly. He'd have it--he was able to get jobs at markets and the telephone company and places. He would use--he would utilize his own children to go and apply for a job after he had schooled them and told them how to perform and how to act and knew they could pass the test. Often times one daughter she'd take the test and they'd lose the test. She'd go back and take it again, and she'd pass it, but they never would call her. Finally, he was able with the help of some ministers and people all over the city, Caucasians and others, who helped him to make sure that these companies would hire African Americans who were competent. He's fearless. He's a--as you know it he's a small man. He is fearless. He had a great partner in his wife who just prayed every night when he left home. He never told her exactly where he was going because if anybody approached her and took her to jail or something she couldn't say where he'd gone because she didn't know. That was his way of protecting her. He raised four, five children, five children and his sons, Ernie McBride Jr., and the girls and, and his other son they all are just, just a lot like their father. They fight for justice and freedom. Mr. McBride is a marvelous man. I want to go wherever he goes when he dies, wherever that is (laughter). Speaker 1: He keeps saying it's gonna be hell--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: I believe it. Speaker 1: Funny he keeps saying that, but hell, hell's gonna be a better place (laughter) apparently. Speaker 2: Mr. Mc--I don't think he's ever done a mean-spirited thing in his life. Everybody who knows him loves him. I'll tell you something interesting about Mr. McBride the NAACP never allowed him to be president of the chapter here. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I thought he, he had been when I found out he was the founder, but he said no he never was. Speaker 2: They, they didn't allow him to be. They, they said he was too gregarious, too mouthy, yet they counted on him to go and make the changes, but they never allowed him to be the president. Isn't that ironic? But, he didn't, he said he didn't care. He's of the opinion that I am doesn't care who--you can get anything done as long as you don't care who gets the glory. Speaker 1: It's--that's, that's almost, that's, that's true for a lot of movement things, you know--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION): Hold one second. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Story_ID: 75131 Speaker 1: Mr. McBride [Ernie McBride, Sr., HM] has meant a lot to this community. Speaker 2: He's meant a great deal to this community, he and Mrs. Zelma Lipscomb both. Speaker 1: Okay, now Mrs. Lipscomb is she, she's ill now--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she's ill right at this moment. Her sister died not too long ago, so she's mourning as well. But, she was a librarian and she has done a lot for this community, and she was Mr. McBride's wind beneath his wings to a degree. Together they did a great deal, and they worked side by side and were in accord. Story_ID: 75132 Speaker 1: And it's exciting now, you can see, you know, when he [Ernest McBride, Sr., HM] tells his stories he gets excited and he relives all the stories and when people are involved in events that change history they have a certain amount of, there's a certain, I don't know, it's, it's a--there are times like no other times I guess-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --and they feel that and they-- Speaker 2: He also played in the ba, black baseball league. He was great. He was--his son tells about the time that he was, Mr. McBride's [Ernest McBride, Sr., HM] team challenge, the, the son's league, and it was a lot of trash talking, so Ernie McBride, Jr., said we, we gonna wipe these old men out, you know, they, they--so they challenged them to a game and the stands were packed. So, Mr. McBride's group came up and they had to decide at the moment who was gonna play what. You gonna play shortstop today, yeah I'll catch today. Mr. McBride was a catcher. You gonna pitch, yeah I'll pitch, so Ernie McBride, Jr., said this is really pitiful because they were the champs, Ernie McBride, Jr.,'s group were the champs of the time. So Ernie said they got up there and he said I think Ernie wound up and he put it across the plate and he said that's the last time he saw that ball. Mr. McBride hit that ball and that was the last time he saw that ball. He thought oh this is just a fluke. He said each one of those old men got up and kicked their butts (laughter). He said after the third inning they just kinda gave up. Those old men had it down pat, and, and they were old by their standards. They were like in their forties or something like that, thirty-eight or something like that. But, he said we learned a valuable lesson, never underestimate wisdom and experience. I loved hearing that. Speaker 1: Yeah that--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Isn't that great? Story_ID: 75133 Speaker 1: How did you get involved in politics? Speaker 2: I retired from LA [Los Angeles] County Probation after thirty some years in 1988, and I was just going to travel the world and enjoy myself. And I had help put a, a, a college of mine, helped to get him in office. I had worked tirelessly on his campaign, and he had been in there five or six years. We kept going to him with community problems. He ignored us and kept saying well you do as--I'll tell you when I'll get ready to do something. You guys only do what I say do. It sounded like plantation talk to me and finally a couple of ministers came, Reverend Norman Copeland and several other ministers came and said you're responsible for his being in there; you have to take him out of there. And I said I'm not solely responsible. I mean he had a lot of people working on his committee. They said, but we have decided you're the only one that can take him out of there. And I said no I can't do this it will, you know, divide friends and that sort of thing. So, he says you need to pray on it. So, for two or three months I prayed on it, not ever intending to do that, never. And I went and told the incumbent that they were trying to get somebody to run against him and what he wasn't doing, and I said now here's what you need to do. You need to let a group of us do these things that they want done, and you take the credit and you can say I am doing them and no one need ever know. And he insulted me by saying I don't have to do anything; you get what I give you. Speaker 1: Sounds like a challenge to me. We're, we're-- Speaker 2: Shouldn't have done it. Speaker 1: --we're gonna change tape right here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A good time to change. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 75266 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alright. In our last episode, we were discussing the, this challenge, this kind of issue about city councilperson who you had helped put in office specifically-- Speaker 1: Yes, I went and told him and told him we would do the work for him and when he told me shut up, kinda shut up and get somewhere and you can't do this and you can't do that and I said that sounds like, you sound like a plantation owner and I'm gonna be giving you a call in a couple of days. So, I came back home and my husband said that I think you're the only person who can take him out. I said--then I checked to see how much money he had. He had $110,000 in his war chest; I didn't have a dime. So, I went to my St. Anthony [High School, Long Beach, California] graduates who were by then running the city. One was a presiding superior court judge of all the judges here, one was a city attorney, one was a city prosecutor. Went back to my roots. Called them up, I'm coming out to your homes I need your help. Doris Walker come on out. Went out to see them, we went through the yearbook. We decided to write letters to all 200--there were only 220 of us who graduated that year and I had always stayed in contact with them, went to the reunions; they were my friends. We wrote all over and we got $5000. People just sent money. Some lived in Mississippi, some lived in [Washington] D.C. wherever. They just sent some money. Okay, then from them I got a few volunteers, some from the east side of time, which was primarily white okay. Then I got people in my neighborhood. So, I garnered together thirty-five volunteers and in nine months I raised $33,000 and I walked and talked and smiled and dialed and that, that was my, my, my mantra. You walk and you talk, you walk to the pre, you walk the precinct and knock on doors. You talk to the people who come to the door, you smile and engage everybody, and you dial for money. Walk, talk, smile, and dial. For nine months, almost nine months and I won by twenty-six votes. Story_ID: 75267 Speaker 1: Twenty-six. Speaker 2: Votes. Speaker 1: A narrow margin. Speaker 2: Well, first it was sixteen votes and then he demand, he wanted a recount. Shouldn't done it, okay. I got together the Filipino community. I went to every group. The, the--I marshaled the nuns. I marshaled the Catholics. There was an Anglo running against me as well, and he out and out said to me Doris you know I'm gonna get all the white vote, and I said be serious. I gonna get the white vote (laughter) because I know more of them than you know. He said well you couldn't possibly. Imagine him saying that to me. He didn't know how long I had been here. And he says well it's gonna be a runoff between Clarence and myself. Clarence was the name of the gentleman who was in there. Well, it was not. It was a runoff between Clarence and myself, you know. He got so angry he left the city and moved to Huntington Beach [California], the one who told me he was gonna get all the white vote. I got it. Okay, and I got the--now the vote in my community was split. I came here in 1942. Clarence came in 1948. He had been a Parks and Recreation leader and that sort of thing, so he got a lot of vote, so the vote in the black community was split. But, I didn't appeal to the black community. I crossed over. I got the Filipino vote, the Hispanic vote. I learned to speak some Tagalog. I knew how to speak Spanish more or less, and when I go to see them I'd speak to them in their language. He couldn't speak to us in our language, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Ebonics huh (laughter). Speaker 2: Not even good Ebonics, okay. So, I was able to cross over and I made everybody feel comfortable. And so I was able to just, you know, to get it done. We outworked him. We worked six-and-a-half days a week. Story_ID: 75268 Speaker 1: Now here in Long Beach [California] people are elected at large? Speaker 2: Well, they used to be at large, but in 1976 it changed and we elected our first black councilperson by going to district elections. His name was Jim Wilson. And then Clarence Smith followed Jim Wilson. We helped put Clarence Smith in when Jim Wilson passed away, okay, and that's the person that I took out. So, I took Clarence Smith out and you're elected at large, but you see each district has approximately 55,000 to 60,000 people and there are nine districts in Long Beach. You talking about 465,000, 470,000 people, so they're nine districts and in each district like here there are people of all nationalities. This is the most diverse city in the United States of America designated so January of 2000. So, you have Hispanics, you have Pacific Islanders, you have a large Filipino community, the largest Cambodian community outside of Cambodia. So, I had, I put ads in the paper in Khmer. I put ads in, in the, in the paper in Spanish. I went to everybody and got, I got volunteers from all of those groups. He just focused on the black community. Can't do it, can't do it. You have to focus on everybody. Story_ID: 75269 Speaker 1: And that really lead me to--we had a Martin Luther King parade here every year. From the time I got in until the time I left each year I would choose one grand marshal from each nationality. I'd choose a theme and then focus in on the person who fit the theme. I would say each one reach one and teach one, and I'd focus it on a teacher. But, I'd get a teacher or somebody who represented education from each nationality and they'd be the grand marshals. People come out to see people who look like them. They're appreciative that you recognize that they are a part of this city. We had thousands and thousands of people. We increased it from 1500 people to 15,000 people, to 20,000 people at each Martin Luther King parade. It has been marvelous. It's really been marvelous, and people are very kind. So, I enjoyed that part. Story_ID: 75270 Speaker 1: I, I don't, I don't enjoy the schmoozing. I been a delegate to the Pan-American Conference, went to Washington D.C. two or three times a year once the city recognized that I knew a lot of the congress people from college days, that I could get us into see people they couldn't get in to see. Same way in Sacramento [California]. I can get you in to see senators and some of the people that you can't get in to see because we were probation officers together or we were students together. We go way back and that's why I sit on several boards, now six boards, Long Beach Transit, St. Mary Hospital, Children's Dental Clinic and they want me on the board because I don't have any money, but I have influence. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's different, different paths to power. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I can sit right here and get somebody I know their home numbers and they'll say yeah come on in and you just call them ten times and can't even get a call back, but they'll call me back. And so that's very important to the City of Long Beach. So, consequently I still sit on these boards and go to Washington every March and I do a lot of volunteer stuff. Story_ID: 75271 Speaker 1: Now, well tell, tell us about your career in the city council. What, what did you--what were the major issues? Speaker 2: When I came onto city council, city, the City of Long Beach [California] was in tran, went into a transition. We lost our navy base. We loft our, we lost our naval hospital. We lost the naval shipyard. We lost everything. I came on in '92' [1992], by '94' [1994] we lost the naval base, naval hospital, and naval shipyard. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a congress person that was on the outs with the president or something--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, they just--San Diego, San Diego [California] usurped our authority. They were richer, less diverse, and they got the contracts and stole our funder, okay. When I got on the city council you need know there were nine white men and me. No women, no minorities. So, I had to create a role for myself. I became Mother Doris. Men need a mother, okay, and all men respond to a mother. A mother makes you behave, makes you pay attention to what you should be doing, and it creates a certain level of, of, of what you should be doing, so the men responded to that. I had addressed myself as Mother Doris to a degree when they get out of line and they responded. They would pull out chairs. They were, wouldn't use profanity. They were great. And I knew them all because I had worked with them on projects for the--(unclear)--, just community things. So, it was as though I didn't know them. One was a deputy sheriff, two or three were--one was a lawyer, I mean, I all kinds of people okay. So, it wasn't but, it was about three years later before we got any more women. But anyway, the guys were great. So, we sat down one night and said we have to reinvent this city. So, we took a poll and decided we would reinvent this city because we lost everything. Trade, technology, and tourism, that's what we're going to be known as, trade, technology, and tourism. Our tourism, we have the Queen Mary, okay. We're going to--we have the busiest port in the nation, trade. Technology, we're going to attract tech, technological businesses. The naysayers out there in the community were in an uproar; that's not what they wanted. We bit the bullet, got called everything but a child of God, threatened, but we stayed firm and we turned this city around and that's the city that you see. The Aquarium--when you go down and look on the, the building at the Aquarium whose name is up there Vice Mayor Doris Topsy-Elvord's name is up there. The mayor and then they gave me a separate because that was also something that I was involved in okay. There's, they are many things that we did to turn this city around, and we're really happy about it. We borrowed money from the port to put the conventions center, made it a larger one. We get a lot of trade shows and a lot of conventions in this city. The weather is ideal. Here it is November, free buses. I sit on Long Beach Transit. Speaker 1: Eighty degrees. Speaker 2: Right. I sit on Long Beach Transit, and we decided some time ago that people who come here should be transported around free. You can also take the AquaLink and go up and down the ocean from one part of Long Beach down to the marina free. When you get down there, that purple bus or that red bus will bring you back free. Isn't that wonderful? Speaker 1: Yeah it is. Speaker 2: It's wonderful, huh. You found that out (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --after you had walked (laughter). So, it's, it's, it's a marvelous city. Story_ID: 75272 Speaker 1: Long Beach [California] is a strange clannish city. Long Beach is not preoccupied about color. Long Beach is preoccupied about family. Half the time I don't think they care what color you are. I'm, I'm almost sure they don't. You either one of 'em or you're not one of 'em. The same 300 people do all the work here. I go to 99 things a month; it's the same 300 people and have always been. The Grand Prix, St. Mary Hospital, whatever, it's the same folks. They're not even cognizant of what color you are. You either out here doing for the community and committed or you're not, and that's the way they operate. It's a very comfortable city. Speaker 2: It's unusual back in the Midwest or on the East Coast to have a community like that. What do you attribute Long Beach's diversity to? Speaker 1: The weather. The access to all the other counties, I mean, we're an hour and half away from San Diego, you're 30 minutes from Los Angeles. We have our own airport. We have our own health department. We have everything LA [Los Angeles] has. We have a convention center. We have the Aquarium. We have the Grand Prix. We have the Queen Mary. We're building Carnival lines. You gonna be able to go on ships from the Annex to, by next March Annex to the Queen Mary. Speaker 2: Okay, so the cruise, the Carnival cruise ships--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Will be going from here-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --in March. So, we have everything that Los Angeles [California] has and yet the owner of the Queen Mary, Joe Prevratil, I was the deciding vote to keep the Queen Mary here. It was four to four. If I had voted against it, it would have been in Japan. I was the fifth vote to keep it here. And the reason I voted to keep it here was me and friends worked on it, worked on the ship. They might not have been high-paying jobs, but that was their employment. Story_ID: 75273 Speaker 1: Just for those watching this tape in the future, and it could be far into the future, what is the Queen Mary? Speaker 2: The Queen Mary is a ship that we purchased from England. That is the, the original Queen Mary ship that used to--it was a cruise ship. Well, not, not, yeah it was a-- Speaker 1: An ocean liner. Speaker 2: An ocean liner, right, and now it's a hotel. Many of the rooms are the same. It's a beautiful nostalgic ship. It has great restaurants. We have a big fireworks show on July 4th. It has--the cuisine is, is, is marvelous. It has a grand ballroom, many dances and all kinds of affairs are there, and the owner of it is Joe Prevratil. Joe Prevratil. Story_ID: 75274 Speaker 1: Joe [Prevratil] is just a marvelous man who never forgets you. When I see Joe, and I could show you pictures of he and I, we hug. This is the kind of city when you see your friends your friends never forget you. I have friends in really high places, but it's this hi Doris, hi Joe. It's an informal city. You don't address people by Mr. You're Larry and you're Doris. It's the kind of place where you pick up the phone and say I need a favor. What do you need? I can or I cannot do it. I can't do it, but I know someone who can. We have many millionaires here who give freely of their time and, and their money. You can just call 'em. You go to lunch with them. You go have a hot dog; it's that kind of a city. And it's, it is unusual. Speaker 2: It is really. Speaker 1: It has a small town atmosphere, but it's a large city. It's the largest city in California, 471,000 people here, so it's a 32nd largest city in the nation; it's a large city. Speaker 2: And yet it's--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Like a small town city. You know your neighbors. You know your, your friends and they don't forget you. I mean, whatever they're having at their homes or some other place you get invited. Story_ID: 75275 Speaker 1: Now, now what, what's the highlight, I guess, of your career in city council as a deputy mayor, I guess, you know, I mean, how did you become deputy mayor? Speaker 2: The council chooses the, the deputy mayor or the vice mayor. I'm the only person in the history of this city who was chosen vice mayor unanimously twice where everybody voted for you. It's a unique position in that the Mayor does not have a vote in the City of Long Beach. It's the Vice Mayor whose a councilperson who has the vote. So, if you're a developer coming to Long Beach you come to see the vice mayor who looks at your project and says to you this is not going to fly in the format you've brought it to us because councilman Crowe is going to ask this, councilman Scott is going to ask this, and you need to answer these questions before I attempt to disseminate this to the council, so you need to take this back, rework it and bring it back to us. Okay, so the developers come to see normally the vice mayor because the vice mayor has a vote. The vice mayor can vote for or against your project later if it comes to that. The vice mayor then share--the vice mayor has a meeting with the city manager every Tuesday and the mayor every Tuesday because we have an agenda, and the mayor may say you know I'm not sure how this is going to go, how do you think this is going to go? Well, you can say it's going to go five to four, it's going to go seven to two because you know. Because you have conversations with your peers, okay, and some time you might say to the city manager you might need to take this off the agenda; it's not going to fly. You might need to rework it and bring it back. So, you, you have a lot of value as vice mayor. Also, you still have to do your district work mind you and you still are a delegate for the city a many, many, in many, many venues, but you don't get another penny for the work. You don't get any more salary, and the salary is really laughable, very minute, okay. Many people can't afford to run because you have to have a full-time job. You can't live out of what you're paid there, you know. It's a part-time job that's 24/7, okay. So, you need to be a retired person with a separate income or you have to have a full-time job. So, most of the council people do have full-time jobs. I think only one or two are retired and the res, rest of them work full-time someplace else. Such a real unique position, but the men made me the vice mayor and then I said two years of this and I can't handle any more of this. Well, they turned around, I was trying to get them to vote for someone else and, and selected me again, and it made my people in my neighborhood proud. Speaker 1: Now how many terms did you serve? Speaker 2: Two. I was there eight years and four of those eight years I was Vice Mayor and councilperson; that was a lot of work, but rewarding. Story_ID: 75276 Speaker 1: You, you had a mayor and a city manager-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and what, what the--is this a city manager form of government? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a city manager form, city manager, city council-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --form of government. Speaker 1: And, and what role does the mayor really play in all this? Speaker 2: The mayor is the cheerleader-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the person who makes friends, goes to Washington [D.C.], goes to foreign countries and makes friends for our city. Speaker 1: It's like being an, an ambassador. Speaker 2: And gets, and able to, to hook us up and get money because of his or her personality and his or her knowledge of the city and her, his or her, personal skills, okay. And in that role, the mayor is gone a lot, so the vice mayor is here a lot for our particular mayor. Story_ID: 75277 Speaker 1: Beverly O'Neill ran, the beautiful women there that I've known for 30 something years, she used to be president of Long Beach Community College, Long Beach City College. She was a teacher. She's an educator. And she retired and she decided one time she would--she decided she was going to run for mayor, so we sat down and had us a conversation. Well, I only gave her two pieces of information that she should use drink water with a lot of lemon to preserve her voice and never say that she knows something that she doesn't know. When somebody ask her a question, if you know the answer give it. If you don't say to them I don't know the answer, but please come to the next forum next week and by then I'll have the answer to your question; and she did that. So, we are great, great friends because she did that. And then, she was a person who, she was the second person to come onto the council, a female, so we were happy, you know, about that. She's the only mayor in the, in the United States who did a write-in. When her--you term limit out after eight years and Beverly decided she'd do a write-in. No one had ever done it. So, she just did a write-in and won for a third term. Our law state you can do a write-in if you want a third term, but your name can never be on the ballot, never, even if you win the runoff, you can't, your name will never be on the ballot. People have to write your name in and punch your name out, and she won. So, you know she done a great effective job and she has gone back to Washington [D.C.] and made tremendous friends with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]and all kinds of people and, and she's a fabulous woman. Story_ID: 75278 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you some philosophical questions here. What do you-what, what, are some of you hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: In Long Beach [California]? Speaker 1: And in general. Speaker 2: I want them to develop more leaders and not be so me, me, I, I conscious. If you don't share information, you'll never have power and you can't share power. So many of us are concerned about our image and what is our image? Had Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] and some of the others and Dr. Abernathy and all of them been concerned about their image and Thurgood Marshall we wouldn't be as far along today as we are. I want them to develop leaders to mentor young people, encourage and then stimulate older people to share with us their wisdom, to plan an agenda and implement it and stop being divisive. We spend so much time being divisive, divisive and trying to decide who's going to be seen to we don't get the job done. I am very careful who I am associated with. Most people don't see me. I do everything from that kitchen. You don't need to see me. You just need--I need to be doing what I do. Somebody call me up, need something, tell me what you need, I'll hook you up; that's what I do. No fee, no nothing. I'll hook you up. I'm good at that. I know who to hook you up with okay, but you gotta promise me one thing that you'll hook somebody else up. That's all I ever ask of you. We just need to get on the bus, get the right seat, drive to the destination, reach our goal. Speaker 1: Never heard it put better. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 75279 Speaker 1: Tell me this after--I know you're still doing things, but what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is to be the best person and do the most good so I can earn my place in Heaven. Now I know I'm gonna be punished for some of this stuff I say (laughter), some, like some of the stuff I told you I say, but I will continue to say those things until I get an answer. My legacy also is to help young people and to, to take care of old people because I consider myself one of those old people; to take care of old people. We cannot just drop them. You see I don't let Mr. McBride [Ernest McBride, Sr., HM] rest. I don't let Mrs. [Zelma] Lipscomb rest. I keep them--they hate to see me coming. I keep them involved in something. They go oh Lord here she comes, you know, because they have so much to impart to us, and I value them so much. So, I just feel like I have to do a good deed every single day of my life, a random act of kindness, and I make it a point every day of my life to do a random act of kindness for somebody. I go down to the post office and people are driving in there to put their mail in and I go to each car. Sometime people roll up their windows 'cause they don't know why I'm approaching their car, and they're idling along and I'll just go to each car and knock on the window. May I put your mail in the box while you look, and they go you'll do that for me? Yes, I'm trying to do my random act of kindness for the day. And several people have said to me my God I'm gonna start doing that every day for somebody, something. I take a lot of pride in, in, in the fact that the good Lord as truly, truly blessed me. He's given me great sons, great grandchildren, a marvelous, supportive, prince of a husband who I truly value. This man never complains about anything at any time. He's known in Long Beach as Mr. Daisy 'cause he drives Miss Daisy (laughter), really, and he's known as a prince. He never complains, I mean, he's the most supportive person in the world, so I am truly blessed to have what I need and I just wanna make sure that the future gets what it needs. And I wanna honor people. I've just submitted Indira Hale Tucker's name to be a woman of distinction. She does so much for the community and people don't know it. So, I go along and pick out folks who are doing things and people don't know about her and I make sure people know about her and that they get honored. They need their roses while they can smell 'em. I've had too much honor, so it's my duty to make sure other people get what they are do, and I like to do that. Story_ID: 75280 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about some of your travels. Now, you, you, you traveled extensively, you know, in various capacities-- Speaker 2: Well in 1971--I, I have a unique way of traveling. I save for three years and whenever I get a certain amount of money, wherever it will take me that's where I go. So, I started in 1971 and went to Europe for six weeks. My son was like ten and my mother tried to lay this guilt trip on me you gonna leave this child here with a babysitter for six weeks and you gonna traipse off to Europe. I said I go on that freeway to that county jail every day and I don't see anybody telling me not to go, and I don't know why I can't go to Europe for six weeks and leave him with that same babysitter in our house and buy six weeks of food, so I stepped, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 74949 Speaker 1: You took your time deciding when you were younger, you know, what career path you were gonna take. Do, do you think that young people are rushed into college, I mean, rushed to make a decision about what they're gonna do to early? Speaker 2: I think so. I think they need to go--see you don't have to, you don't have to declare a major until you're a junior, so I think you should wait until you're a junior. You need to sample--one time I thought about being an anthropologist. I love the study of people and cultures, and that's what made me want to travel. That's why in 1971 I went to Europe for six weeks. I went to Italy and Spain and Monte Carlo, and just we eurailed and jumped on and off the train, my girlfriend and I. And we took her 12-year-old daughter. It was her coming out. And I remember getting to Monte Carlo--not, I'm sorry not Monte Carlo, Monaco, and at night it was on the train and I saw this beautiful palace like glittering and it was Rainier's Palace [Prince's Palace of Monaco], Princess Grace and Rainier's Palace and they kept saying they have a beautiful zoo though, so we jumped off and stayed there for three days. And at night we went to Monte Carlo, you know, the gambling establishment. We only had a very limited amount of money, so we just stayed around there with the beautiful people and kind of slid around and, and in the daytime we went on the beach and we stayed there three or four days. And our focus was getting to Spain, and we jumped back on the train and got to Spain and that was during the Nixon era. And I remember for four days in Spain we could not cash a check because they burned Nixon in effigy and everything was closed down. And I remember going to the bullfights and sitting five seats below [Francisco] Franco and I never got over the fact that the gentlemen was not quite five feet tall, and this man was the ruler. He was surrounded by people. Children were taller than he was, and he was a dictator. And we lived in the National--(unclear)--Hotel, which was a Hilton Hotel, and it was, it was just marvelous. Just the energy of the travelling and seeing people and we were in Paris and we were in the Louvre and while I was standing there a big brick came through a window in the Louvre, and some African students were in the Louvre with us and we said, they were speaking in French, and we said what happened. They said George Jackson in Soledad has been killed in the United States. We were in the Louvre in Paris when George Jackson was killed. So, we said why are they rioting? They're in simpatico with him. They're in sympathy with him. And they rushed--these students rushed us out, took us to the subway, and took us back to our hotel and they explained to us how the Persians felt. The Africans exchanged cards with us. They had an apartment there. Some of them were going back to Russia. They were students. When Africans leave home, sometime they don't get back for twenty years. They are given scholarships and they have to stay in this, in the countries where they are educated to pay back. So, we learned a lot from that. Story_ID: 74950 Speaker 1: The second trip that I took we stayed six weeks there. Three years later we went to the, to the, to the Caribbean, and years later we went to--I went to Australia and then I went to Africa. I went to Egypt in 1990, and I went to a Pan African Asian Conference. I went to Egypt for two weeks, and I went with Danny Bakewell [HM] and some other people from the--(unclear)--here in Los Angeles and a friend of mine Evelyn Knight. First we went to Egypt and we stayed there, and then we went to Liverpool, England, to the Pan African Asian Conference to help them get together, the Asian Pan, the Asians and the Africans in London and the European countries to get together and stop fighting each other, and it was, that was something to see. We stayed at the University of Liverpool. We stayed in the dorms, and it was really exciting. Story_ID: 74951 Speaker 1: Then we went to Africa, went back to Europe. I stated before Australia was some, something too. Australia was really an interesting country. Speaker 2: When did--oh, what conditions are the people in, in the-- Speaker 1: The Aborigines? Speaker 2: --Aborigine people, yeah? Speaker 1: The Aborigines were kind of ignored. I went in 1988 and they have a few shops and things when you go out in the outback they live in, they were living in, in conditions that were not conducive to being recognized as, as important people. And they were beginning to, to lash out and, and come together. Now I understand like last year a friend of mine went and brought a piece of Aboriginal art, which is right there on my wall, and he says they are doing much better since this past Olympics and the fact that they made strides okay. So, he says they're doing much better and they're getting more education and a lot of the Aboriginals, the Aboriginals were taken from their home by the government and placed in homes of Anglos and placed in orphanages, so they didn't have a sense of belonging. They were just between the devil and the deep blue sea and they--it's been addressed. It's been addressed and they have a lot of conferences and a lot of classes to address, address the fact that they are a people and they're the first people. Story_ID: 74952 Speaker 1: Now you have some, some interesting things to say about, about South African, and you, you were, I mean, it was off, off before we were, we got into the interview you were telling me about Mandela's release and his house and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Mandela--when Mr., Mr. [Nelson] Mandela--you never say Mandel in South Africa. Everybody white, black, pink, or green addresses him as Mr. Mandela. Even the guards who guarded him all the time that he was in prison addressed him as Mr. Mandela because he has that aura about him that makes you address him with Mr. Mandela. So, when he got out, about six months after he got out, Jane Fonda and Clint Eastwood I'm told went to South Africa and met with him and said they wanted to build him a house. Now, I don't know that anyone here knew that, but the South Africans all new that. And they built him a lovely home in the hood and it's across the way from Bishop [Desmond] Tutu's home. And so when you go down in there, this big striking abode is on one side, and Bishop Tutu's, which is a one-story and, and, and, and less opulent looking is like on the other side. And then the rest of the houses look like what they look like, typical houses, okay. Story_ID: 74953 Speaker 1: I think Johnnie Cochran is another person that was surprised--(unclear)--he's a national hero. Speaker 2: He's a national hero there. You go into some little restaurant or some little stand and there'd be pictures of Johnnie Cochran standing up there with the owner that someone had taken a picture of him. He has gone to South Africa many a time I'm, I'm, many times I'm told and has done extensive work for, in South Africa and no one has particularly known about it. So, Muhammad Ali, Johnnie Cochran, Clint Eastwood, and Jane Fonda are heroes in South Africa. When I was in South Africa they, South Africans would come up to me and they'd say (this was six years ago) how do you like our country, how do you think we're doing, especially the white South Africans and I'd say I'm surprised at how well you're doing in such a short time. And it was so odd to see signs that had been painted over in South Africa. You know when we divested to make them get rid of Apartheid, Mobil Oil changed their name to Kobil, K-O-B-I-L, okay. I just, I learned that Coca-Cola's like God; it's everywhere, okay. Winston cigarettes they had changed their names and they, they'd paint out the signs. They divested and changed their names and still operated to a degree. I got the city council in Long Beach to divest all of our interests in South Africa while I was on the council. It was unanimous. LA [Los Angeles] city council did the same, so each city council where there were people who looked like myself we were instrumental in getting divestments on our city--(unclear)--and we had lots of money, you know, there. But, South Africa is an interesting place. I saw in Soweto, I saw a beauty shop inside of a boxcar that had no windows, and the only reason I knew it was a beauty shop was the pungent aroma coming from it of hair being pressed. And I saw this smoke and I went to see what it was; it was a beauty shop. Barbershops they have red, white, and blue painted on the outside of the barbershop, but there are no windows. Story_ID: 74954 Speaker 1: The people still live in like squatters. There are a few--they built some homes and they with new roofs and the roofs are called elephant roofs, they're humped. Camel roofs, I'm sorry, camel roofs. They're humped and so that when the water goes in it can go down through the groves and go off. They're called camel roofs. There are a few of those. Much, much unemployment. Every street you go on there are hundreds of black men who have no jobs, and they sit in despair and drink; a lot of alcoholism in South Africa, a lot. The women still do the majority of the work because they can get some kind of jobs. The East Indians are the Jews of South Africa. They own the businesses. Most South Africans work for East Indian homeowners. They're their maids and their cooks and take care of their children. I found them to be, the majority of them to be haughty and arrogant until I would check 'em and say you know you wanna sell me this ring and you need to check your attitude or I'm out of here. I have the money, you have the gems, I can get these gems anywhere. Oh, I didn't mean any--whatever, but don't go there with me. In other words, I don't play that. Okay, so because they're using to talking to South Africans and they forgot we weren't from South African. And I also told them you know they need to speak to the South Africans in a different way, you know, because they are very haughty. They've kind of just taken over. Speaker 2: They've trained them to respond the way they would like them to, I guess. Speaker 1: Yes. So, I think they treated them the way the British might have treated them in their country. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So they found somebody now they can be "over" or in command of. So, I--that's the only, one of the things I found offensive. I was surprised at how much I liked the white South Africans, especially the young people. Many of them did want Apartheid to stop years before it stopped. They weren't in to it. Their parents were, but the kids weren't. They wanted the latest fashions. They wanted to be involved. They wanted to be able to dance and go to the activities. They, they wanted to be a part of a change. Speaker 2: So, so, it freed them up too. Speaker 1: It freed them up and you, and you could tell it was genuine. You could tell it was genuine. Story_ID: 74955 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now. This is different from the legacy question, but well did, did your mother [Mary Lee Rose] get a chance to see you become-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a vice mayor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was--my mother didn't--my mother died in 2000. She was 86. She died in 2000, and she never would say--she'd just say well you just a chip off the old block. She would give me accolades, but not that I did it per se, but she told everybody else I did it. She never quit bragging to other people about what I did, but she didn't say it to me except in that context, which was okay. Speaker 1: So, she was very proud. Speaker 2: Very proud, yeah, very proud. Story_ID: 74956 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who, who served others and tried to do all she could for others, but it wasn't enough. And I want other young people to pick up the, the mantle, and I've instilled those, those thoughts in, into my sons, so they're very helping people. One of them is a probation officer, one's a probation counselor. They're on booster clubs, and they give back to the community, and my grandkids do. And I want to be known as someone who is not concerned about her image, but she's concerned about mankind and I'm color blind. Speaker 1: Well, thank you. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome, thank you. Story_ID: 74957 Speaker 1: That's Doris Walker when she was eleven years old here in Long Beach. She had been here perhaps a year. Speaker 2: This is Doris Walker when she as seventeen years of age and graduated from St. Anthony High School in Long Beach [California]. Speaker 1: Doris Walker age--Doris Topsy at age thirty-seven as a deputy probation officer one day in her office in Compton, California. Speaker 2: Doris Walker, Doris Topsy rather, mother of three at that time, a group supervisor at the [California] Youth Authority. Speaker 1: This is Doris Topsy-Elvord when she ran for city council in 1992, which she won by twenty-six votes. Speaker 2: These are the Topsy sons. In the blue sweater is Gerald Topsy who is a deputy probation officer and has been one for nineteen years. Stanley Topsy to his left, a son who passed away in 1994, and Steven Topsy who is a group supervisor for LA County Probation Department who is now forty-two years of age. These are the three sons in the late '70's [1970s] or the first of the '80's [1980s]. Speaker 1: Mary Lee Rose, my mother, the matriarch of this family who came to Long Beach when she was twenty-four years of age. When she took this picture, she was about forty-five. Speaker 2: This is Doris' father, Clyde Julius Walker, known was Jack who was born and reared in Helena, Arkansas, and was a master sergeant in World War II. Speaker 1: Doris ran for city council in 1992, and this is one of her campaign posters, stated voter warning, it's time for a change, and a change is what the City of Long Beach got. Doris did win by twenty-six votes. Speaker 2: During black history month, this Boeing here in Long Beach feeds several people, and I was very surprised and a few years back when I was walking along and there was a big poster of myself in Boeing with a part of my life history on it as the vice mayor from the city of Long Beach and that is from the Boeing Foundation. You know they make the C-17. Speaker 1: This is Doris Topsy when she graduated from college in 1969 with a degree in social welfare. Speaker 2: Doris is here with her cousin, la, Lawrence Williams, a defense attorney, a criminal defense attorney who lives in Los Angeles. It's uncanny how much they look alike. We call ourselves the hound dogs of our family because we have those long faces. Speaker 1: In 1995, this is a picture of Doris Topsy-Elvord with James Meredith. Remember him from Ole Mississippi and how he integrated it. This is James Meredith. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Doris and Mary, and, and Myrlie Evers. She was in Vicksburg, Mississippi, and I believe the same day in June. We are the same age. Fabulous Myrlie Evers. Speaker 1: Julian Bond of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was one of our guests here in Long Beach and stayed for several days, and I had the honor of being in his presence, Julian Bond. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Year, if you remember. Speaker 1: The year is on the back of the picture. Speaker 2: Nineteen-ninety nine. Speaker 1: This is 1999. Speaker 2: Here I'm in the company of President William Jefferson Clinton, known as Bill Clinton. We had lunch with him several times here in the City of Long Beach as well as in Washington, and I'm sitting right next to him. This was at the Boeing Foundation here in Long Beach with President Bill Clinton. Speaker 1: This is Doris and her prince of a husband, Ralph Elvord who's a great supporter and one of her best friends, Ralph Elvord. Speaker 2: Doris and a long-time friend, Congresswoman Diane Watson [HM] who was former senate person here in the State of California and the ambassador to Micronesia appointed by Bill Clinton. She is now a congresswoman in the United States Congress. Speaker 1: Telegram did a ci, a civic leadership run in Long Beach and they filmed me with a picture of [Nelson] Mandela and wrote some very nice things about me and which I'm sure helped me win the election. Civic Leader Topsy-Elvord has a long role as an activist. This was in 1990. Speaker 2: This is Doris Topsy-Elvord and her husband Ralph Elvord this past August in 2002 on a cruise to the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Our families went along with us. That's my oldest son Gerald Topsy who is forty-eight years of age. He is a deputy probation off, deputy probation officer, and he and his family went along and that's one of the pictures. Speaker 2: My son, Steven Topsy, who is the baby of the family and his wife Jacqueline were also on that cruise. It was a wonderful time and my brother and his family and all together there were fourteen of us, and we had a marvelous time. Speaker 1: October 5, 2002, I'm receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award from the NAACP from the president, Naomi Rainey this past October 5, 2002. It was a wonderful moment, and I was very honored to have received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the NAACP. Speaker 2: This is the official picture of Doris Topsy-Elvord that was used throughout the city for the last four years from 1996 to 2000. Speaker 1: These are my two sons. There were my three sons, but one passed away, so these are my two sons. They are wonderful young men, and I'm very proud of them. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Year? Speaker 1: Nineteen-ninety eight [1998]..