 Story_ID: 444206 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines with The HistoryMakers and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please spell your name, state your name, and spell your name please. Speaker 2: Lucille Simmons Whipper [HistoryMaker Lucille Whipper]. L-U-C-I-L-L-E, S-I-M-M-O-N-S, W-H-I-P, as in Peter, P-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: June 6, 1928. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Charleston, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And your occupation or former occupation? Speaker 2: My last job was college administration. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're retired? Speaker 2: Retired. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: My home in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: February 1st, 2007. Story_ID: 444207 Speaker 1: Now we're gonna start by me asking what I call People magazine-ish type questions okay. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Pink and green (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chocolate. Speaker 1: And do you have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's dessert. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Do you have a favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: No, all right. And what is the best time of year for you? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I guess someone else could probably pick up on that. Story_ID: 444208 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your mother and father [Joseph Simmons]. Let's start on your mother's side. First tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please. Speaker 2: Sarah Marie Washington Stroud. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Sarah, S-A-R-A-H, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, Stroud, S-T-R-O-U-D. Speaker 1: Okay and do you, where was she born? Speaker 2: Charleston [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember her date of birth? Speaker 2: I surely don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your grandmother. Speaker 2: I did not know my grandmother. Speaker 1: Did you know her name? Speaker 2: My mother was adopted, and the only name that I recall would be Sophia Haywood [ph.]. Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: I don't know his name. Speaker 1: No, okay. All right, well, tell me about your mother. Tell me--did she share any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Well I guess, I guess I should say about my mother her mother died from childbirth, her youngest brother, so my mother was evidently about two years old. And she had older siblings. There were four of them, two boys and two girls, and her adoptive mother. I don't know I--she was legally adopted, but she reared her, took her and her younger brother to rear them and her mother, her adoptive mother was, even in those days and I guess my mother's birthday was something like 1916 or something like that, I should be able to correct that, emphasized education. And so she finished high school as it was then public school only went up to the eleventh grade. And she took a few weeks, a few months in college in Morris, Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina], eloped with my father, who was ten years older, and he was between being a fisherman and a longshoreman. My mother, according to her account, she was a very active, hyper child and very, well I wouldn't say brattish from what she said, but just inclined to be smart, fast talking, or whatever it is and that carried her all the way through her life, however. She grew up in what is known in the Charleston area as the borough, and that is the east side of Charleston, and there was this black community there and I, I think after the Civil War all of the big houses became tenements. But my, my adoptive mother and I always said I would try to trace this. Owned her property and, but it was a working class community basically, a lot of longshoremen, fishermen, and then people who, well the cigar factory became a very, the employer of a considerable number of people in the community. Story_ID: 444209 Speaker 1: I can remember as a child their having yard dances, I guess, yard parties on weekends that was pretty wild. Speaker 2: They had them out on, parties on the lawn or the yard? Speaker 1: Meaning yard. Speaker 2: I mean in the yard. Speaker 1: It wasn't the lawn, (laughter) yard. Speaker 2: I'm sorry (laughter), the yard. Speaker 1: And I would be with a group of children sort of peeping in on what was going on at the parties if my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] permitted me to go where it was for a while, and they would have, well there was always--I don't, I don't know how they got a piano out in the yard, but I remember this character called Bubbarena [ph.] who was a pianist, a jazz pianist and there would be the washtub and the washboard. Those are some of the things I sort of recall those yard parties, and it was just a wild time I thought you know. And I can remember as a child the grocery store, and I think it was run by a German. His name was Hesse [ph.] and being able to run to the store and buy what we call horse cake. It evidently was a cookie in the shape of a horse. Story_ID: 444210 Speaker 1: What else can I remember, and-- Speaker 2: About your mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud]. Speaker 1: About my mother, well she, my mother always made sure--she and my father [Joseph Simmons] separated when I was at an early age, but she always made sure that I, when she was not around, I was with an adult. I would laugh when I tell this story because she didn't make that much money, but we always had a babysitter, and she would make sure that I was in the company of either an older teenager or, or an older person. And she, she worked very hard. She was always a hard worker. Speaker 2: What type of work did she do? Speaker 1: She worked at the cigar factory. That's the only job, the earliest job that I remember that she had at the cigar factory. And as I said she always made sure that we were taken care of. Also, my father's aunt and she sort of took care of children in the neighborhood [in Charleston, South Carolina]. All the children ended up there after school. And my mother was, as I said, she was a thrifty person. She was, she meant what she said and she whatever--she was also, as I said, a free-spirited person in her life and just made very high demands of me. I think she felt that, she thought I had a whole lot that I guess I was her child, that her shining star or something and so I really was thought of, although it was a community of working class people and it was always a back and forth from one house to the other; that's the way we lived. She made sure that there was always a close watch on, over her children. My sister [Gertrude Simmons Huger], there was a sister that died at birth, and then my sister that I grew up with I was four years older than she. And so except for being in the house, we were not like companions because of the difference in age. Story_ID: 444211 Speaker 1: She believed in church. She was active in church, not to the point of being holy roller or a spiritual person, but she felt the church was a place that you ought to be, you had a time to be there, and she made sure that we were there. Her pastor's wife was a heavy influence on her life as a young woman who was separated and rearing two children. And we grew up in a Baptist church, but in our community they would always have revivals that they would have these revivalists come in and the whole community would attend the revival. And my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] always attended as an onlooker. She would make sure that she would be in the balcony to see what everything that was going on. And I can remember, this is one tale that we tell, she was in the balcony at this revival and my sister she might have been about eight or nine, I guess, was with the children when they, I don't know if the invitation was extended or what, but my sister went up to the front with some other kids and my mother was in the balcony and she saw her go down with these group of kids. And so it was the practice at that church that the mothers of the church would be there and the, the how can you describe it, that you have to come through you know, you have to through an experience before you are saved and so my sister was with this group and so they started rolling on the floor doing whatever and the mothers were fanning and praying and helping them to come through. My mother was observing all of this, you know, and so after service was over some of the children still did not come through, you know they were rolling and I think they were having a lot of fun and my mother thought so too. So, she went downstairs after it was all over to get my sister, but my sister was still sort of in this trance and she was carrying on and so my mother called my sister's name and said, "Get up we gotta go home," and my sister remained in this trance and so the ladies, the mothers of the church said, "Leave her alone she's, she's out of it, she has to come through." So my mother said, "Gertrude [Gertrude Simmons Huger], get up it's time to go home," and so the mothers were very disturbed that my mother was interrupting all of this that the spiritual happening and so she said it one more time in a stern voice and my sister got up and they went home and that's the type of person she was. I think that gives the sort of flavor of, you know, that she meant business whenever. Story_ID: 444212 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Tell me his name. Speaker 2: Joseph Simmons. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember that much about my father because he was not really a home person. I guess he was an outdoorsman or something, although I was, you know, the apple of his eye. I remember that he was a veteran of World War I [WWI], and I remember they received a bonus and that's when I got my first piano out of that bonus. And the one thing I remembered about him was that he, again I was sort of reared, I was very protected as a child, and I think I told you about this aunt of his that kept the children and this Aunt Da [ph.]. Speaker 1: Da? Speaker 2: And I found out in my research that that's an African symbol of mother or something, but we call her Da and could have been (pronunciation) Dah [ph.], but I did see that word some, somewhere in African. Well, she decided that all of the children were bad that day and everybody got a spanking, and of course I was hysterical as a result of my spanking. And when my father came I told him what had happened and he thought it was awful, and he and his aunt had the biggest argument about the fact that I had this group spanking; I remember that about him. And then Da decided one day that she was gonna pierce everybody's ears, and I didn't want mine pierced. And one of the things that they would do after piercing your ears they would, they said you have to put your urine on it to heal it. And I just thought that was awful and so that was another altercation that my father had with, with his aunt. And then early in my life he would leave town [Charleston, South Carolina], I don't know if he went to work or whatever, and so he was just sort of in and out of my life the early part. I guess I may have been early elementary school or something like that. Speaker 1: How much education did your father have? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Story_ID: 444213 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] and father [Joseph Simmons] met? Speaker 2: Well, the only thing she tell, she told me and in more of a warning (laughter), she was young and attractive and he was an older man that was well known around the community and he was ten years older than she, which was really, you know, and she was just attracted to his ways, his cunningness, and his I guess local hero type of thing. Story_ID: 444214 Speaker 1: Now you said your mother's name was Sarah Marie Washington Stroud. Speaker 2: Was Simmons Stroud. Speaker 1: Simmons. Speaker 2: Sarah Marie Washington, her maiden name-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Simmons when she married my father [Joseph Simmons] and then Stroud, my stepfather. I was reared mostly by my stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay. What was your stepfather's name? Speaker 2: Edward A. Stroud [Edward Stroud]. Speaker 1: You wanna talk about him a little bit? Do you know where he was born? Speaker 2: Columbia, South Carolina, I think. Speaker 1: Was your father also, your father was he also born in Charleston [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I believe so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right what about Edward Stroud. Do you know about where he, how much education he had or anything about him before he married your mother? Speaker 2: He was limited in his formal education, but he was a craftsman, carpenter, but also employed at the cigar factory and that's where they met. He was one of the leaders in the strike, worker's strike at the cigar factory, and a lot of, some people, historians claim that, 'We Shall Overcome,' probably started at that strike at the cigar factory there that played a very dominant role and you know and I guess my activism really sort of stems from my mother and my stepfather who were active in meeting the challenges of work and so forth. And at least he lost his job as a result of his activity with trying to unionize the cigar factory. He also, he had a family when they met, and so my mother sort of assumed responsibility for both families and she was and you know even today with my stepsisters that they recall her fondly because I think he was sort of wild and probably not taking care of his family before they met, and she made sure that he took care of both families and she would send money to his other family after they were married and I think they just have never forgotten that because his first wife was really, had a mental disability. He was, as I said he was a sort of craftsman also then he got work at the shipyard and my mother did too. She was, she was one of the early female workers at the Naval Shipyard [Charleston Naval Shipyard, North Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: What did they do at the shipyard? Speaker 2: You know let me see what did-- Speaker 1: Do you remember what type of work she did there? Speaker 2: I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of what he did. I know my, my youngest uncle was a caulker, and I think that led to his death really from cancer because they worked with fiberglass you know. I believe my stepfather worked in the machine shop whatever that was. He at first was not a church person, but my mother finally got him to be active in the church, but another church the Reformed Episcopal church. He became active in the Reformed Episcopal. He was a colorful person, very colorful and very, very supportive of her and the goals that she set, you know, when they bought their first house. He did all of the renovations and stuff like that. And whatever she said, that's what happened-- Story_ID: 444215 Speaker 1: And very supportive of me and my sister, just you know. We grew up in the house with him [Whipper's stepfather, Edward Stroud]. Speaker 2: And what is your sister's name? Speaker 1: Gertrude. Speaker 2: And you said she was four years younger than you, old. Speaker 1: Yeah, younger, younger than I was. Speaker 2: Younger okay, okay. Speaker 1: Her--unfortunately she died at an early age from cancer. Speaker 2: How young was she? Speaker 1: She must have been I guess in her thirties. Her name was Gertrude Huger, H-U-G-E-R [Gertrude Simmons Huger]. Story_ID: 444216 Speaker 1: When you think back to your childhood and you actually gave me some sounds, you know the music of the, the jazz piano in the yard with some sights. What smells can you remember that would take you back to that time even it was something cooking or flowers or? Can you think of a smell (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mostly fish and-- Speaker 1: Fish (laughter). Speaker 2: --crab, shrimp. You know those were staples. And I can remember walking down to the, what did they call, mosquito fleet at the, the docks where the individual fishermen would go out to fish and come back and sell the fish right that they just caught. I can remember walking down to the dock to purchase fish and bring it back on its all, would be all strung up. And I guess that's what I would think about mostly. Well my father [Joseph Simmons] did take me out on a shrimping vessel. Speaker 1: What was that like? Speaker 2: Terrible. I got seasick. It was awful. When we went out, I guess to the ocean you know. It was all right until we got there, and it was just riding the waves as they were twirling. Ooh I prayed to get back--I got so sick and that was the worse experience that I have had being seasick and being on a shrimp trawler just to see how the fishermen, you know, really lived and worked and so forth. But, yeah fish, seafood, shrimp. Story_ID: 444263 Speaker 1: I wanna talk more about your growing up, you as a child and you grew up during what was called, you know, the Depression [Great Depression]. Did the Depression as it were, did it affect you as far as not having enough food or clothing or any of those things? Speaker 2: I guess it did in that it limited the variety of food maybe. Since we were so heavily influenced by the sea, seafood and so forth, I guess it was that possibility and then I can remember eating bananas and bananas and more bananas because of the freight, freighted bananas, and we always had large stocks of bananas. Clothing, we had a lot of dressmakers. I can remember dressmakers and making clothes. And I'm sure we were affected by the Depression. I can remember I guess, I, I can't, I don't, I don't know, I can't connect. I can remember my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] bringing home a sticker, it seems like it said NRA [National Recovery Administration], but I, I don't know what this was connected to. And I can remember when, when my father [Joseph Simmons] got a bonus that was really, you know like money and, and I think that the neighbors just sort of helped each other. And so it was the community when I was a child like elementary school age, it was just a back and forth, you know everybody knows everyone and you're into each other's houses and that type of thing. Story_ID: 444264 Speaker 1: I started school at a, an Episcopal mission. Speaker 2: What was the name of it? Speaker 1: St. Stephen's Church [St. Stephen's Episcopal Church School, Charleston, South Carolina] and it was, they had a kindergarten. They went from kindergarten to I think sixth grade, and my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] sent me there for kindergarten, but you know, it was like a one-room situation and I was placed in first grade. I was four, so I was just grouped in first grade. The priest in charge there, I believe his name was McCloud [ph.]. He was West Indian. And so I had a sort of Episcopalian background along with my Baptist background because I attended this school and participated in there as a part of the school. Of course, we had worship service in the church. And oddly enough, that particular church has changed today and it is almost totally white. But, it was during my early years. It was an all-black situation, and I was heavily influenced by my connection to that church, and sort of growing up with the priest that, I don't know if he directly followed McCloud, Simpkins [ph.], the Simpkins and they had a lot of children. They were much older than I was, but I was heavily influenced by them. They all went to college. As well as I was influenced by my Baptist. Now my mother, although I participated in the activities with the Episcopal church, my mother made sure I stayed with the Baptist church. My grandfather was a deacon, although I did not know him, was a deacon in the Baptist church and they had a picture of all the deacons, so I was able to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is your grandfather-- Speaker 1: On my mother's side. Speaker 2: --on your mother's side. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You didn't know his name, you didn't know his name? Speaker 1: I think his name was Joseph Washington [ph.]. Speaker 2: All right, you, you said that the first priest was, was, West Indian. Speaker 1: I believe he was West Indian. Speaker 2: Let me ask you, was there any talk about any of your family having been in slavery at all? Do you know any of that information? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. Story_ID: 444265 Speaker 1: The makeup of the community now when you go to kindergarten are you, where are you living? What community? Had you moved to the house (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still living in the borough, and that church-- Speaker 1: Are you still living in the boroughs? Okay. Speaker 2: --is, was in the borough. Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh, okay. Speaker 2: Sort of the boundary maybe and they have restored, that's historic Charleston [South Carolina]. They've restored a lot of those houses that I-- you know, when I was a child they were tenements where blacks lived in most of those houses, and so I walked from where I lived, I walked. Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to kindergarten when you went, well actually in the first grade when you were four years old? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay at this school [St. Stephen's Episcopal Church School, Charleston, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I stayed at that school through the fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. What other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And transferred to the public school. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your parents have to pay for you to go to this Episcopal school? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. I don't know how much, but it was very little but when I consider that you know I always had a sitter and my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] just I don't know who she could expand money. Speaker 1: Who were the teachers in the school? Speaker 2: In the public school? Speaker 1: No, in the Episcopal school. Speaker 2: It was just the, the, the minister's wife and he. Speaker 1: Oh okay and it was a one-room school you said. Speaker 2: Well it was their, the parish house. We were in the parish house, and it was basically this large dining room and there was a room downstairs just for the older children, no more than about two, two rooms, big rooms, huge rooms, yeah. Speaker 1: So, when you went to the second and third grade they just divided you by age and you had separate-- Speaker 2: By grade whatever the materials (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By grade, by grade. Speaker 2: Yeah and different sections. Speaker 1: Sections of the room, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 444266 Speaker 1: So tell me, so you go to the fourth grade and you go to public school, what school did you go to? Speaker 2: Buist School [Buist Academy for Advanced Studies, Charleston, South Carolina], which-- Speaker 1: How do you, how do you-- Speaker 2: --is now the, B-U-I-S-T. Today it is the top mag, magnet academy and-- Speaker 1: And this school was outside the borough? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was in the borough? Speaker 2: It was in the borough. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was opposite a historic church, --(unclear) church, Emanuel Church [Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Charleston, South Carolina] on one of the main streets that runs through, through the borough. And I went to Buist School. I can remember one of my teachers name was Haywood, Laura, Haywood [ph.]. No, it wasn't Laura, Laura was a sister. I can't remember my teacher's name. Speaker 1: What was the experience like going from the private school to public school? Speaker 2: I, I can't remember anything outstanding-- Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) about it, so it must, the transition must have been all right, I mean I was among the, the smartest I guess, always into things, and placed in things and reading (unclear). My sister [Gertrude Simmons Huger] was mischievous and here again I can bring out the character of my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] because she would act up in class and to the point, and children do this today, threatening, telling the teacher, "You pro, don't tell my mother because if my mother comes she will get you," and this was expressed in the lounge and the, one of the teachers said, "No that's not true. You send for, send for her mother." And so my mother took off from the job and she came to the school to see what, about my sister was acting up, and they had little glass panes in the door so you can, so when she went to the classroom she could look in and my sister was walking, walking up and down the row doing her thing and so when she'd seen enough she went in and told the teacher who she was and just grabbed my sister by her collar and dragged her on out of the room and what happened afterwards was just a tale to be told. But, here again it, you know, tells you the type of mother that I had. But there wasn't as far as the transition it was not anything--. Story_ID: 444267 Speaker 1: So tell me as a, as a child in elementary school, what did you like to do? Did you like to read? Tell me some of the things that you enjoyed? Speaker 2: Oh I loved to read. I would, I would, I don't know if this is elementary or high school, but I was reading all the time. I would go to bed with a book, and then when my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] would say, "Lights out," I'd put the lights out until I thought she was asleep and then I'd put the lights back on and finish the book and I'd wake up the next morning, you know, I just didn't have enough sleep because when I would pick up a book I had to finish it as fast as I could, so, I was an avid reader. Speaker 1: What were some of the books that you liked to read? Speaker 2: I used to go to the, I started going to the library. You know I can't--Louisa Alcott [Louisa May Alcott] book, 'Little Women,' and, and I would just go down the series of books and do those books. And I remember I, I said that I was gonna read the Bible, I was gonna read the whole Bible and I was gonna start from Genesis. I don't know how far I got, but I don't think I achieved that goal of reading the Bible. But, I can remember these you know series of books for girls I would go down series and read. Speaker 1: You said your, your dad [Joseph Simmons] got a bonus and bought a piano, how old were you then? Speaker 2: I may have been about seven or eight or something like that. So, I took piano lessons. My, my pastor's, my pastor's wife as I said was very influential in my life and her daughter was taking piano lessons, and she started off teaching me, so that's how I started off with piano lessons. Story_ID: 444268 Speaker 1: So you graduate from what grade in this school, this elementary school [Buist School; Buist Academy for Advanced Studies, Charleston, South Carolina], sixth grade or eighth grade? Speaker 2: It must have been sixth, then I transferred to--was it sixth grade. No it had to be seventh grade because seemingly the public school started with the eighth grade because I did one year, I did eighth grade at the public high school. It still didn't go further than the eleventh grade at that time. And after the eighth grade I transferred to Avery [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], which was a private high school. Speaker 1: What was the name of the, the public high school? Speaker 2: Burke, Burke Industrial high school [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina]. And my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] was a graduate of that school. Speaker 1: Okay, and you transferred from Burke to Avery, was that a decision of your parents? Speaker 2: My mother. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So tell me about high school. Speaker 2: I was very active in organizations. I remember that there was one organization called the Hi-Y for boys, and they would have sweaters and things like that and, and a group of us said, "Why don't we have an organization that's similar for girls?" And so we organized what we called the Tri-Hi-Y, and I don't know the, the name how it originated or anything, but anyway we organized the Tri-Hi-Y. It was girls and we got our sweaters and so forth. I participated in the choral group. At least at Avery just about everybody sang, and I was very active in the chorus. I was in the speaking contest. Speaker 1: What was that like? Speaker 2: I remember winning first place. My English teacher, Mrs. Poinsette [Margaret Rutland Poinsette] said, who was a graduate of Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], insisted that I learn this 'For My People' by, 'For My People' by, she died recently Walker [Margaret Walker] and that's, that's what I recited. We, I was also, we had a student co-op shop, you know, sale books supplies and so forth. I was, I think it was called a co-op. I was a part of that, class officer. No athlete. I was not athletic (laughter) at all, not even cheerleading. But, that was a vital part of school the, mostly the basketball team more so than the football team. Story_ID: 444269 Speaker 1: Going to Avery [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina] I think that was a transition because the Avery was noted, known as a school that was sort of elitist and also it, the perception was it was a color thing also, but that's not true if you ever look at the pictures of the graduates at Avery (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what do you mean a color thing? Speaker 1: That, well there were mostly, it started off mostly with the children of free men and so it was mulatto and light skinned and all of that was a dominant factor in the, in the school and the privileges and the notoriety or whatever you wanna call it. And so that was always sort of in the background, or even, if not blatant. There was always a suspicion that teachers had favorite people who were from the first families or who were light skinned and so forth. You know that was always a part of that history at that school. I never felt that, but it was always if you had something you wanna grumble about you'd say, "Oh yeah she got by because she was so and so daughter or she was," you know she's, the word was color struck. "Oh yeah that teacher is color struck," you know, that type of thing. So, that is sort of the negative characterization of Avery and it lasts to this, to this day. And so coming from the east side sort of was, you were sort of stigmatized more so than coming from the west side where they were, you know, more class conscious and more professional people, et cetera and et cetera, and so that was always sort of in the background. Speaker 2: Did you ever feel any of that from your teachers or other classmates? Speaker 1: No, I, I didn't--from some classmates who were, you know because I was a, I was a top student and you know always among the favorites of the teacher anyway. But, I think classmates that may have been envious or whatever would, I would feel that you might be snubbed or something like that and it was more matter from them I think because of envy and jealousy and trying to put you down when people are putting you up. I think that existed, but did not get that feeling from the--my teachers were all very supportive and pushed me along (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Did-- Story_ID: 444270 Speaker 1: Did you know at this point that you would go to college and what was your desire after college, I mean if you thought about going to college let me ask you that first? Was that something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was a given. Speaker 1: It was a given? Speaker 2: With my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud], that was a given-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause she went and didn't stay and. Speaker 1: Did you think about what you wanted to, to do after, after school [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina]? I mean what profession you would go into? Speaker 2: Ooh I changed so much until in my junior year of college I changed my major (laughter). I thought one time I thought I wouldn't graduate on time. Of course nowadays on time is, you know (laughter), it stands itself when I think about my grandson, one of them in particular I thought he was gonna be a career college student. Not really I wouldn't say because I started off in, in mathematics. One of the good things was that I was influenced by my teachers to go to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. I got a scholarship there, and my pastor's daughter went to Talladega you know I was sort of being groomed in her footsteps and I went to Talladega and Talladega was modeled after the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Well the first two years there were general courses like you couldn't major. You had the humanities and, and foreign languages and almost a core curriculum for the first two years and so I started off thinking that I was gonna be in math in that area, and I found out that I didn't have it. Story_ID: 444271 Speaker 1: Back at Avery [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina] you said there were some teachers that, that encouraged you. Do you remember who they were? Speaker 2: Well, I remember Geneva Singleton. She was, she was the math teacher. Marguerite Poinsette [Margaret Rutland Poinsette] was the English teacher. One of the Brogdon, or was it Christine [Christine Brogdon Gilchrist] or Sadie [Sadie Brogdon Blackwell], Brogdon, a Ms. Brogdon, she taught in the social studies. And at Avery, we always had black history. That was a part of the curriculum at Avery. And then John Wrighten [John H. Wrighten, Jr.] came in as a substitute. John Wrighten was a young man that sued to open the law school in South Carolina [University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina]. He also influenced my class when we were seniors to sue the college of, to seek, not to sue, to seek admission through the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina] that was a municipal college, and I think just about everybody applied to attend the College of Charleston and that threw the whole city in a tither then. Of course, we did not succeed in entering the college, but it influenced the college to become private. How they did it, I don't know. That over the summer they changed from municipal to a private school to maintain segregation there, but Avery played a very, the faculty as well as students. It, it was a normal institute so that, normal means that after high school there was two years of teacher training, and a number of those teachers, those persons worked as teachers in the schools throughout the area, throughout the state really and it emphasized really a sort of classical curriculum as opposed to Burke they call it Industrial School [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina] where there was more crafts and that type of thing. And that is why my mother transferred me to Avery because she was placing me on a college preparatory track. Story_ID: 444272 Speaker 1: So this class we made headlines and I'll show you the book--two authors, professors at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], just released a publication on the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina] and its move towards diversity. And I was interviewed and quoted there. They had just did a panel on, on that at the College of Charleston because I ended up being the first black administrator there at the college and so it was a twist of fate that I was refused admissions there. And when the colleges were required to have an affirmative action program, the president at that time, when I was a high school counselor asked me would I come over to, to develop that program and to build that program. Speaker 2: Did they, what was the reason that they gave for not admitting you into the school, into the college? Speaker 1: Well, they didn't give a formal reason, but we all knew what the reason was. Speaker 2: They just, I mean did they send a letter that just said you're not admitted or do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I can't remember if we got a letter, but maybe we did, and it probably was very generic or something like that, but they, when I participated last week in this panel and the authors of the book was talking about their research they said that you know the college didn't even let women in. It was a period that they just blatantly refused. We don't have women, we don't admit women. So, I'm sure they didn't feel that it was, I know they didn't feel that it was anything illegal not to admit blacks. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, year did, did you graduate from high school [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina]? Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944]. Speaker 2: Okay '44 [1944]. Okay and so now you're getting ready to go off to college [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] is this going to be the first time you're away from home? Speaker 1: No, I used to go to New York [New York] every summer to be with my aunt, my, my father's [Joseph Simmons] sister. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And in New York my aunt made sure that I, you know, visited the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York] and I did all those kinds of things. And so I always enjoyed, you know, the summer being away. Speaker 2: Where did she live in New York, do you remember? Speaker 1: In Harlem [New York, New York], 112th Street, something like that. Story_ID: 444227 Speaker 1: So you graduated top of your class [at Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], tell me about that? Speaker 2: Salutatorian and that was something that was thrown around because the valedictorian she had a few points, it was not one point as far as grade average and so many convinced me that I was not given that because of my background as opposed to the person who became valedictorian, and I wouldn't accept it, you know, I, I just shrugged it off. It, it did not become a bone of contention with me, but it did ring with a whole lot of the students. I heard mostly from the students. And I heard also from the adults that the person, and we were very good friends the valedictorian, that that person became valedictorian because of who she was and-- Speaker 1: Who was she? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Esther Commodore [ph.]. She, her family was really from McClellanville [South Carolina], but she was related to the Holloways who were free blacks who owned businesses during slavery and so forth, real historic family and light skinned (laughter). So, they put it all together. Speaker 1: You know in talking about that, do you know about the brown paper bag test? Have you ever heard that phrase? Speaker 2: No, but I've heard about the--we have in this, this area the comb test. One of-- Speaker 1: The comb? Speaker 2: Yeah. One of the churches, St. Mark Church [St. Mark's Episcopal Church, Charleston, South Carolina], where most of the mulattos attended, they said that if you passed through there was a comb taking over the door and if that comb could not go straight through your hair, that you were not admitted. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: And you know that was not true but that was said (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course not (laughter), right. I was like, how do people come up with these things? Speaker 2: Episcopal church yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 444228 Speaker 1: Now you're off to school [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] and how did you decide what school because your pastor and your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My teacher's influence and my-- Speaker 1: --pastor and your, okay all right-- Speaker 2: And I, I got a scholarship. You know they didn't have these grants, loans, and so forth, and so I received a scholarship and it was financially feasible for me to go there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so tell me about your experience? Speaker 2: At, at school? Speaker 1: At school (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, huh my freshman year I roomed with a friend from Charleston [South Carolina]. They didn't want us to do that, but we happen to manipulate and we roomed together my freshman year. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Ruth Mahoney [ph.]. And that first year of course it was, well it was a challenge I'm sure. I think foreign language was my biggest challenge there, although I had taken foreign language in high school [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], it just was nothing like what was expected in college. Speaker 1: Did you take French? Speaker 2: Yeah French. And I was very active in whatever freshmen could be active in, I guess. In my sophomore year, I was given the student, I, I became student counselor, so the counselors lived together and that's where I met, when I met my long-time friend and we've been friends, very close friends, that picture there in Chicago [Illinois] since sophomore in college and we're very close. And-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Melba Lewis, Melba Thomas Lewis [ph.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: They live on 91st Street in Chicago. Story_ID: 444229 Speaker 1: Then there was the sorority thing. And this is where I strayed away from my pastor's wife, my, my pastor's daughter was Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and I became AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and so that was, I was, I was very, very active in the, in the sorority. Speaker 2: How, why did you decide to become AKA versus Delta I mean? Was there a reason (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My teachers. Speaker 2: Your teachers. Speaker 1: My favorite teacher. Speaker 2: Who was your favorite teacher? Speaker 1: Ms. Poinsette [Margaret Rutland Poinsette] and-- Speaker 2: What did she teach? Speaker 1: English. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And also the--I guess the students that I was with at college you know almost as a group, so you, that was basically it. And I held office in the, with the, with the sorority. Speaker 2: What office was that? Speaker 1: Tamiouchos, treasurer. Speaker 2: Okay. And what were some of the things that you did as a group, as, as a sorority? Speaker 1: We, I think we did some things at the hospital off campus. We did tutoring on campus. Those are some of the things--I think most of my activity, my, I became an activist I guess when we organized the first integrated student organization in Alabama. We connected with, what was the name of the school--now I can't think of the school--it's in Birmingham [Alabama], school in Birmingham and we planned meetings. We planned to meet and when this group met at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] that's the first experience we had with the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. Speaker 2: What happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They burned a cross on the campus. We had a dance the weekend that this group met, and we found that that there was a cross that was burning on campus at that time. Story_ID: 444230 Speaker 1: And then we met in Birmingham [Alabama]. That was when Wallace [Henry A. Wallace] was vice president. And Birmingham you know has always been the most segregated city in the United States. They had a law that said that blacks and whites could not meet together in the same room unless there was a barrier. So what we did was to string a rope across the room, and that was our barrier and then we made fun of it. Bull Connor was, he was chief of police here [Birmingham, Alabama]. And when the vice president came to attend this meeting he got roughed up a little bit by the patrolmen. It was very-- Speaker 2: Vice president of? Speaker 1: United States (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) States. He came to a meeting that-- Speaker 1: Yeah that we were-- Speaker 2: --that your organization--what was the name of the organization, do you remember? Speaker 1: You know I, it was the, I cannot remember the name of that organization. I ought to go back and research all this stuff, but-- Speaker 2: But who was the vice president at the time? Speaker 1: Wallace. Speaker 2: Oh Wallace, okay, and he came to the meeting. What was the purpose of his attending this meeting? Speaker 1: He was invited-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to the meeting. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I don't think he ever got there. I mean he got outside. We never did really have a meeting. It was more of a protest whatever 'cause we didn't ever settle down enough, you know, to have a meeting. But, then I, I, I started majoring, I changed my major to economics and sociology. And I had two professors, one was German and one was Rasmussen [ph.] and Pop, Poppidine [ph.] was the economics professors. And it was stated that they were Marxists--you know and it was felt that the campus [of Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], I don't know if it was said because we were active as far as desegregation or what, it was stated that the campus was under the influences of Marxists, okay. I had to do a thesis, and I did my thesis on the leader of the union for Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation] and it would be interesting for me to go back if I could find that. Speaker 2: And what did your paper say? Do, do you remember? Speaker 1: I can't remember. Speaker 2: Can't remember (laughter). Speaker 1: But, I remember it was focused on him and his leadership because in the South and then around Birmingham too, you know, not only was it a, a segregated society, but also workers had a hard time and the union for Bethlehem Steel was a strong union. But, it was not too far from my background remember with my, my parents [Whipper's mother and stepfather, Sarah Marie Washington Stroud and Edward Stroud] unionizing, so it was not that unusual let's say that I would go in that direction. Story_ID: 444231 Speaker 1: What else happened during your college days? Speaker 2: And I met my, my first husband then. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his name? Speaker 2: Stephen Edley. He was from Virginia, and he was working with the union. I think that's how we met. Speaker 1: How do you spell the last name? Speaker 2: E-D-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: And Stephen, S-T-E-V-E-N or? Speaker 2: S-T-E-P-H-E-N. Speaker 1: P-H, okay. So, tell me about your meeting of your first husband. Speaker 2: Well, it was exciting I guess (laughter). That was during my senior year, almost graduation I guess. Oh, but I know what I should say how we had fun because during most of the years I was in college we didn't have that many boys because of World War II [WWII]. You know and then they start coming back the junior year, so we would, they would take us to on weekends they would bus us to Anniston [Alabama] where there was a camp there and entertain the soldiers. They would have a dance and that type of stuff, so. That was a major part of our social life during my freshman and sophomore year going to Anniston. And we went to Tuskegee [Alabama] a couple of times. We were heavily chaperoned, and the thing that I make my grands laugh at was that when I, my transportation to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] is by train, and we had to change about three times before we got to Talladega. And when we arrive on campus, you know seating on the train was segregated. The black coach was right behind the engine with all of the smoke coming in. There was no air-conditioning. But, when we arrived on campus we had to have on gloves, hat, and everything. That's how we had to arrive on campus, so you can imagine going through all of that, changing and where did we first change in Atlanta [Georgia] and then we changed in Anniston. But seemingly we made about two changes before we could get to Talladega. Now we got on I-20 [Interstate 20] and we'd make it in about six hours, but when you hit campus you, the dean was there to inspect how you look. Speaker 1: Who was the president of the school at that time? Speaker 2: Gallagher [Buell G. Gallagher]. He was white, and then there was another white president. They didn't have a black president while I was there. Speaker 1: And do you remember the dean of girls? Speaker 2: What was her name? I cannot remember. But, I remember she was heavy-chested and we used to tease and call her too hung low, Miss Davis [ph.], whatever Davis (laughter). Story_ID: 444232 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were telling me about how you met your husband [Whipper's first husband, Stephen Edley]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. We met while I was, you know, interviewing the steel worker [from Bethlehem Steel Corporation] and so forth in Birmingham [Alabama]. He was from Virginia, and we married right after graduation [from Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. He decided to go back to school because he did not graduate. He also a writer and he went back to North Carolina, and I started working in the public schools as a teacher in Charleston [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Oh in Charleston. So he went, so y'all did not live together? Speaker 2: No, we, we were with my mother [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] when he went back to school. And his family was from Virginia, and oddly enough was a family of one generation of boys. That family died out. Speaker 1: Oh really. Speaker 2: And just every generation was one, one boy, and he was, he was what year, but anyway we had a son and when my son was about two years old he committed suicide, my first husband. Speaker 1: Oh awful. Speaker 2: That was of course a very traumatic experience for me. I was with, with, with my mother because he was still a student at, in North Carolina, North Carolina State [North Carolina State College of Agriculture and Engineering of the University of North Carolina; North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina]. Editor of the paper and you know as in most instances you think things are going well, but they're not going well. Speaker 1: And so, I just wanna put on record you graduated in 1948, okay, and your son, you said you had a son. What's your son's name? Speaker 2: Stanford Louis Edley [Stanford Edley]. Story_ID: 444233 Speaker 1: Now you're teaching in the public school okay and tell me what happens next? Speaker 2: Oh, well I started working at, at, on the island. Let me see what, what comes first. Speaker 1: You're teaching elementary school? Speaker 2: No high school. Speaker 1: High school, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm trying to think if, if I, I started at Bonds-Wilson [Bonds-Wilson High School, North Charleston, South Carolina]. I think yeah I started at Bonds-Wilson, and then I went to graduate school and then I came back after graduate school and I worked at a school on Johns Island [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Where did you go to graduate school? Speaker 2: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember what year you went? Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], '54 [1954] and '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Okay and while in graduate school, you said you went to the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any experiences there you wanna talk about during your master's [degree]? Speaker 2: Well, it was rough (laughter). I remember one teacher that I felt was really a segregationist, you know. Can't remember his name now, but it was, it was a very good experience as far as the educational environment and the challenges and so forth. And I was supposed to work on my doctorate, but as I said I just could not tolerate, I had my son [Stanford Edley] with me then, I lived with my mother's [Sarah Marie Washington Stroud] friend in Chicago [Illinois], and I just decided to go ahead and do a thesis and finish with the master's in political science and I came back home and went back into teaching (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there, did you find a difference in attending a college in the South than the North besides that one teacher? What was the differences? Speaker 2: Well, one thing, you know, I attended a university and that was on a graduate level, so and you know, you couldn't compare it with college where you were living in a dormitory (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, true. Speaker 2: --and that kind of community. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So, it would be difficult to compare the two-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --experiences, uh-huh. Story_ID: 444234 Speaker 1: So you return home and begin teaching-- Speaker 2: I taught on the island, where they called Johns Island [South Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Johns Island. Speaker 2: --at Haut Gap [Haut Gap School; Haut Gap Middle School, Johns Island, South Carolina]. That was an experience-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I started with the lower grades, seventh and eighth grade and the students were heavy into Gullah, and you can imagine my just leaving the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] being assigned to this school. I could not understand the children's language. There was one student, her name was Georgetta [ph.], I'll never, Georganna [ph.], never forget her because she was my interpreter. It took me better than a month to really understand the language, and that was a real experience, but it was an ideal school as far as the way it was structured, the principal as a leader, the teachers involved in planning and so forth. It was really an ideal situation. And, but that's the one thing I, two things I remember it was the best high school situation I'd ever been in as far as operation and so forth, and the second thing was really recognizing that Gullah was a language and having to, you know leaving a professional world as you would a graduate student and then coming, just was unexpected. And those are the two things I remember there. Story_ID: 444235 Speaker 1: Then I married long after that my second husband who was a minister, and when I became pregnant I, they wouldn't let pregnant teachers work. So, I had to go on leave and after going on leave since I was living in the area of Bonds-Wilson [Bonds-Wilson High School, North Charleston, South Carolina], I went back, I was called back to Bonds-Wilson, so I went to Bonds-Wilson, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and what was your second husband's name? Speaker 1: Benjamin James Whipper [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.], W-H-I-P-P-E-R. Speaker 2: And he was a local minister here in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Baptist. Speaker 2: --in what city? Speaker 1: Charleston [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: In Charleston, okay. Speaker 1: Charleston, North Charleston [South Carolina]. He had two churches. Story_ID: 444236 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the fact that you had not, I mean you have heard Gullah before, but there were no people that lived around you growing up that, you know, they called because to me I would think that Charleston [South Carolina], the people of Charleston, you know, they would call Geechee Gullah you know also, so how is it that the people around you were they Gullah Geechee at all? Speaker 2: We, all, everyone in this area including our last Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] it's a part of our pattern Gullah, but words, certain words, you know, like we would say (pronunciation) pulice instead of police, things like that or we'd say instead of put out the light, we ichee [ph.] out the light. 'Cause I remember going when I first went to college [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] they were waiting for kids from Charleston so they could tease us about those patterns of speech, so that's true, but when you are right in the heart of, of an island where there's not that much back and forth with the younger, say younger children then they have a complete conversational Gullah, not just one word or one phrase you know and they, they, they would speak fast, you know. (Speaking Gullah) you know to, you know that's what you were exposed to when I said that was my first experience really with Gullah not thinking about the, the, the influence on our speech pattern if you were born and reared let's say in the city where you'd have more experience and exposure to other people. But, those children on the island they were not exposed. You know they very seldom got over to the city, and so their language, now it's altogether different now. You can always hear a tinge of it, but when I first went out there those kids, you know, it was long past the time when the farmers were permitted to keep the kids out of school. Although school may open in August, the kids didn't come until after the crop was picked, you know. So, when I was at Haut Gap [Haut Gap School; Haut Gap Middle School, Johns Island, South Carolina] that's the kind of situation I found myself in-- Story_ID: 444237 Speaker 1: Have you ever experienced any blatant racism? Speaker 2: Blatant racism, yeah you know stores where you couldn't try on the hat, couldn't try on the shoes. And as I said, schools, I couldn't go to college at Charleston [College of Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Is there a personal experience, you said trying on a hat, I mean, have you had that experience actually gone into a store and you could not try on a hat, I mean what did the, the people say to you, I mean did you not know before you went in that you couldn't try it on and was it something new that you didn't know? Speaker 2: Well you sort of knew it, but you probably dared to try, you know. Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it's just the fact of life. It's like racism is like breathing air and drinking water. It was there, you know. Speaker 1: Did your parents ever talk to you about how to deal with the white citizens in Charleston [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: There was not that much contact on a everyday level, you know. As a child, there was no contact as such unless it was in the arena of business or something like that. That's what I would say. Story_ID: 444238 Speaker 1: So, you go back to Bonds-Wilson School [Bonds-Wilson High School, North Charleston, South Carolina] after you have your second child? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was, was that a daughter or son? Speaker 2: A daughter. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: D'Jaris and I'll spell that, D'J-A-R-I-S [D'Jaris Whipper-Lewis]. Speaker 1: Okay, who picked her name? Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: Did you make her name? Speaker 2: No my girlfriend and it was sort of unusual. At Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] a number of us ended up with a D'Jaris. It must have been three D'Jaris', but her godmother had no knowledge of this. I don't know where she got it from, and there was a D'Jaris, the, the first D'Jaris that I knew was the daughter of Mrs. Hinton who was the leader of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at Columbia [South Carolina]. She is deceased since then, but it was just sort of funny. And most of the time when a D'Jaris meets a D'Jaris they sort of connect it to Talladega to see if that's where it came from you know and so you know that's just a little something. Story_ID: 444239 Speaker 1: You're teaching on Johns Island [South Carolina] and give us the spelling of Haut Gap the name of the school there. Speaker 2: H-A-U-T, Gap, G-A-P [Haut Gap School; Haut Gap Middle School, Johns Island, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, so explain what happens. You return, you have your, you get married a second time and you have your daughter [D'Jaris Whipper-Lewis], tell me what happens next? Speaker 2: I was on maternity leave and contacted by the principal at Bonds-Wilson [Bonds-Wilson High School, North Charleston, South Carolina] inviting me to return to Bonds-Wilson, and it was just a few blocks from where I lived and although he was not my favorite principal (laughter), I thought it was an opportunity. You know it was one of those situations where he was very autocratic and respected me, but we just fought all the time you know. And he needed a music teacher and I had done a lot of music training. At Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] I took organ and I was in the club and then choir and so forth, and so I went back, I went to Bonds-Wilson. And I don't know what year now, but the state required high schools to have counselors and although I was not trained as a counselor, he selected me, he told me he wanted me to take that position. There again is where he had a lot of confidence in me, although we fought all the time, and I started commuting to South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] for training as a counselor. And so I guess I spent about two years doing that, and I think I, I may have started as a part-time counselor because there was another person, a counselor, at Bonds-Wilson. And it could be that I started part-time as a counselor, teacher and a counselor. Well, I got involved in as a counselor. I always fought the principal because I felt that he did not build enough college preparatory courses in the curriculum for the kids. And each time we would argue about it, he would promise me that when school opened again that we would have the higher math and the foreign language and the sciences there because the kids were very smart and I felt that they could go to any school or any college they wanted to. This was, of course, during the period when there was more of a fight for integration of schools and so forth. And so after I became a counselor, I got connected to A Better Chance [ABC]. That was, and is I think still exists, an organization of northeastern preparatory schools that were seeking to integrate their schools by setting up a program for summer, summer school for students that they identified in the tenth grade, preparing them for transition into the preparatory schools of the Northeast. So, I got connected to, with them and started working with some students that I identified including my two sons because I married into a family of six and so with that connection to A Better Chance that I introduced families to that program and quite a few young people entered that program and went to preparatory schools in the Northeast. Story_ID: 444240 Speaker 1: The principal he wasn't too keen on that kind of thing (laughter), but I thought it was an opportunity for the, for the child as well as for the institutions, for the preparatory schools. You know this was this breaking into, just doing your share to break in, break down the barriers of segregation and so forth. But, it also influenced me to push harder for the students who couldn't go away, so that we, they would have a better chance in their schools for, for preparatory, college preparatory subjects. So, one day I had enough of him and I walked off the job. I told him I was quitting, and I was going to organize a community protest. I could do it very easily because my husband [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] was a well-known pastor in the community. My husband was sixteen years older than I, so he was established as a pastor, moderator, and you know leadership in the religious community. And so this was not long after we had returned to school [Bonds-Wilson High School, North Charleston, South Carolina] and I found out that he did not place the Algebra II in the curriculum, did not do what he said he would do, and there were no books and nothing happened and so I told him I've had enough, I just was gonna let the community know just what was, how the children were being harmed and da, da, da. So, I walked off and I went to the supervisor and I told him I wasn't going back, I was quitting, but I wasn't quitting silently, that I was gonna organize a protest. And so he called the superintendent, it was black supervisor, then it was a white superintendent, so they got together and they made all these promises to me if I would just go back, that they would see to it that the curriculum is strengthened and so forth and so on. So, I went back (laughter) and tried to work with the kids the best I knew how, and those changes were made. Meanwhile, of course, we did not have a happier relationship. It was almost like you know you sickened to death when you step, when I'd step on that campus it would give me a stomach ache, you know just sort of anticipating that you're gonna have a fight. And a fight for what the kids ought to have. Story_ID: 444241 Speaker 1: Did the kids have new books in the, in the black schools? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think back. No they were, they were books that were--after a certain period of time they would change them, but they had some new books, but they were always books from other schools and so forth (unclear) yeah. Speaker 1: Did the Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] really make a difference at the time when you were teaching there, the decision, you know to integrate the schools? Did it really have any impact on the schools that you taught in? Speaker 2: No, they, they remained basically segregated. Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this, but when you went to school what about the, the books then, because you went to private school you, you paid for books, so you had new books. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: You know some things were so matter of fact that at the time you're not focused on it, you know, and then you start realizing you know later on what was going on, you know. But, at the time I can remember just trying to pick the best books that were available out of the stack, you know. But, one thing that really struck me when I returned from graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was at Haut Gap [Haut Gap School; Haut Gap Middle School, Johns Island, South Carolina] that the principal he would have to go to the superintendent's office for supplies and he came back and he told us with the toilet tissue, there were certain toilet tissues for whites and toilet, certain toilet tissues for blacks. We said now you know if that is not something. That was the honest to goodness truth. Speaker 1: Well what would be the difference (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, different quality (laughter). Isn't that something? Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh boy. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long did you work with the Better Chance program [A Better Chance]? Speaker 2: I worked for years and then I accepted a position at Burke High School [Charleston, South Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for a guidance counselor who had been there for years was at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], retired, and before she retired she told the principal to, in order to continue the work she'd been doing there (laughter) she wanted me there, and she had enough influence to convince him and both of them asked would I come over and direct the guidance department at Burke. Speaker 1: Do you remember what year it was? Speaker 2: It had to be like '64 [1964] or '5 [1965]. Story_ID: 444242 Speaker 1: Now being that you're such an activist, we're into the '60s [1960s] now, tell me have, were you involved in any civil rights actions, marches, protests, become a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] anything like that? Speaker 2: The hospital strike that was, I marched in the hospital strike. Speaker 1: Which hospital? Speaker 2: The Medical University of South Carolina [Charleston, South Carolina]. That was a major, it you know got national coverage with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] and all, it was a real thing there. I was in those marches, but I did not offer leadership then. I was, when I finished Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] that was the year that the Democratic primary was open to blacks and I came home walking the streets and registering voters and I was very active in political organizations. Speaker 1: Such as? Speaker 2: The Democratic Party. Speaker 1: Democratic Party, okay. Speaker 2: Basically the Democratic Party. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember that in the city we had wards and where I was living the Ward 7 was the first ward to turn, the leadership became black. We worked, we pushed for that. I was elected vice chair of the Democratic Party one year, I don't know what year, but I worked politically through the, through the party and after the strike I was placed on the community relations committee where people were, we tried to get together community leaders, black and white, trying to improve the situation in the City of Charleston [South Carolina]. What else. I remember that the, the student government at Burke [Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina] they were, I can't remember what conditions that they were protesting the school and I was counselor then and we, we worked with them to have an orderly protest, so they marched. I can't remember what was the, the basic issue then or not at that time. I don't know whether it was a new gym or whatever. Most of what I did I would say was in the education, in the area of education breaking down barriers and so forth and of course in the community making the, the Democratic Party more viable. Speaker 1: When Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, you, were you in a classroom and had to talk to children about the assassination or were you somewhere else? Speaker 2: No, I was in the classroom. I can almost remember that. I was--it seems like we were in an assembly or something when the news came that he was killed and it was you know just an awful day. I remember that quite vividly. Speaker 1: What about the March on Washington, do you remember the march? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did not, I did not go away then. I was in, something was taking place. I was always involved with children. I don't know if it was the summer program I was conducting or what, but we were there to see the folks off in the train, buses, and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me what were your thoughts when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: Well, guess the thing was again, you know, and it's tro- very troubling and you're wondering where, where do we go from here you know. Story_ID: 444243 Speaker 1: You participated in tutorial program for black children in Charleston County [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yeah during Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], I think I was then at Burke [Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: During the War on Poverty when, what, what they call equal opportunity commissions or something under the War on Poverty the county was granted money to establish commissions for programs for economic and educational opportunity and Charleston County established the OEO, I think you call it, Office of Economic Opportunity, and they had the various programs. They established Head Start programs. Our church in the city, my husband's [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] church, was one of the first to have a Head Start program. Speaker 1: What church was this? Speaker 2: St. Matthew-- Speaker 1: Matthew okay. Speaker 2: --Baptist Church [St. Matthew Baptist Church, North Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to all of the community meetings and so forth to find out. At least I was keeping up with the program as it was developing through [U.S.] Congress and so I was well aware of what, what purposes it could serve and so forth and I was focusing on what could be done as far as education was concerned. And so when they established the OEO office I knew the people that were on the commission and even the people who were staffing and together, besides the Head Start program that they started and one was at my church, we wrote a proposal for a tutorial program. I was still impressed by the ABC program [A Better Chance] and what they did in the summer and things like that, so we established what we called Operation Catch-Up, which was sort of the beginning of the Upward Bound idea of working with students and enrichment program in the summer and then tutoring them during the school year. And so we established Operation Catch-Up that worked in the county, worked throughout the county. It was most, in the summer we had a summer program, I think the first summer program was at my church, St. Matthew. Again, I got the church involved all these things, and then the next year we were at the Catholic school and I think one year we were at Burke one summer. And we employed graduate students from the northeastern universities, became faculty, and that created a lot of stir because they lived in the homes of the students, and there was some negative new, news stories about that, you know these white-- Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: --graduate students living in black homes, and then the curriculum, 'Lord of the Flies' [William Golding], and all of that stuff coming down with all that, that type of curriculum. So, we got some negatives on that score, and I directed that project and gave it up, I forgot when. I think I probably gave it up when I moved to the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina]. But, that program really identified a lot of students and assisted them into college being ready to go into just any school that they wanted to go into. It was a very enriching experience for them, and we expanded it throughout the county and we had stations for tu, tutoring and homework throughout the county of, in the city and in the various areas of the county. Story_ID: 444244 Speaker 1: So, then you go to work as-well now, this is around 1972. You were the director of the human relations at the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina], right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about that? Who (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, the pre, the College of Charleston had really gone through some changes from municipal to private to state ownership and they appointed as president, Theodore S. Stern who was a retired captain of the Naval Supply Center in Charleston [South Carolina], and my husband [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] was a working pastor. He worked at the Naval Supply Center. He became the EO, one of the EOO officers [equal opportunity officer] at the supply center under President Stern, when President Stern was captain there and upon retirement and being appointed to the College of Charleston, President Stern when the colleges were required to set up these programs and I think it was also as a result of a suit that sixteen southern colleges were in, under scrutiny and under requirements to desegregate and so forth and so on. Well anyway I was director of guidance at Burke [Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina] when I got the call from President Stern asking me would I come over and help develop that program. And I accepted it, and I can remember entering the old auditorium that had become more of a reception area and John C. Calhoun whose picture was on the wall and I took pleasure in sticking my tongue out at him because you know and say, "Well I'm here." You know I used to pass through that campus going from Avery [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], home and you know just look over the wall, I couldn't get in and so that was an experience. I thought it was notable as far as my personal experience with that college. Since President Stern was military and most of this started in the [U.S] military through presidential order that the military had to desegregate. He was quite knowledgeable and hands on with that, and so I learned a lot from him as we developed our program and the colleges program was one of the first to be accepted as a viable, acceptable program. That was a very valuable rich experience. I guess I can say that all of the experiences that I've had and whether it's negative of positive it was one of growth. It, it contributed to my being who I am as an individual and that was really a challenge and in order to you know, College of Charleston is one of the earliest colleges in the United States. It was back I think the 17-something, and trying to make a difference in that kind of environment was a challenge, but the president was so committed, so I was in a better spot than many of my colleges at other schools because most of the schools are doing it because they had to. At the college, the president was doing it because he felt that you must, it was something that had to be done, so it made my job easier as far as having the support. I didn't have to fight the president. I didn't have to do a lot of convincing him to take certain steps as my colleagues had to. You know we would meet and we'd exchange what was happening, and the big job, the challenge was sensitizing the faculty and staff to equal opportunity, equal access and so forth and we did that through seminars and training and so forth. So, it was a step by step process. No miracles happened, it was slow (laughter), one here and one there or whatever. Story_ID: 444245 Speaker 1: So now you're visited by Ms. Childs [Margaretta Pringle Childs] who wants to recruit, recruit you to help save the Avery Normal school [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about that. Speaker 2: You know Ms. Childs' family, she came from what you could really call an aristocratic family, but abolitionist, activists. She would have teas and luncheon, interactional when people didn't even think that blacks and whites could sit down together. So, that was the type of person she was. And-- Speaker 1: She was white? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, the Childs family goes way back in history. And she just, she was at the college [College of Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina] as an archivist, and she came. I had just accepted being president of my sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and our sorority was very active. We were into tutoring. We were into juvenile justice programs. We were into a whole lot of stuff, and she came and I told her, I said, I said, "Well you know I am, I just got to be president of the sorority," and so she said, "Sorority?" Because white sororities, you know, they were just partying kinds of things. Story_ID: 444246 Speaker 1: So, you were telling me Ms. Childs [Margaretta Pringle Childs] was like your fraternity, I mean sorority. Speaker 2: And she said, "Sorority?" Speaker 1: Which sorority is this you're talking about? Speaker 2: AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so I chuckled because you know she, as far as she's concerned sororities party, you know, but black fraternal groups are always into projects and doing things and service. They're really service groups, you know. Well anyway she told me that she felt that, she heard that they were going to make a condominium out of that building. You know the history of the building was they closed Avery [Avery Normal Institute; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina] when the American Missionary Association withdrew its support. It, Avery became a public school and then you had the true public schools, Burke [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina] and Avery on the peninsula and finally and it was my sister's [Gertrude Simmons Huger] class was probably the last class at, at Avery, all students were transferred to Burke. We had one school. And so the building they said the trans- it was said that the transfer was done because the building could not meet fire inspection and so forth, but soon after a businessman, Palmer [Charles E. Palmer], purchased the building and set up a proprietary business school there in that building. So Avery alum always felt that they were taken advantage of, you know, flimflam, you know, whatever. So there have been efforts to try to do something about that, and Ms., Dr. Childs, came and told me that they were gonna change that building to a condo and that would be sad because of the history of the institute and how much, it had influenced society through the leadership of its graduates and she gave me the whole spiel that I already knew, and she said something needs to be done to stop it and somehow or another she identified that I was the one to do it. I don't know how, why, but she came and challenged me to do that. And in order to, I think get her out of my office, I said, "Okay." So, here I go again and there were some faculty members that I was close to and staff. I think they were already thinking, these people were already thinking in some direction about African American history because it's sort of during the period when black history became you know, in every corner store there was something about black history and it was just the thing, it was the afro and the whatever and that was the period we were going through. So, I was able to meet with staff, some people on the staff and faculty that I felt would be interested in trying to establish an organization that would work towards acquiring that building and using it for the purpose related to its original purpose. Well, we ended up, we did get together. We called some community people together, former Avery-ites and others. We were trying not to make it exclusive, an alumni association because our vision was bigger than that and we had a difficult time convincing some people that, that was not what we were doing. Story_ID: 444247 Speaker 1: I was a member of Links [The Links, Incorporated], and I was able to convince them of this being a worthy project and they ought to make the call to the community to get that community involvement, which they did, and so we were able to organize with faculty staff of the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina], alums, and other interested community people that met and organized the Avery Institute for Afro-American History and Culture [Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina]. And working on the president's [Theodore S. Stern] staff of course and I guess this is what Margaretta Childs [Margaretta Pringle Childs], so I was in a position to, you know I got to have meetings. I had places to have meetings and so forth and so on, and with the help of some of the staff, grants writer we wrote a grant to the humanities, National Humanities [National Endowment for the Humanities] to do a feasibility study and that's how we got started and that's how we developed the goals of the Avery Institute in which direction we would go into. As a result of that feasibility study, we pulled in a Dr. Johnson [Clifton H. Johnson] who was at the, what's the archives in New Orleans [Amistad Research Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: It was at Xavier [sic. Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] now--and from the, the archives, the archives at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] they were brought in, in discussing the community and the setup and as a part of that grant that the National Humanities gave us, so that we could do a feasibility study to give us some direction in what, in the way we should go. And so we ended up with the conclusion that the Avery Institute would establish, this organization would try to acquire that property and then use it for archival purposes. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was achieved? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and it was chartered in 1980. Story_ID: 444248 Speaker 1: Now I should say something about it being achieved (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because in the back of my mind I always wanted to be in politics, but since the college was a state institution we decided instead of having a separate organization, private organization to do this, why not make it a part of the College of Charleston [Charleston, South Carolina] so that it would have state support and we would not have to depend on fish fries and chicken dinners because what we envisioned needed more than that, that kind of money. And so we had to go about convincing the college that this was something that would enhance whatever they were doing, convincing the governor, the budget and control booth, so when you said achieve I mean that was work, that was a lot of lobbying, a lot of contacting. It was, you know, and see I had just retired from my job (laughter). I convinced the college to give us a room, and so it was from there that the Avery Institute [Avery Institute for Afro-American History and Culture; Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina] in order to convince the college of the, the, the worth of the project, we did exhibits, we did a whole lot of stuff as an institute to build up the impression that this was something that needed to be more formalized and so forth and so on. Fortunately, the times were right because Governor Riley [Richard W. Riley] was governor of the state, and you know he ended up being secretary of education, so he was into education. And because of that and then his assistant for education was black and I knew him from way back, so it all fit in together and all we had to do is be very convincing about our argument. And meanwhile the state, Palmer [Charles E. Palmer], or somehow or another turned over the building to the state, so everything was just sort of in place to sort of move the way we did for establishing the research center. Speaker 2: So, the center is museum and archive? Speaker 1: It's really archives-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but, of course, they do exhibits and they will accept material things, but mostly the emphasis is on documents and that type of thing. Story_ID: 444249 Speaker 1: Anything else before we go into your political career? Speaker 2: That led me to my political career. I had to do so much lobbying and collaborating (laughter). I said well maybe I'll go back to my first love that I thought that I wanted to be when I was at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] I wanted to be a congresswoman. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --when, when are you first elected to office? Speaker 2: In '86 [1986], in state office, but meanwhile during that period I, I was convinced to run for the constituent school board, right, that was my first (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yes that was the first. Speaker 2: Yeah and there was a problem between the constituent school board and the full board as to whose responsibility it was to do certain things because the set up in Charleston [South Carolina] was unique to Charleston. They were trying to overcome segregation, but yet pull all of the various little boards together because it was not financially feasible, you know, they had to come together instead of having these small boards and stuff. So, they came up with a plan that provided for constituent boards and then the big boards, so there was always a fight between what the constituent board should do and could do as, so that was the interesting battle there and that was my political first elected office. I was--somebody came to me and said, "Hey you know you ought to run and we'll do the petition, we'll do so and so and so and if you're--." I said, "Okay," you know, I still haven't learned how to say no, and so that's how I got on the constituent board. And we did have that fight always about who was to hire a teacher, who was the last one that hired a teacher and blah, blah, blah, and they, that fight is still going on. Story_ID: 444250 Speaker 1: So what happens next? Speaker 2: The next thing was that I thought I was living in the district that, where a vacancy occurred. We'd gone to single member districts, okay, the state, and the representative for District 109 had been indicted with some charges, federal charges, and was it federal or state charges, that's Representative Woods [Robert Roosevelt Woods]. He had become very powerful, chaired the Ways and Means Committee [House Ways and Means Committee] in the state, as with blacks we always, always say when you get to have certain power you better watch out because somebody is waiting to get you on maybe some charge you never even thought about. He was a minister and had, I think he had a Head Start, if not a Head Start he had some federal program and so they threw all of that into whatever they charged him with. So, the district became vacant and I thought that I lived, I did not look at the boundaries, I was about three blocks outside of when I decided that I was gonna run with my husband's permission and enthusiasm, family, everybody yeah go for it. So, I had to move into the district. We built that house, and I was a few blocks outside of the district. And I thought it would be easy for me to find a house in the district. Couldn't find a house in the city, that's how I got in Mount Pleasant [South Carolina] because all my life I've been in the city, except no when we first got married I was in North Charleston [South Carolina]. So, I had to look at the laws as to when you had to be in the district legally and so forth, and we rented after my first announcement and I made sure that, and it was very interesting because some of the first questions people would ask, "What a minister's wife doing running for a political office?" And I said, "What a minister doing," 'cause we had many ministers--South Carolina is one of those states that you don't really get paid to be a legislator, you know you get a stipend. And that of course know, you know holds back a lot of people from running for political office because you gotta work, but pastors were more flexible, so you would find everyday to have a lot of pastors and I said, "Well if the pastor can run for political office I sho' don't see why his wife can't." My husband [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] had no problems with it at all, and so we moved into the district. We finally found a house and moved into the district; I've downsized since then. I was very interesting, very interesting. I had to fight one of the person who also offered was a male who was a long-time activist, at least he was among those that had desegregated the golf club. He was supported by most of the Democratic leaders like Hollings [Ernest Hollings], you know and so folks said, "You sure are crazy that you're gonna run against," what they call him Big John. He was the, the key person in all of the elections and so forth and so on. And so I told them I thought I could be, beat him because at the level that I had worked, you know with that Operation Catch-Up, I've been all in the county, I knew parents all over the county and Big John was just in political environment more so, and so that was my first battle and I won that in the primary. Story_ID: 444251 Speaker 1: --So, that made you Charleston's [Charleston, South Carolina] first African American woman legislator? Speaker 2: On the state level. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you stayed there for how long (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years. And what were some of the committees you served on? Speaker 2: Well, in the state, the speaker always placed new people and black people on mu- Municipal Military, Municipal Medical Committee [House Medical, Military, Public and Municipal Affairs Committee], so I spent my days there (laughter) where most of the other blacks landed. Maybe if you were an attorney you'd get on you know anther committee. And I served on the Rules Committee [House Rules Committee]. I finally ended up on the Labor and Commerce Committee, Labor Insurance and Commerce Committee [House Labor, Commerce and Industry Committee] which was sort of next to Ways and Means [House Ways and Means Committee] as far as being a powerful committee. But, for the State of South Carolina I called it the chamber of commerce because the chamber of commerce had more influence on that committee than any committee. And what I said, Rules Committee. Oh, some of the others I can't remember. Story_ID: 444252 Speaker 1: And so you were there for ten years and you were also on the advisory board of the college [College of Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina] to appoint a president or something to that effect. Speaker 2: During that time, I was on the Human Affairs Commission [South Carolina Human Affairs Commission]. I was appointed to that. They no longer, they said conflict of interest, so you cannot serve on those commit, commission, but I served on that commission when Clyburn, Congressman Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn], was director of the Human Affairs Commission. And the interesting thing about Congressman Clyburn we go way back together when I was a counselor and he was a school teacher at the other high school, C.A. Brown [Charles A. Brown High School, Charleston, South Carolina], and we would do testing, there was a whole lot of testing. I think that's when I first met the congressman. Then he moved to the farm commission, and the farm commission worked with high schools in getting students to college. Somehow or another the farm commission had a connection with Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and a lot of students were sent to Wilberforce. So, I started working with Jim Clyburn when he was director of the farm commission working with getting students into college, and then when I served in the legislature I worked with the Human Affairs Commission of the state when he was director, and we are now working on establishing an international African American museum in Charleston [South Carolina], the City of Charleston along with the mayor. Story_ID: 444253 Speaker 1: Well there were always, all, always just few women anyway. But one of the issues I ran into that was ongoing every session was the marital rape bill making forced sexual activity by a husband a form of rape, and I ended up in that fight and as the main author that year, work had been done years before I believe Senator Fielding [HistoryMaker Herbert U. Fielding], and you probably need to put him on your list of people to be interviewed, had started it, but it seemingly was the year for it to go through and so we did get that through. Also there was the fight about affirmative action and health care and foster children, adopted children, and so forth always an issue in a very conservative state. You would think that South Carolina is one of the richest states in the nation, but so limited in support of those things that made a difference in the quality of life. Now with Governor Riley [Richard W. Riley] they moved more into education. They've been doing better in education and more accountable and more interest in education but when it comes to other kind of issues we've, we still have a long way to go. And so that has always been my struggle with others in the--and an interesting thing is they organized a women's caucus while I was there, but they were just like the men. I mean that they didn't have any, you know real issues. They didn't get their teeth into it other than meeting together and so forth. I wasn't very active when I found out that they were about not very much. Story_ID: 444254 Speaker 1: Well was there some controversy in the House [South Carolina House of Representatives] in '94 [1994] with the Black Caucus [South Carolina Legislative Black Caucus]? Speaker 2: Lost trust was that '94 [1994]? Speaker 1: I'm not sure, but I know it was some-- Speaker 2: Where a lot of caucus members got caught up in this selling their vote and some served time. Speaker 1: Well, why don't you tell us about that? Speaker 2: Lost trust, a group of legislatures were accused of selling their vote for, why would I forget that, in return for, oh might have been the lottery. I got it written down somewhere. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: But, some were indicted, some pled guilty, and some were exonerated. And through the years, a little bit more light was shown on that whole activity because there was always a question (background noise) of-- Story_ID: 444255 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were continuing to tell us about the lost trust issue (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that was, that was, that was a sad note there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, whenever reapportionment comes up, there's always a fight because those people who are seated always fight to stay in the district to keep the lines drawn, so they'll be in their district. And the basic fight with the Black Caucus [South Carolina Legislative Black Caucus] and the Democratics is that most of the Black Caucus members are Democrats. But with the white Democrats, they would not maintain their seat unless they had a reasonable number of blacks within their district, so the issue is should we have more black representatives, which would decrease the white Democrats or should we have white Democrats and less black representatives. So, during reapportionment that's really the heart of the struggle there and in redrawing those districts lines everybody trying to protect their territory and of course the, the Democrats, the white Democrats they are the ones that suffer as the blacks push to have more black seats. But, then it became when we were reorganizing, I don't know what year this was, the speaker of the house always appoints the main persons and he was a Democrat and was intent on bel- his belief that the state legislature was not like [U.S.] Congress, that we could work, Republicans and Democrats could work together and not be so partisan and, and meeting the needs of the chur- the, the state. And so he decided that he would appoint a Republican as pro tempore, he would support a Republican, and we thought that was a shame. We said now these Republicans are not about to do no compromising, and he is behind the times if he feels that the state is not gonna be like the nation as far as the republicans wanting to take over. I spoke to him confidentially because it had started in Charleston [South Carolina] I noticed where the Republicans were moving in and, and so many of the Democrats were becoming Republicans, you know. They may have been Republicans in spirit all the time, they just came out the closet. And I spoke to him about it, and he was saying no, no, no, you're wrong, so we talked among ourselves and we met and everything and I said somebody needs to oppose that appointment. Nobody would. I had no idea of winning, but you just had to make a statement. I'm, I'm good at making statements, although I might not win. And so I ran for pro tempore, okay, knowing I would not win, but the point I was making was this was no time to think that you can compromise. I did not win, but in a few years he was ousted. He lost to the person that he appointed and supported for pro tempore. I didn't go and say I told you so, but it was a good example of I told you so. He really as, as experienced as he was in politics it did not help him because I was certainly not of his experience, but I, I was reading the signs, and that was the beginning of the Republican takeover. Story_ID: 444256 Speaker 1: You're there [South Carolina House of Representatives] for ten years and then you retire and tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess I should say not retired. I choose not to run again. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah because my husband's [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.], because of his illness he was seemingly not getting better, and I felt that I needed to be home and-- Speaker 1: What type of illness? We didn't talk about that. Speaker 2: Complications from diabetes. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and of course you know I would be away, our session was from January to about June, then I'd be home, be away three days a week and even with care, but I felt that you know I should be the main caregiver and so he didn't ask me to, but I made a decision and told them why I was not gonna run again after serving. I was going to really get out after eight years, but my colleague, Juanita White [Juanita Mitchell White], she had been there four years beyond me and she said well she was thinking about leaving and would I just stay (laughter), and we would leave the same time. They used to say we were clones, Juanita and I, at least to the point that they would call me Juanita when they see me and they'd call her Lucille [HistoryMaker Lucille Whipper]. That was just how much we were on the same page. And so after putting in ten years I decided not to run again, I'd rather be home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was a good decision because that was in '96 [1996]; my husband passed in '98 [1998] and so you know I was very happy that I did that, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, you, you had another tragic death that we didn't talk about with your son [Stanford Edley]. Speaker 2: Yeah my son. He got involved in the drug scene, and he was an auditor in Florida, he you know very smart and so forth, but it was during the time when this is what was going on and so we struggled and he had an OD [overdose] death. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Here again it was in something like '80 [1980], 1980, around the '80s [1980s] or something like that. Story_ID: 444257 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to talk about that we did not talk about that we might have missed? You said something about the ABC program [A Better Chance]. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, no I think I got to that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in a number of students that went into that program from this area-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the fact that we were able to, that program influenced what we did with, with Operation Catch-Up and all kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well because of your service in the House [South Carolina House of Representatives], a, what honor was bestowed upon you? Speaker 2: Oh, last year the, my local representative, the young man that took my seat, 109 [District 109], I sort of groomed him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's his name? Speaker 2: David Mack [David J. Mack, III]. Of course that was sort of funny how he got into politics because he was, he had a talk show on one of the black radio shows, and he was one of the real critics of the Legislative Black Caucus [South Carolina Legislative Black Caucus] and critic of everything. And so I called him one day and I said, "David," I knew his parents. I worked with his parents, and they are all in education. I said, "David you wanna put your action where you mouth is at," and I told him I said, "I think you might have an opportunity and I'll support you if you would accept being a candidate for this seat that I'm gonna give up." Well, he was flabbergasted, never thought out it and so forth. I said, "Talk to your wife about it, talk to your family. But, I think that gift for gab that you have can be put to some better use (laughter), and you need to experience some of the things that you were talking about," so that's how he ran and of course I supported him and he had a hard fight, but you know he was able to acquire all of my workers and so forth and so, so he won. And it was through his initiate with the legislature and so forth that the, while the bridge was being built-- Speaker 1: Which bridge? Speaker 2: Arthur Ravenel Bridge [Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge] was being built that a resolution was passed that, that a highway connecting would be named in my honor [Lucille S. Whipper Interchange] and then after the bridge was built they, they did, they did do that. Speaker 1: What, the bridge connects-- Speaker 2: Well it connects what we call east of the Cooper [Cooper River], Mount Pleasant [South Carolina], McClellanville [South Carolina] with the city. My district connected east of the Cooper because when I offered for the district I, I really sort of thought it was concentrated in Charleston [South Carolina], and it did run a little more on the peninsula than over here. But, when I found out that the district at that time ran all the way to the Georgetown [South Carolina] border, so there was a good portion of it that was east of the Cooper, and my district connected east of the Cooper with the peninsula area, which even included my church, St. Matthew Baptist Church [North Charleston, South Carolina]. And so I guess with that as a background, it became the, the place maybe that I would be most remembered connecting these two areas. Story_ID: 444258 Speaker 1: I know you have a lot of organizations that you belong to and, but tell me about any organizations that are really dear to you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my favorite right now that I'm involved into--as a member of Links [The Links, Incorporated], I was able after my husband's [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] death to visit the, South Africa, and Links' international program was to establish schools in South Africa and so they planned a tour to those schools that they, so I participated in that. I was so affected by that, that trip to South Africa, not Johannesburg [South Africa], Durban [South Africa], Cape Town [South Africa], they just like being at home. Cape Town remind me of Charleston [South Carolina], but when you went out into the village, the villages where the schools were and when we visited the island [Robben Island, South Africa] where Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was imprisoned, you come back not with the feeling of legacy as far as your inheritance, but because of the struggle. That's how we connected to South Africa because of the struggle. But, to go in the village where there's no electricity, no running water it was unbelievable that people live that way today, and then South Africa is a developed country. It's not an underdeveloped country, but everything is centered on the city. And the whites there, you got the true meaning of no middle class. You're either upper class or you were lower class. And then AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] being rampant, the way women were treated. They didn't even frown against rape. They were just sort of making that a real criminal activity, rape, and the struggles of the children who were left without parents. So, I came back, went back to Links, I went to Links again for, I mean for Avery [Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], went back to Links and told them what my heart felt and that I would like for them to call together, make a call for organizations that would be interested in doing something in Africa. We always prided ourselves in being African American, and we speak about it more than what we do about it and they gladly accepted that project. And so the people I knew and through Links they ga- gave us the push off, and we established Low Country Aid to Africa, a collaboration of individuals churches, religious institutions, fraternal groups interested in assisting the various communities in Africa and its struggle against AIDS and especially families impacted by AIDS, and we got together a good group. And so that we organized, we connect ourselves instead of incorporating Low Country Aid to Africa as an arm of the Palmetto Project [Charleston, South Carolina], which is a non-profit organization, and the Palmetto Project acts as our fiscal agent. The director of that project serves with Low Country Aid to Africa. And we have one fund raiser a year and we assessed, assessed the various organizations working in Africa because we said we weren't gonna come up with an organization, we weren't going over there, we were going to research organizations working in Africa with the same goals that we have to aid families impacted by AIDS, and we just raised money and give it to them to carry on their program. And I think we've been functioning about three years, and the first year with the help of Links and a big grant we gave twenty thousand dollars to a non-profit organization working in Cape Town and for the last two years we supported a hospital in Malawi. It was organized by the Foreign Mission Board of the Baptist for, as a maternity hospital, but because of the pandemic, AIDS pandemic, they have had to extend. So, we gave them $8,500 dollars last year and $8,500 the year before. We don't, we are not active all year. We start our activities around, well we start about December and we have the fundraiser in March and whatever we do we give. In addition, we do have a committee that seeks to develop consciousness and awareness around people in the low country about Africa and the needs of Africa, so we put up a booth at various festivals and so forth. We are attempting to develop interest groups in high school and college level, and so that is one of my real, one of the groups that I gave the initiative to. Story_ID: 444259 Speaker 1: Meanwhile, I accepted the presidency of the state women's Baptist convention. With Baptists, we are very traditional, so that was not an election fight. You just stay in office and you just keep moving out. So, I started off at my, I call it my old age, as third vice president and it's a five-year tenure, so that I became second vice president, and I became first vice president and when I looked, and I should be retiring, I ended up being president. Well, it is an all-consuming task (laughter), strictly volunteer as one of my activities (laughter). And that is taking up most of my time. Supposed to be a five-year tenure, I, I complete three years, and one project that I am most proud of for that organization is past, immediate past president wanted to write a history of the organization. It was found in 1888. And they were just going to write down what they remembered, but because of my association with Avery [Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina], I knew the value of what this was all about. So, I volunteered to be project director for this history project, although they had a historical commission, but I knew they would just have a glamorized look at what the women had done, so I said, "No let's get a documented history." And I spoke to the director of Avery, and we wrote a grant to the state humanities for a grant that would help us gather original documentation and do oral interviews and so forth. So, we got the support of the state humanities to begin that project, and we had our ups and downs, but we released two weeks ago this publication, 'Born to Serve: The History of the Woman's Baptist Educational and Missionary Convention of South Carolina' [sic. 'Born to Serve: A History of the Woman's Baptist Educational and Missionary Convention of South Carolina,' W. Marvin Dulaney]. Now remember the significance of this because this organization was founded when there was no Urban League [National Urban League], no NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], none of the community organizations that we are so familiar with today. So, things that happened happen through the church, and so we're very proud of this (laughter). So, I don't know about a five-year tenure when I'm completing three (laughter). Story_ID: 444260 Speaker 1: --When you look back over your life is there just one thing that stands out the most? Speaker 2: The Avery Research Center [Avery Research Center for African American History and Culture, Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because they said it couldn't happen. They said it couldn't be done, and I am really proud of that because it really makes a difference. It has made a difference. You know when we started out our museum one of the oldest museum in the nation it was no emphasis on African American artifacts and so forth. The Gibbes art museum [Gibbes Museum of Art, Charleston, South Carolina], but we pulled together as the institute. We pulled together all these groups and say hey you know you need to be in on this. We need to make African American history a part of our history. That's how I sold it to the governor. I said we don't wanna, what we're doing is to make African American history a part of history of the state, and we have pulled together those organizations, we have influenced what they do. The Gibbes art gallery may have had three pieces by blacks; they're acquiring more. The museum and its exhibits, you know, it, the impact has been terrific and so besides just establishing that research center and what it has acquired and the things it's doing, but the impact on other institutions I feel has been great, and I think of that as one of the things that I'm most proud of (simultaneous). Story_ID: 444261 Speaker 1: Your inspirational stories will be in the archives for many generations to, to listen to and to watch, what would be a message that you would like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: I guess not to just be a critic, but if something needs to be done you're the one to do it. Don't look for somebody else to do it. You have to do whatever you can do to move it on, and I, I think if I can convince people of you know becoming involved at whatever level they can be involved in, you know. You may not always be a leader, but you can always catch on to whatever that activity is that relates to something of great interest to you and especially if it is a challenge, that it's nobody else to do it. And I remember a story from Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] that he tells all the time that he was riding along the road with his father [Enos Clyburn] and a branch had fallen across the road and he told his father somebody ought to move that. So, his father turned to him and said, "You move it," you know, and that would be my message. Speaker 1: All right. Is there anything that you, else that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: No, I'm drained (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Well I want to thank you so much for taking the time to do this interview because it has been most inspirational and it's such a necessity that we have our African American achievers give us their, their information for the future generations. So, I wanna thank you from The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Well thank you for asking me (laughter) yeah. Story_ID: 444262 Speaker 1: Interchange from this view it's at the cor, corner of Cumming Street and the I-26 [Interstate 26] and we're looking towards northwest or east depending on where you want to exit, but it is, the interchange is a number of entrances and exits that will lead onto the new Arthur Ravenel Bridge [Arthur Ravenal Jr. Bridge], take you west of Charleston [South Carolina], northwest. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay go ahead and tell us who's in this. Speaker 1: Okay, I am seated there at a community project that was funded by a grant from the establishment of a fund in my husband's [Benjamin Whipper, Sr.] name with the Coastal Community organization [Coastal Community Foundation, Charleston, South Carolina], and I established a found a, a grant that would donate money to various organizations. It's called a donor funding, and I can select the organization. That's a community organization that works with mothers in particular helping them to acquire certain skills that would enable them to be better prepared for job opportunities. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's a function where some of the family was gathered. The left is my daughter-in-law, Seth's wife [Carrie Fulse Whipper]. The next person is Rosmond [Rosmond Whipper Hawkins], my second oldest daughter, step-daughter for those who wanna be specific, and there is Seth [J. Seth Whipper] in the background. The two of us served together in the House of Representatives [South Carolina House of Representatives]. He's a representative, and in front of him that's me. Behind me is Cheryl [Cheryl Whipper Hamilton], who is a, who's an attorney, and on the right of me is Debra [ph.], my oldest grandson, and her friend and then the oldest daughter, Ogretta Hawkins [Ogretta Whipper Hawkins]. Speaker 2: That's my husband and I at, it might have been his, what twenty-fifth anniversary at the church. It may have been in 1980 something. Speaker 1: President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and his wife held Christmas parties for two years during his administration, and that we were invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to the Christmas party, and my son Seth, J. Seth Whipper, who was is now serving in the legislature, accompanied me and that was the formal picture we took with the President and Ms. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay this photo here, tell me about that. Speaker 1: That was my campaign photo. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And can you move your right arm. Can you take it out? Okay. This is your campaign poster? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 1: The middle picture, that picture is of a group session for Operation Catch-Up during one of the summers that it was in operation. Speaker 2: Picture of the Legislative Black Caucus [South Carolina Legislative Black Caucus] in 1987 to 1988 on the steps of the capitol [South Carolina State House, Charleston, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my colleague Juanita White [Juanita Mitchell White] who served about sixteen years in the House. The speaker of the house, Bob Sheheen [Robert J. Sheheen] in the middle and I'm on, I'm at his left, on his left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Here's a picture in the House of Representatives, we are assembled and I am to the right in the sort of light green and that's my son, J. Seth Whipper. We served together one term in the House of Represent- Representatives..