 Story_ID: 20138 Speaker 1: My name is Maxine Waters. I'm a member of [U.S.] Congress representing the 35th Congressional District. I was born August 15, 1938. And today's date is something. Speaker 2: It's July 29th. Speaker 1: July 29th, Sunday, in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: 2001. Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: And we're at the Beverly Hilton in Los Angeles Story_ID: 20139 Speaker 1: What's your favorite food (laughing)? Speaker 2: I like a variety of foods. I really love fruit, and I like to eat lush nectarines and cherries and grapes. And--I love fruit. If I could live on fruit I would. Speaker 1: You make them sound so good, lush nectarines (laughs). Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Sorry. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I enjoy a lot of colors. I think blue would be my favorite color. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I think the Caribbean. We've spent a lot of time in the Caribbean. And my husband was ambassador to the Bahamas. So I think the Caribbean and the Bahamas in particular. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like spring. I like spring when the flowers are blooming, and the air is light and it's warm enough to be without coat and jackets. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying. I don't know. I have so many I have to think about that. Story_ID: 20140 Speaker 1: And I'd like you to give your mother's name and what you know about her background. Speaker 2: My mother is Velma Lee Moore. She was born Velma Lee Thomas. She was married to my father who was Remus Carr. A subsequent marriage was to Samuel Moore. So she is Velma Lee Moore. Speaker 1: Can you talk about what her background was and you know, what you know about her side of the family? Speaker 2: My mother was an only child. Her father did marry and have two other children, so they would be considered half brothers and sisters. She was married at a very early age, dropped out of school at a very early age, and basically had babies for her entire life. I'm one of thirteen children. So my mother basically was a homemaker, a wife and raised children. Speaker 1: Now where was she from originally? Speaker 2: My mother originally was from Arkansas. Her family lived both in Little Rock, Arkansas and other places in Arkansas. Story_ID: 20141 Speaker 1: What about your father? What about him? You know, give his--. Speaker 2: I didn't know very much about my father. My father was gone before I was two years old, so I don't remember him. He was Remus Carr. And he was a guy who basically worked odd jobs and moved around the South. The first five children were all born in different states. So he was always constantly moving and looking for jobs. And by the time they got to St. Louis [Missouri], where I was born, he was there for a short period of time, and then he was gone. So I don't remember him. Story_ID: 20142 Speaker 1: And your siblings. Can you give their names in order? Speaker 2: (laughs) I have twelve brothers and sisters. Let's start. The first is Velma. The second is Rema. Then there's Willa. Then there's of course, there's Maxine, and then there's Remus and Joseph and Wadsworth, and Samella, and Kimberly and then there's Sharon, there's Adrian and there's Reginald and there is Ray and that should cover them I think. If I've left one out, I'll go back and put it in (laughs). Speaker 1: (laughs) That's pretty good when you think about it--large family. Story_ID: 20143 Speaker 1: I'd like you to just talk about some of your earliest memories growing up, 'cause you were growing up in a, you know, a family that became larger as time went on. But, you know, what--what were your early--some of your earliest memories? Speaker 2: My earliest memories in my family was living in St. Louis [Missouri] on a main street, actually in a suburb of St. Louis. An all black suburb in a little town called Kinloch [Missouri]. Where we lived across the street from the local elementary school. And during those days, the strip that we lived on had many of the businesses in the little town of Kinloch. And I can remember we lived near a woman who was the local town hairdresser. We had the corner store right at the end of the road that we lived on. Down the street we had the bakery, Mr. Falwell's Bakery that everybody just loved, who made his own brand of cheesecake. We had--. Speaker 1: (pause in interview) Speaker 2: Everybody knew everybody in Kinloch. All of the families worked and played together and basically grew up together. I stayed there until I was about the fourth grade. And then I left. The family left and then we went to St. Louis. But I remember the small town atmosphere. I was very young, but I can recall the church and my best friends. One of my best friends is someone that I grew up with in Kinloch, who's still in Kinloch today even though half of the town is gone. Bertha Robinson and I remember it as a good time. Pleasant times. We were poor, but I remember good times. Story_ID: 20144 Speaker 1: Do you know what precipitated the move into St. Louis [Missouri]? How far was Kinloch [Missouri] from St--i was just--you said--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Just a few miles, but, of course, the suburbs and Kinloch was considered the country town. And people always aspired to move to the big city. And so my mother [Velma Lee Moore] was reunited with a gentleman that she had known in earlier years and remarried and, of course, they wanted to move to St. Louis, so we left our little home that she had built there and we went to St. Louis to live. Along with the new father [Samuel Moore]. Speaker 1: So how was that experience? How was St. Louis to you? And do you remember your sort of early memories of it? Speaker 2: Yes I do. Again, we moved on a street called Montrose [Avenue]. And Montrose was like a little town within itself. All of the families knew each other very well. We were in and out of each other's homes. We, we could eat dinner at any given house at any time. Everybody knew the local gossip and what was going on in each other's families. The children all went to the same school, James Weldon Johnson School. We all played sports together. We created our own fun. We would have our own races in the middle of the street. We built our own skate trucks. We were all athletes. We swam in the local pool all summer together. Again, it was like living in a small town, even though we were in St. Louis. We didn't venture very far from where we lived. The school--my local school, of course, was in walking distance. Even after we left the eighth grade and went to high school, our high school was in walking distance, very near to us. In those days, the corner store was always an important place in the community. That's where you bought your pickles and your candy and--so the local person who ran the store was someone that was known to everybody. In those days we didn't have refrigeration. There was the iceman. There was the coal man and they delivered ice and coal to your house. And you had a little card that you put in the window that would let them know whether you wanted twenty-five pounds or fifty pounds or seventy-five pounds of ice, and he would ride down the street in his ice truck, look at the cards in the window, chip the ice off the big block and put the big thongs in it, and just drip it all the way into your house, into your refrigerator. People sat on their stoops at night. It was very hot in St. Louis. People gathered--and our friends would gather on our steps. We had so many children in our family, it was a gathering place. And we would sit out and talk and play and have fun and drink Kool-Aid. And again, it was like a small town. And I think that I--I rather liked the idea of small town living even though I lived in a big city because my neighborhood was also so very special to me. And that's where my friends--I really developed great friends--and really, a lot of who I am was born out of the experience of those years. My values--we went to church, we went to Sunday school every Sunday. We stayed for eleven o'clock service where we were joined by my mother. We were back in the evening for BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] and we went to vacation Bible school all summer long. So everything I know I learned in kindergarten in that small section of St. Louis. Story_ID: 20145 Speaker 1: What sounds and smells do you associate with growing up? Speaker 2: Oh listen! Sunday morning on my street [Montrose Avenue] in St. Louis [Missouri] everybody had their gospel music on. That's where we learned about the Five Blind Boys [of Alabama, singing group] and all of the great gospel singers. And, of course, everybody's door was open frying sausage and bacon and baking biscuits. The smell of sausage in the air and the gospel music is what I remember a lot about the neighborhood. And it was very special. As a matter of fact, everybody created their own little quartet in those days. Trying to be like, you know, one of the groups that we heard on the radio every Sunday morning. And we had our all-girls quartet where we sang gospel songs. Not for anybody special, for ourselves. And we mimicked the sounds of the gospel singers. So I remember the sounds of gospel music and the frying of sausage and bacon on Sunday morning. Story_ID: 20146 Speaker 1: Were you Baptist? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Were you raised in a Baptist church? Speaker 2: Yes, raised in a Baptist church. And we--raised in a Baptist church, but we visited other churches and we particularly enthralled with the Pentecostal church, I guess it would be. That's the holiness church. The sanctified church. And so we would sneak off and go to the sanctified church. Because they played the tambourines and they danced, you know, and they gave testimony in very deep and passionate ways. So we were always drawn to the sanctified church, and we wanted to see the spirit hit people, and to experience, you know, the dance, and to play the tambourine, so. And still, I enjoy very much the sanctified church or the Pentecostal church. Speaker 1: Have you ever spoken in tongues? Speaker 2: No, but I'm fascinated by it. I am not that deeply religious, but I have a great respect for religion. And I am--I'm moved by gospel music--very moved by it, and enjoy the church very much. Story_ID: 20147 Speaker 1: What were you like as an--a young person? You know, we all are--were you shy? Were you, you know, mouthy? Were you--you know, were you precocious? Were you, you know, introspective? What do you--what were you like? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was competitive. I was an athlete. I liked school a lot, was considered smart in school. I was mature in my thinking. I listened a lot to my mother [Velma Lee Moore] and her friends talk--I eavesdropped a lot on their conversations. And I thought I understood a lot about what they were talking about, and I thought I knew a lot more than other kids about life. And I fancied myself as someone who could make decisions and take charge and often did. My mother allowed me to make a lot of decisions at a very early age. I was responsible for taking care of younger kids. I literally ran my mother's household at a very young age. And so I enjoyed, you know, sports and competition and school and all of that. Story_ID: 20148 Speaker 1: I considered myself growner than the other kids. Speaker 2: So you--even though you were fourth--you were the fourth child right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You were viewed as more responsible than your older siblings? Speaker 1: All of my older siblings were quite responsible. We all worked at a very early age. All of us had jobs at twelve and thirteen years old. All of us took care and helped to manage the house, clean the house. So we all were given, you know--perhaps not just given--we didn't have--didn't have--she [Velma Lee Moore] didn't have a lot of choices and we didn't have a lot of choices. We had to accept responsibility at a very early age. So the, the three of them did also before me. Speaker 2: Now what do you think that--how that helped form you? You know, for what you are today? I mean that--having that experience early? Speaker 1: I think it helps with judgment. I think it helps with accepting responsibility in difficult tasks and being able to make decisions. I thinks it helps to ground you when you have to make decisions at an early age. And you get a sense of yourself, I think, a little bit sooner than perhaps other people your age. I think even though sometimes it--some of what we did was difficult. I think it's good for you in the final analysis. Story_ID: 20149 Speaker 1: The schools you went to, were they. You went--James Weldon, right? Speaker 2: James Weldon Johnson [School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Johnson. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You did--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Elementary school. Speaker 1: Were there--were your teachers white or black? Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: All black. Speaker 2: All black teachers at my elementary school, very supportive teachers. These were teachers who you saw on the weekend. I can recall one of my teachers, who was a very tough math teacher, Miss Carter, who took us on outings and picnics on the weekend. And she would come to my house to pick me up. And I can remember one Saturday my mother [Velma Lee Moore] had not completed all of her tasks and her chores. And it was that Saturday that she was washing our hair and getting us ready for the week ahead of us. And--but I had not, you know, my turn had not come yet to get my hair done. So my teacher took me home and she could--did my hair and we went on to the picnic. I had another teacher, Miss Stokes who was a piano player and loved spirituals. And she taught us to play piano, and I would hang around after school with her oftentimes and learn to play 'Steal Away Home' on the piano and talk with her. And she was perfectly comfortable with kids who wanted to stay. She would sit at her desk and do work or come over to the piano, and you know, give you little piano lessons. So our teachers were part of the community--very supportive. And they were like your parents in many ways--your parents who had a little bit more knowledge and could teach you things. So we had a very supportive community in schools. Story_ID: 20150 Speaker 1: Were there any subjects you gravitated to more than others? I mean, you know, during, during those formative years? Were you good at, you know--did you like reading more than you liked math, or what--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, I loved reading. And eventually--I loved reading, I loved the [U.S.] Constitution. By the time we were in the seventh grade, and we were introduced to the Constitution, I just loved the Constitution. There were some areas that I loved that I didn't quite understand why I liked them so much. Even today as we talk about conservation and the environment, I loved conservation and talking about soil erosion and planting and how to protect the earth. That and the Constitution I think. I loved American history, even though they did not teach us slavery. We learned the American history from the point of view of fleeing the British and seeking freedom in these new colonies and the midnight ride of Paul Revere and all of those stories--Patrick Henry, "Give me liberty or give me death." All of that was fascinating. The first amendments to the Constitution, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, all of that was very special. And I spent a lot of time knowing and understanding the Constitution. And it's very interesting that they taught us without teaching us our history. But I was fascinated by the quest for freedom and justice and equality of the early founders of this country. And so it took me years to really understand my history and the history of my people. But then I appreciated the Constitution even more, even though it was not written for, you know, Africans and certainly African Americans. I think in that Constitution what they did without maybe intending to do so was to instill the right to be free. And so everything that I learned later about slavery and about what had happened, you know, to my people, I was able to take the Constitution and apply it to my work and to African Americans in this country and use the Constitution as a basis for that struggle for freedom. Speaker 1: So even though these were black teachers, you didn't--They didn't mention--did you--did they teach anything about, you know, black, black people or anything like that? I mean any--were you taught? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The closest thing we got to our history was black spirituals. We sang the spirituals. And in those spirituals were messages and stories of going on to have a better day in heaven with, you know, kind of inferences about the tough times here on earth and all of that. But we never really were taught the history of slavery. Story_ID: 20151 Speaker 1: What was St. Louis [Missouri] like during that? I mean, what kind of community was it? Though even though maybe your--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: As a child were you aware of the--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah one thing there--I can remember lots of things about St. Louis. I remember there were black professionals. There were doctors and lawyers and the teachers and all in our communities. And they were revered. They were the people that you really, you know, looked up to. You aspired to be like them. Of course, I remember the black church and all the time that we spent there, and the lessons of the Bible. The church was very special and important in the black community--as it is today. I remember the black Pullman porters who came into St. Louis. Union Station was a great place. And I think the union stations across the country are very special places. But in St. Louis, it was a very special place. And I remember the black Pullman porters who were looked up to also in the community. These were guys who had good paying jobs, and when they got off from work they were always dressed in suits with their little luggage, and they were very special. We would go to Union Station as outings to see the trains back in. And across the street from our Union Station was great bronze statues that are there today that we always loved to go and, and see those statues. One thing we were, we were fascinated by because they were naked statues, and we were not supposed to be watching the naked body, so that always intrigued us. And, of course, being in the Union Station itself--the bustling place with the Fred Harvey restaurants [rail station hotel and restaurant chain] and the people coming and going, and the trains and the Pullman porters and all. I remember that as kind of a special time. Story_ID: 20152 Speaker 1: Also, downtown St. Louis [Missouri] was very special. The buildings, the courthouse, the city hall--we have grand buildings. And I guess I thought ours was the grandest buildings of any, any city, and I suppose, you know, all cities have their grand buildings, but I think there's wonderful architecture in St. Louis. The--the civic buildings and we have great cathedrals. Even though our churches were not the great cathedrals, in certain sections of St. Louis you have huge massive Catholic and other kinds of cathedrals. So I've always been fascinated by the architecture. The--we have a great zoo. We have the number one zoo in the country, and that was always a very special place--going to the St. Louis Zoo. I think we were noted as the number one with all of the animals. Fascinated by the birds and all the colors of the birds. So that too, was a special place. And even though our community [Montrose Avenue] was where we spent all of our time, and where we, you know, became who we were, when we ventured out to these places it was always special, and to be enjoyed, and to be appreciated. Story_ID: 20153 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Vashon [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Vashon. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. How's that spelled? Speaker 2: V-A-S-H-O-N Speaker 1: Okay. And was it also primarily a black high school or not? Speaker 2: It was an all black high school, but I experienced my first white teachers there. And they came one summer. And I had a white teacher for literature I believe. Or was it English? I believe it was English, because that's where I learned first to diagram a sentence was with this teacher who had come from across town. And who seemed quite out of place there. But then I think it was that year also that I joined the human relations club, and we started to exchange trips and go to other high schools, and we interacted more with whites. But high school was a very special place. We had a great--we had great music--great music teachers there. And we had a great band, and it was where I was first introduced to Classical music. We had music teachers who were interested in a broad range of music. But they did what I think you do in traditional high schools. While we perhaps would have loved to have had some classes in jazz and other things, we were taught Beethoven and Tchaikovsky and all of that. And I learned to kind of enjoy it. I was--I learned to dance, and I was an interpretive dancer. So much of that music was kind of nice to dance to. The 'Dance of The Sugarplum Fairies' and all that. That really was, was nice. It's a nice part of, of your music experience. But today, I prefer jazz and blues. I love blues. I love jazz. And, of course, I still love the gospel. But I think the real stories about us are in the--are in blues. And I think the real spirit of us is in blues and jazz. Our high school had teachers, again, who cared about us. And I want to tell you the story about one teacher Miss Scott. Miss Scott was the toughest teacher in the school. She walked the halls and she searched the bathrooms to see if, you know, people were playing hooky from class and hiding out, in the, in the stalls. And she would come in and she would check on all the stalls. She was extremely matronly. She had never married. And she dressed, as people would say, old fashioned. She wore the old black lace up pumps and the thick stockings, and all that. But she was brilliant. We didn't know how smart she was--one of the best teachers there. I can remember one morning going to class, and I had not done my homework. And so I had to--I ran into class kind of early before it was settled down, and wrote this composition that we were supposed to have written for homework. As it turns out, I had to think of something to write about, and I remember having seen a black woman sing an opera on television the night before, on a show called the 'Arthur Godfrey Show.' It turned out the woman was an opera singer named Grace Bumbry, and Grace Bumbry is from St. Louis. And so I wrote kind of what I felt, but kind of what I thought the teacher would want to hear also. But I was moved enough to write about it and thought it was important enough to write about. She was so carried away with the composition, she put me in her car and took me to Grace Bumbry's home where I met--Grace Bumbry was not there, but I met her family and I left the composition. Now I've watched Grace Bumbry's career developed over the years. And she became one of the world's greatest opera singers. But I didn't meet her until about five years ago in Washington [D.C.]. Story_ID: 20154 Speaker 1: Did you ever venture over to East St. Louis [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Not until I was grown. Yes. I never went to East St. Louis until after I was grown. So I didn't know it very well. But that's another part of kind of the St. Louis [Missouri] experience. Speaker 1: 'Cause that was sort of the wild wild West. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was, and that's where the after-hours clubs were, and where you went to do things you couldn't do in St. Louis, kind of, you know. Speaker 1: So now in high school, were there other things forming you, you met Mrs. [Grace] Bumbry [opera singer], you know. Were there other things that sort of formed you during that period that would affect you maybe later? Speaker 2: Well I think that my friends, my teachers, my neighborhood all really--I am a part of that. I mean that's kind of who I am. I didn't kind of discover myself after, you know, I left there. Or I didn't have experiences after I left there that I thought were so much greater or so much important. For me my life really began there, was developed there. That's kind of who I am. And whatever I do, it's related to that early life in St. Louis in that neighborhood in my schools. Speaker 1: Do you miss the Midwest at all? Do you miss your Midwest and your midwestern roots? You're--you've been out here in California so long. Speaker 2: Not really miss it. I'm kind of in many ways an old-fashioned person. And I miss not being able to go to my neighborhood and have my neighborhood be the same. You know what I mean. I miss not being able to go to St. Louis and be with my friends that I developed at a very early age. I mean that sounds a little strange. But I'm-- I'm a person who for the most part didn't like the idea of moving out of our house. Who prefer spending time with people who shared that experience than with new people. I mean I'm just kind of an old-fashioned person. And I like old things. I like the old house that we lived in, in St. Louis. I collect antiques and I like old things. And I--I can go into an antique store and get sentimental about a living room setting that--I remembered my friend's house looked like that. You know, the doilies that are on the dresser and that kind of stuff. I, you know, so that's who I am. Story_ID: 20155 Speaker 1: When you graduate what are your thoughts at that point from--? You graduated, right? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. What were my thoughts at that point? Speaker 1: You were in love. Speaker 2: Falling in love and going where my first husband was, who was in service and torn because I thought education was important. And I always felt that I had to pursue my education. But at the same time, you know, having some of the struggles young people have with, you know, thinking that you know, the thing to do is to be married and do all of that. And so I was--I was at being grown then. I was a grown woman, you know. It was time for me to go on my own and do my thing. Speaker 1: So your first husband's name? Speaker 2: Edward Waters. Speaker 1: And where was he--where was he stationed? What--he went into the service-- Speaker 2: He went into the service and ended up being stationed in Colorado, where I spent time in Colorado Springs. He was at Fort Carson, Colorado. Speaker 1: So you--what you're--are you seventeen or eighteen at the time? Speaker 2: I'm seventeen at the time. Speaker 1: Seventeen, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you get married. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And you go--you go off? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so how--what is that experience like? 'Cause you've been in this sort of cloistered environment. You know, and even though you want to be grown, are you happy to be grown and in another location-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was quite grown. And so I went off to Colorado Springs. Where we moved into a small rental house. My husband was at Camp Carson. And the job that he had at the time, I think he was like working in the fireman's unit. And he was on so many days and off so many days. So there were times when I was alone. And he--I mean I did quite well. I mean I managed the place. I got--I had friends there. Mrs. Hunter was the local undertaker. And I got to know her family well. I lived right on the same little compound. And then in the front house from me, there were a couple of women whose husbands were at Fort Carson. And so my new experience there was going to the auction. 'Cause you had time during the day to spend time. And I learned about auctions. So I would go and I would sit at the auction and learn to bid on little things. And learned a lot about antiques and learned a lot about quality. And that's--that was that experience. Speaker 1: [Off-camera discussion.] Speaker 2: Yeah. Don't forget now. You know, I was--I had had a lot of experiences in running the house and helping to raise other kids. And, you know, paying the bills. I paid the bills for my mother [Velma Lee Moore] and all of that. So I was pretty self-sufficient. Yep. Speaker 1: So what--so now you--how, how soon is it before you have your first child? Speaker 2: I had my first child before I went to Colorado. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I went, I took my first child with me. And I had my second child in Colorado Springs. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you're busy raising children. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Which you said you had plenty of experience. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this is not-- Speaker 2: Okay. So are you enjoying this planning your life in many ways? You know is it--? Speaker 1: Often times I do. And I have had a lot of great moments. Speaker 2: No. I meant, I meant back then. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Oh! Back then. Oh! Speaker 2: [Laughs] I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I'm searching still. I'm knowing that there's something more that I want to do. I'm learning still a lot, reading a lot and thinking about going back to school at this point. So I'm not--I see myself in a temporary state during the time I was in Colorado. My husband is in service. You know, I shou--I have to be there. But, you know, I'm waiting to get back. And I'm, you know, waiting to kind of pursue. These are the things that I was not sure about at that time. Speaker 2: And so you lived in Colorado how long? Speaker 1: About a year I think. Speaker 2: A year. And then does he get move--stationed some place else or is that--that's not-- Speaker 1: He ended his career in service-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In service-- Speaker 1: --in service and then we went back to St. Louis. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And you're in St.--how long did you stay in St. Louis [Missouri] at that point? Speaker 1: I stayed there [pause]. Da-da-da-da. I came to California in nineteen-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In [19]61. Speaker 1: [19]61. Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. But what year--what year were you in Colorado? What were the years? Speaker 1: I was there in 195--[pause] 6, [19]57. And then somewhere in there I went back to St. Louis and came here in sixty--came in [19]61. Story_ID: 20156 Speaker 1: Now when did you start working outside the house? Speaker 2: I've always worked. Speaker 1: Even when you were in--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Not in--not in Colorado. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Not in Colorado. Speaker 2: I didn't work in Colorado for that year. But I started working when I was twelve or thirteen. I just put my age up and got a job in Thompson's Restaurants in St. Louis [Missouri] where I was a busgirl. I cleaned the tables. It was a segregated restaurant and we had to eat our food in the basement. Every summer I had a job. I always worked, bought my clothes for the school year. And, you know, basically had what I needed for the entire school year from my work through the summer. Including clothes, lunch money, all of that. I just did that every summer. Then when I got back to St. Louis, after we had been in Colorado, then I went to work in garment factories in St. Louis. And until I left St. Louis and came to California, I was working in garment factories. Came to California, went to work for a telephone company and went back to school. And then went to work for Head Start toward the end of the time that I was to graduate from Cal State [California State University at] Los Angeles. Went to work for Head Start [early childhood development program]. And from Head Start went to work in politics. Speaker 1: I want to go back to the garment factories. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: And I want to ask you were there things--was that--was there anything that you learned from that experience? Or that you, you know, sort of relate to now in terms of the garment industry? Or was it just a job like working in a plant? You know [unclear]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well, I learned a lot. One of the things you learn in those settings is, you know, kind of the expectations of the work place. And the politics of working. Who the supervisor is, who they like, who they don't like. Not only what's expected of you, but how do you conduct yourself in ways that will make work more pleasant than perhaps the job is itself. I mean you learn a lot about life working in those kinds of jobs. You learn a lot about people. You learn a lot about prejudices. You learn a lot about yourself. And it's, it's--I think it's that--that stage of your life where you're making lots of decisions about how you're gonna relate to the world. What you're gonna accept, what you're not gonna accept. All of those things. So those, those days--I, I almost consider everything that happens to me a great learning experience. But--and I always felt that I was working at this job for money. And these people didn't know who I was. And that I always felt that, you know, sometimes people who were bossing you and--not in the nicest way, that they weren't as smart as you were. And it didn't matter if they didn't know it. You knew it. You know what I mean. And you knew this is not what you were gonna be doing forever. I mean that kind of stuff. You know. Speaker 1: So you always had good self-esteem then? Speaker 2: Pretty much so. Even though there were times when you didn't. But I always kind of deep down inside felt that I knew things. And I had a sense of what life was about and how it all worked. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you--was there anyone there that--you said, there's no way that--it was sort of like "I don't want to be working here the rest of my life." Was there anyone there, you know, that was a career person. They'd been in the garment industry a long time and you-- Speaker 2: Well let me just say this. I've never been in a job where I just hated it so much that I felt I just couldn't do it. You know, it was always, "This is what I have to do now." You know what I mean? "This is what I do now. Whatever it requires, you know, I'll get through it. I'll do it." That kind of thing. There were some people--I can remember even back in those days. There was a young woman who was a designer, a dress designer that worked in the front office at the factories. And she was well put together. Because she was. That's who she was. I mean she was a fashion designer. And I liked the idea of her walking through that factory in her beautiful clothes and her high heel shoes all well put together. Because no matter what the people thought about, black people, African Americans who were working back there, you know in the sweatshop. At least they could see that, "You know, oh! Okay. So just as there are various levels of, of living in the white community, so are there in the black community. And there are black successful people." You know, glamorous people and all of that. So I remember her, you know, inside the factory. And in my home coming up, I remember the social workers. We were on welfare much of the time that I was growing up. And the social workers who came to your house were always, you know, the professional that you got to see. And, of course, you admired their clothes and their--and the fact that they were educated. And you know, they had a little power. They had the power to determine whether or not you eat. You know? So that seemed pretty powerful to come out and decide whether or not you would continue on welfare. So that's why I aspired to be a social worker. Because I thought that they had the power to help people. Or to, you know, make dep--decisions about other people's lives. Speaker 1: You know, when you were young, did you hear of the people selling the burial policies, who would come [unclear] insurance? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. Insurance policies. They came to your house. And--at some point in time I started to manage them. We'd have white insurance salesmen with the fifteen cent policies. And they loved my mother 'cause she had so many children. And that was a lot of fifteen cent policies. But I was always insulted by the manner in which they conducted themselves in our homes. They took liberties that they should not have taken. I've known them to walk through your house. I've known them to say things that they should not have said. So I've never liked collectors. Bill collectors and insurance salesmen. You know, that visit homes to collect premiums. I've never liked that. Speaker 1: Now you--when you--the move to California, was that prompted because your husband [Edward Waters] got stationed there? Or it--was it--was it--what was it? Was it that--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think he had--I think his first--I think he had been out in California maybe at one point in time. But his sister was there too. He had family who had moved there. And, of course, California was the story of fruit on the trees, hanging from the sidewalks. I mean you know the stories about the beautiful weather and the fruit trees, and the wonderful skies and all of that. So I think it was natural for young couples or--in places like St. Louis where, you know, the jobs were not that good to want to look for a better life. You know, it's--it's the updated tale of "Go west, young man." I mean it's go to California. The jobs are better. You could find your fortunes there. Story_ID: 20157 Speaker 1: When you decided to go back to school, how old were your children? And was that a--was it that "I want to establish my own way?" Or was it a discussion that you and your husband had? I mean was it, or, were you sort of trying to exert your own independence at that point? Speaker 2: Well, I'd always knew--I always knew that I would go back to school. You just had to do that. As a matter of fact, every September watching, you know, people return to school, was always something. It was a longing that I had while I was raising my children. My children were very young, four or five years old when I went back to school . It wasn't about a discussion. It wasn't about, you know, deciding. It was just something you knew you were gonna do. It was a matter of just being able to, you know, organize your life to do it. So it was nothing that we thought about. Discussed to that--discussed and had to make decisions about--it was just something that you knew you were gonna do. Story_ID: 20158 Speaker 1: When did Head Start [early childhood development program] get started in this country? Speaker 2: 1960---6 I believe. Speaker 1: And you were--yeah. 1960. Now, you know, we--we interviewed someone named Shirley Jones who had the Kedren Community-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, sure. Speaker 1: Right. Were you part of--, Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That, that was not my delegate agency. But I knew about them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was one of the delegate agencies for Head Start. There were several what they called delegate agencies. I--She was with Kedren [Mental Health Center]. And I was with Federation. We had twelve or thirteen delegate agencies. And, of course, I knew about Kedren. Speaker 1: And so what--what do you like about this Head Start experience? Speaker 2: Oh! That was everything for me. I loved Head Start. Head Start was almost a defining moment in my life. I had the opportunity to go to work for Head Start. Because I had gotten ill while I was working at the telephone company. And I was off. And I was home. And one of my dear friends who worked with me at Pacific Telephone [and Telegraph] Company would visit me in the evenings. And we would talk a lot about what was going on. And we started to talk about what we were reading in the papers about the war on poverty and this wonderful program called Head Start where poor kids were gonna have the opportunity to have a preschool experience. And, of course, in those days, you know, it was only, you know, people who could really afford to send their kids to childcare and to preschool and all of that. And so we were fascinated with this. And we thought we wanted to be a part of this war on poverty. And we wanted to, you know. We both aspired to work in Head Start with the children. And so we sought out the agency that had the responsibility for recruiting in those days, for this war on poverty for a number of programs. The Neighborhood Adult Participation Project was a project that was recruiting for Head Start. We both went over there. We talked with the people. We put in the applications. I got hired and she did not [laughing]. And I was hired as an aid. Because Head Start was really that program that talked about reducing the number of children to adults. And they were gonna have a ratio of one adult to every child in the classroom. Three adults in the classroom for classes of fifteen. It would be the teacher, the assistant teacher and the aid. And I got hired as an aid in Head Start. And Head Start opened up for me a whole new way of thinking about who I was and all of the experiences that I had. I was able then to connect them to what I really wanted to be. And I was able to come to grips kind of with my philosophy of life. I mean I was free. Now I could put all of this into some kind of perspective. You know what I'm saying? So I went to Sunday school and I went to BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union]. And I, I attended vacation Bible school, and I listened to the stories of the elders and the old people when I was growing up. I did all this. So what did all of that mean? You know? This is where my values were being developed. And now I could put it into some kind of perspective as I looked at life. You know. In between I'd gone on jobs and I was learning about people. But I didn't have a chance to apply a philosophy of life really. Head Start in addition to, you know, our responsibility for, you know, working with the children in the classroom, it was about families. It was about communities. So we had sessions where we began to talk about who we were. And what our expectations were and what we cared about, and what we'd like to see. And I mean, you know, the person started to blossom and grow. And I started to, you know, think about who I really was. What I liked and what I didn't like. And that was the jump-off period for me. Speaker 1: You know I have another question. Just because you had--you know, you had your own children. They weren't--were they past Head Start age at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: But you had your own children. And you had, you know, been a--raising your brothers and sisters. Was there--did you learn something new about child-raising within this, you know, environment Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Sure. Speaker 1: And I'm wondering what? Because this is--you--what I find so phenomenal about Head Start the program has never been criticized. And it seems to have been solid from the conception. But I'm not--is that true? Or was it formula--were things sort of-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I think the-- Speaker 1: You know that it's wo-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think the reason Head Start is so revered is it placed a focus on young children and the idea that you could take children at a very young age, teach them self esteem and help to build the possibility for their success later on in life. That you could teach them not only self-esteem which I thought was a most important lesson of Head Start. But how to interact with other children, that reading could be fun. And I saw it as a buffer. No matter what kind of situation you came from, Head Start could be a refuge. A haven for kids who came from poor houses, poor homes, bad experiences. When you came to Head Start, it was a loving environment with supportive teachers, who were taught the specialness and the importance of children. And I don't think you know, you can criticize that too much. I mean later on there were some criticisms that said, "Head Start kids were successful in school for the first few years. And then it dropped off." Some of that kind of stuff. But I think that it did so much for parents and families and communities that it, it became accepted. As one of those programs in the War on Poverty, that is lasting. Speaker 1: That's right. You're absolutely right. Now you--you worked there for let's see-- Speaker 2: How many years? I always get in trouble when I try to remember the number of years. I worked in Head Start for maybe five or six years? Speaker 1: Five or six years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And may--you know 'cause--what were you doing between that time and going to work as a assistant to the--to the city councilman? And I'm wondering--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, no, no. Here's how it happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--I worked in Head Start and I was--I attended school. I was at Cal State [California State University at Los Angeles] and you know I was in Head Start. In Head Start I grew from being an aid in the classroom to becoming a supervisor parent involved in volunteer services. So I was growing. I was going to school. I was now taking courses that helped with a lot of the work that I was doing. Because don't forget. I was aspiring to be a social worker. And Head Start thrust me into interaction with the parents with all of the problems of social work. And so I was learning how to do this kind of work. And to work with families with problems. And I was taking courses in school and all of that was working. Now in working with the parents and helping them take control of their lives, we were still fighting for funding for Head Start. Because remember, the War on Poverty it was--It started out pretty shaky. I mean and the funding and you had to fight for it. And you had these, you had the big umbrella agency that was finding its way about how to manage all these programs. And we had to start interacting with all of this. And so this brought me in touch with politicians. And we had politicians who would visit our rallies about "We have to have Head Start funded. Don't cut Head Start." And we started to see the politicians and you got to know kind of what their role was, and to kind of lie with them. And then you know. You met the people around them. And would ask you to come work in their campaigns and all of that. So we started to flow into from Head Start and working in the community, working for politicians who were supportive of Head Start. And trying to, you know, make sure they were reelected. Or, you know, working against some that you, you know, didn't think were so good. And so that started to happen. All of this was happening. Going to school, working in Head Start and then beginning to work in politics and working political campaigns. Story_ID: 20159 Speaker 1: And then I went on from there to leave Head Start [early childhood development program], to help run political campaigns. And then to have my own firm, public relations firm for a short period of time. And then on to running for office myself. Yeah. Speaker 2: What--what--what was the first campaign you worked for--worked on? Do you remember? Speaker 1: The first campaign I worked in was Mervyn Dymally who was in the California State Assembly and I think he was running for the [California State] Senate. That was the first campaign I worked in. Speaker 2: Did you--obviously it was a very good experience. Speaker 1: I found campaigning fascinating and engaging. As a matter of fact, because I was a young mother whose time was all consumed with work and school, I didn't have the experience of social clubs and sororities and building those relationships in those ways. Where your social life is developed. So politics for me became a way of interacting. And with politics and campaigns, comes, you know, the cocktail parties and social events and entertainment. So it fulfilled for me a combination of learning about power and the exercise of power and a social life with other people who enjoyed the same kind of thing. Story_ID: 20160 Speaker 1: What other campaigns did you work on with people (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, let's see. I worked on Wilson [C.] Riles for superintendent of public instruction, which was a [California] statewide campaign. I worked for the first person to succeed [Mayor] Tom Bradley [ref. to Richard J. Riordan]. David Cunningham for the [Los Angeles] city council, and I went in to run his office after running that campaign. I worked for [Hubert H.] Humphrey's [U.S. Presidential] campaign. I worked on Teddy [Edward M.] Kennedy's [U.S. Presidential or U.S. Senate] campaign. I worked on [U.S. Senator] Alan Cranston's campaign. I worked for some school board races--Arnett Hartsfield, one of our early members of the [Los Angeles] school board I worked, (pause) let's see. A number of other campaigns, local, different, various, you know, local campaigns. Story_ID: 20161 Speaker 1: In this, you were holding all different types of capacities. Or were you slotted for different things because you became adept at them? You know, when you worked on-- Speaker 2: Different things in different campaigns. I learned to do a lot of the task of campaigns. I've managed campaigns from top to bottom. I've taken parts of campaigns where I would take on organizing blacks in the state of California or in the greater Los Angeles [California] area. Or I've taken on campaigns where I worked with various issues in campaigns. All different ways, you know, depending on the candidate and your time and kind of what you thought you'd like to do and what they needed. Story_ID: 20162 Speaker 1: Congressman [sic, Congresswoman] Waters, what did you learn when you were managing campaigns and working with the black community? What did you learn because this is still a point in time historically where we are still novices-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and new to the political systems, and so. But we're fresh. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, I mean, this is not--well, it's whatever. It's still not that far from the Voting Rights Act [1965]. You know, it's from within that ten or twelve year period from, you know, the 1960--right? Speaker 2: Well, there are a lot of lessons in managing a campaign. First of all, the first lesson is in deciding to do it and choosing the candidates that you're going to work for. You really have to know a lot about your candidate in advance. You don't need surprises (laughter). You need to know everything that you can possibly know about them. The good and the bad, the way they think. So I think you're better off if you know a lot. I know in today's campaigns, they bring in consultants who come in, and you know, put it together in shorter periods of time, but I think you're much better off if you know something about your candidate, and I think you have to like your candidate. I really do, I believe that. Then I think that you have to have enough confidence to be able to, you know, manage and advise and make decisions. I think you have to be well organized to utilize this short period of time in this window that you have in order to get from beginning to end of the campaign. I think you have to understand money and the role that money plays in campaigns. If you think you can manage a campaign without it and you think somehow, you know, you're going to be grassroots politics and you don't know how to get the money and you don't really need it, you're just barking up the wrong tree. I think you have know alignments. You have to know the players. You have to know who organized labor is, what they're all about, what can they do, what can they deliver. You have to know who the business communities--you have to know who the players are, and again, what the alignments are. And I think you have to know how to manage money. It's like putting together a small business or a business in a short period of time, and choosing and identifying the experts or the other people to work with you so you get the best bang for your buck. I think you have to have an eye for what is good and what is not good. You can't just be, you know, get a consultant to develop a piece of literature. I think you have to be a part of that, and you have to know--you have to have confidence and know when you think it's good and when you think it's not so good. So I think that managing campaigns for African Americans is still difficult. It's harder to raise the money still. It's hard to raise the money, oftentimes, in the communities that people want to serve, and I think that's one of the worst problems of campaigning. That oftentimes the people who even like you and want you to represent them, don't understand the importance of contributing so that their candidates are not absolutely beholden to all of the outside interests. We have still enough money in our communities to be more supportive of candidates, and it's still not there. We have to rely on the outside interests. Increasingly, and even when I came along, there were more people into campaign management and have more expertise in running various aspects. It has dwindled, and we have to rely on outside consultants to run these campaigns. So we need to develop more leadership, more campaign expertise, and identify more money. We just had a big fundraiser for the Democratic Campaign Committee where Berry Gordy raise $2.1 million in his backyard with the Motown [Records] Review, with Diana Ross [singer] and Smokey Robinson and Stevie Wonder. Now we've got to develop that more. He did it for the D triple C [DCCC, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee], which is run by [former U.S. Congressman Richard] Gephardt, and whatever. But we have got to convince people who have that kind of money and that kind of power, both in entertainment and sports, to let us join with them so that we can deliver those kinds of resources, and I'm committed to trying to find some ways to do that because we have the money. It can be done. Story_ID: 20163 Speaker 1: Now the thing is, you know there are people that, you know, get involved in campaigns and that's what they do for the rest of their lives. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: But you, there was something that clicked that was different for you. You decided to go for it yourself, or others saw in you. What happened that you-- Speaker 2: It was a combination of things that were happening at that time. That was--when I first ran for office it was 1976. That was kind of at the height or the, where women were really beginning to talk about running for office, and by now, because of my involvement in running, managing, and working in campaigns, and the work that I was doing in the greater political community, I was now involved with the women's organizations. NOW, the National Organization for Women, the National Women's Political Caucus, Democratic Party politics. I was, you know, in conferences, conventions. I was making alignments all over the place and learning and growing. At the point that my predecessor decided not to run, you know, I was being urged by the women, "Hey, you should run. You should run," you know, and I had enough, you know, connections and friends and all to--and women in the women's movement and all of that to say, "You ought to run." So I was being encouraged to run and I was fascinated by the idea, even though I never really determined that that was going to be my destiny, you know. But it all came together. And even those families that I'd worked with in Head Start [early childhood development program] were in the same community where I was being urged to run, so I had a lot of fire power on the ground with community groups and organizations and families, and I'd gotten to know a lot of people, so it made good sense. And I ran against the establishment, against organized labor, and the politicians who had the power, but I had the people. I had a lot of grassroots support and women's support, and I had women from all communities. I had the white women who came in to the white part of my district, which was still a rather conservative part. I never even went there. I sent those women over to campaign and it all just came together and it worked. Story_ID: 20164 Speaker 1: And how did you feel the night that you were elected? Speaker 2: It was surreal. I knew because I saw the numbers, but I didn't know what it really mean, you know what I'm saying? I knew and I was there with the, you know, by now the mayor [Los Angeles, California Mayor Tom Bradley] had come over to my campaign headquarters and others were coming over to the campaign headquarters, and we were seeing the numbers, and I was, you know, given the, you know, the kind of remarks and thanks, you know, to people. So I knew I had won, but I didn't really know, you know what I'm saying? I didn't really know, and it took me some days to understand, "Okay, you won. You're off to Sacramento [California]." Yeah. But that night, I didn't really, really know, you know? Story_ID: 20165 Speaker 1: So was it a close election? Speaker 2: No, it was not that close. It was very competitive, but if you can remember, by the time I ran, I had learned to manage campaigns, so I knew a lot about campaigns and I had very supportive people around me working with me, and I did some extraordinary things in that campaign. Like I flew back to Washington [D.C.] overnight just to get a picture with [U.S. Senator] Hubert Humphrey because he was big. It was Humphrey-Hawkins Act [Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978] that had become very well known, and Hubert Humphrey was always known in the African American community as a good, solid, progressive Democrat that cared about working people and all. His name was big. So I flew back to Washington, got a photographer, caught him coming off the Senate floor, got a big picture with him, kind of talked to him for awhile, got back on with the negatives from the thing, produced a brochure, and boy that was a big hit. We mailed that thing out to every household with me and Hubert Humphrey, and people thought that was big time. You know, they loved it. They loved Hubert Humphrey and the fact that we were seen together, with me talking about the Hubert Humphrey Act, reduction of unemployment. It was big. Then we used some of the other stuff that we had learned in campaigns. We took the language of our community and translated it--translated the language of the women's movement into the language of our community. Even though I was in the women's movement, it was largely a white women's movement. But black women were talking about the same issues in different ways, and so we learned to take that language and put it into the language of the black community where women were seeking opportunity and fairness and all of that, but they talked about it in different ways and they would not say like in seeking to run for elective office, white women may say, "It's time for us to share in the power of, you know, the establishment, and you know, we have to serve on the corporate boards and all." Black women simply would say, you know, when they talked to me, "You know, we've given men the opportunity to run for all of these office, why not, you know, time for a black woman." And so we'd take that language and just write it back into our literature as we talked with the women. And then we tried some new things that we'd learned about. People in my community and that--they had gardens. A lot of gardens they had. They grew greens and tomatoes and all of that, so we decided to mail garden seeds, and we utilized our volunteers to fill up these envelopes and we'd put the--on the back of them, "A penny saved is a penny earned. A penny saved," or whatever that was, with collard green seeds and tomatoes and all that, and women were just in my office filling up these envelopes and we mailed them out and they was a big hit, and for years after, you know, walking through the community, people would remind me they had a collard green stalk in their yard from the seeds from my campaign, and people would cook for me and invite me to come over and eat, and all of that. So it was a wonderful experience. It really was. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Speaker 2: The best campaign I've ever had was that campaign. Story_ID: 20166 Speaker 1: The women's movement, let me ask you about that. Have you seen yourself as part of the women's movement? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. I was very much a part of the women's movement. I was one of the early black women who was involved with [U.S. Congresswoman] Bella Abzug and Gloria Steinem and the white women's movement. I was in 1978 at the International Women's Year Conference in Houston, Texas where we developed a plan of action, where [President Jimmy] Carter--we were interacting with President Carter and kind of forcing on him our place in his administration. He ended up firing Bella Abzug [as co-chair of the National Advisory Committee for Women] and we all quit. I mean it was wonderful experiences. But from that I went on the board of the 'Ms.' Foundation with Gloria [Steinem] and I learned a lot from the unsolicited proposals that would come in to 'Ms.' [magazine]. Women wanted to be funded from coal mining towns to Harlem [New York], where women had dreams and ideas about things they could do and ways they wanted to better their families, and all of that. I would read those proposals and then I'd take them back to the California legislature and legislate some of those ideas from the unsolicited proposals that we would get from women who were trying to find support for funding for things they wanted to do. So I was very much a part of the women's movement, and had to learn to balance my activities with the women's movement that was basically white, that could literally consume you, and the time that I spent in, you know, African American communities and my community, and working with African American women, who many didn't like the language and the definition of the women's movement. We had to, you know, try and make all that work and come together, and it eventually did. I can remember at the national level when Dorothy Height [civil rights activist] and others, you know, began to, you know, find their place in this women's movement, and eventually, it did begin to work pretty well. Story_ID: 20167 Speaker 1: Did you, were you ever in conflict with them on some issues? You know, because-- Speaker 2: No, I never was, but what I discovered was, I learned that you don't talk about the issues in the same language that they had designed. I never forget the first time I was at one of these conferences and women were wearing a button with a hanger on it that said, "I had one." Black women don't do that. They talked about abortion in ways that were not comfortable--white women did--for black women, and when I saw--I thought, "Oh, my God. That's not the way to talk about that." But I also knew that black women who didn't talk about abortion knew more about it than they were willing to talk about because, don't forget, I had eavesdropped on my mother's [Velma Lee Moore] conversations with her girlfriends and I knew that there were women in our communities who had all of these homemade remedies for how to abort. I heard women talk about falling down steps, about women taking, douching in lye, about women taking turpentine--I heard all those conversations when I was a young girl, and I knew about midwives who performed abortions by dilating the uterus in St. Louis [Missouri] and in East St. Louis [Illinois]. So I knew that black women had abortions, but I also knew it was a very private thing. It was nothing that they talked about, but I knew that they knew how to do it and much of it was learned during slavery when black women aborted white babies that were the result of basically rapes by white. So I knew that, but I also knew that white women wanted to raise the level of discussion about abortions because they were talking about your right to determine whether or not you could do that. Black women already knew that if they wanted to do it, they were going to do it. It was nobody's business. White women were trying to get it accepted in the medical world. We didn't have the medical world. We didn't have the luxury of fighting for our doctors to do it. We had the ways to get it done and didn't get it done through doctors. This was done through midwives and other kinds of things that women learned how to do. So we were both talking about freedom of choice and the ability to make the decision if you had to, but we were talking about it in different ways, and so I learned early on not to take the language of the white women back to the black community. It didn't work. What I learned how to do was to get comfortable with talking about freedom of choice with black women in ways that were not offensive and did not invade their privacy, and we learned how not to talk about it in certain instances. We never confronted ministers and the church; white women did. We didn't, you know what I'm saying? We had an agreement, unspoken: black ministers didn't bother us about it and we didn't try to make it a part of our conversation with them. And still, that's kind of how things work in the black community even today, but I just learned how to handle the issues and to try and advantage our community from the growth and development on these issues in ways that they were comfortable with, and how to work with my white sisters on issues that I cared about, but not allow them to define them for me in ways that would alienate me from my own community. Story_ID: 20168 Speaker 1: Tell me how you came to work with Willie Brown during that time, you know. How'd that happen and what-- Speaker 2: Well, I'd known Willie before I was elected to the California State Assembly because before I went and I'd managed campaigns, I'd become a part of Democratic Party politics. I had run for the county committee and I was going to conferences and conventions, and so I met Willie Brown and some of the very, very exciting black politicians from the Oakland [California] area and admired him greatly. By the time I got elected and went into the California State Assembly, Willie Brown was there and he had gone through a struggle for the speakership and he was just a prominent leader, and when I got there, I was not sure-footed, but again, I'd come out of the women's movement and I did not think it was right for them to call me 'assemblyman.' It just didn't make good sense to me, you know. So I thought, "Well, you know, I'll just change the language in the way they talk about women here." I didn't even know that I was going to create such a stir, you know. So my first piece of legislation was to redefine the title from 'assemblyman' to 'assemblyperson.' What did I do that for? The men went crazy. They said I was trying to neuter them. They were really just taken back by this new member who was going to come and change the language, and you know, this feminist background, and all of that, so they took me on. This fight went on the floor for days where I was clearly losing because they were more experienced and painting me as a wild eyed feminist coming to, you know, change this institution that's been around, you know, for all these years. Willie came to my defense, you know, because he's just a smart politician and he saw I was tangled up in the parliamentary maneuvers on the floor, and he came to my defense, and on and on and on. And of course, we looked to Willie to learn how to do the job. I mean just, you know, you just paid attention whether he would pay attention or not, and you know, a short time afterwards when we got into a speakership fight, and of course I aligned myself with Willie, and by that time, I'm growing and developing and able to put things together and became one of his great operatives in developing the strategy for his speakership. We became very good friends, and then, of course, after we won the speakership, I became one of the leaders working with him to carry out, you know, whatever we wanted to carry out in the Assembly. Story_ID: 20169 Speaker 1: Now did you find the [California State] Assembly? Was it-- Speaker 2: I loved it. Speaker 1: You loved it. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're powerful. As a matter of fact, it took me awhile after I came to [U.S.] Congress. I mean I had separation pains or whatever you want to call it because we wield so much power there with Willie [Brown], you know, as the Speaker. I served on the Budget Conference Committee. That's basically six people resolving the differences between the two Houses [state senate and house of representatives] and deciding what the budget's going to be. I served on Rules Committee. I served on one of the Ways and Means Committees to determine, you know, fund--and we just had the ability to make things happen. You get your legislation. You can get it heard in committee. You pass bills with your name on it, and I had great legislation there. I had the Divestment Bill for the state of California, divesting all of our pension funds from firms doing business in South Africa. I had the strip search legislation that stopped the police establishment in the state of California from strip-searching people for nonviolent offenses. I had the first legislation to force insurance companies to pay for buildup after mastectomies for women who had wanted prosthetic devices and all of that. Had great legislation--the first statewide child abuse prevention program. Just had great legislation, great successes, so I loved it. Of course, you don't know what, whether or not--you just have no way of knowing that what you're supposed to be aspiring to may not be a satisfying as what you already have. So we were supposed to aspire to higher office, so-called, and people really just started to talk about it because I was in the same district with [U.S. Congressman Augustus] Gus Hawkins. He was aging, getting older, and people just, "Oh, well, that's Maxine's seat. Of course she's running for that seat, of course, of course, of course, of course." And of course I went on to run, but I missed it a lot after leaving. Yeah. Story_ID: 20170 Speaker 1: You're a big fish in a small pond [California State Assembly] so to speak. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. That's right. I loved the fact that I went home, of course, there every weekend too, shorter distance. But if I had to fly down during the week, I could, and I literally created a program in public housing projects for job training of all these gang members and kids in public housing, and I conducted those classes myself. I would fly down during the week and I had five or six public housing projects in the district. I created this program. I ran it. We put people in jobs, and I liked the idea of the close connection with the community, you know. Washington [D.C.] really puts you away from the community, and even though you can get back on weekends--in Sacramento [California], if something was happening on Thursday or Friday evening, you could fly down and fly back, you know, and they kept you in close contact. Speaker 1: Now when [U.S. Congressman Augustus] Gus Hawkins seat becomes available, were you even sort of preparing for that or were people saying, "Max," you know, there is this process? Speaker 2: I had prepared. It was assumed it was my seat. I had taken the position, you know, along with all the talk, and you know, my style of politics and all, that it was my seat, to the point where doing reapportionment when Gus was not one of the inside players. He was an esteemed member of Congress with an education agenda who worked at his job the way a congressman should work at his job, but he was not in the back room scheming about reapportionment, and so the lines that they had drawn for his seat was going to take him out of a large part of the black community and put him in hostile territory, and I created a big fight about that and moved those lines back, and it was at that point that I really knew I was going to run for that seat because I feel very strongly about protecting those lines, and I guess it was at that point that I really decided I was going to run. Story_ID: 20171 Speaker 1: I was developing or had developed a reputation as being feisty, confrontational, aggressive, and all of that, and [U.S. Congressman Augustus] Gus Hawkins was from the old school, and I always think he was a little bit uncomfortable with me. We had a good relationship, a very cordial relationship, but I always felt he was a little bit uncomfortable, and I always felt that all of the talk about me running for his seat made him a little bit uncomfortable and I never had any sense of when he was going to retire or anything like that, and I always felt that he thought maybe I was going to run against him. So, at one point, you know what I decided? I was going to write him a letter and I was going to make a commitment that I would never run against him, that I would never against him. So I wrote him a letter and I told him that, and then I think when he was ready to retire he called me up and he told me he was going to retire and I told him, "I will run for the seat," and he said, "And I will endorse you." Story_ID: 20172 Speaker 1: I do want to go back just a moment and ask you about working on [Rev.] Jesse Jackson's [Sr.] campaign. Speaker 2: I didn't even say Jesse. Yeah, okay. All right. I mean, yeah. Speaker 1: Because I was thinking that's, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Those were heady times too. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were. 1984 was exhilarating. When I talk about exciting, 1984 and 1988 were the most exciting campaigns. It was very powerful. Black people were very excited about Jesse Jackson. It was rough going in the beginning trying to get all of the black leadership in line. It was new. It was threatening, I think, for some, but the organizing, the meetings, the traveling from state to state, the working with the Secret Service, working at the conventions, behind the scenes, all of that was just--yeah, it was heady stuff. It was exhilarating. It gave us an opportunity to exercise power and to make decisions, and I must say that Jesse is a kind of person where he knows very well how to take talent and use it, and so you get a chance to do a lot working with Jesse Jackson. If you can do it, he'll not only let you do it, he'll give you more to do, you know, or expect more from you. So I got to do a lot in those campaigns. I was chairing the campaigns. I was in the back room with the guys, you know, making decisions. I was introducing him at all the big stops. It was good. Speaker 1: Who were some of the other people critical that people wouldn't know involved in these campaign? Was Emma Chappell-- Speaker 2: Very important. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very important. Was a finance type person who was helping us to do our financial reports, which are so important in these campaigns. The management of the contributions and the reporting of the contributions must be done and it must be taken care of. They always come after you and you're always going to make some mistakes, but she was very important with that. Speaker 1: And who else? Who were some of the other players (unclear)? Speaker 2: Out of Cleveland [Ohio], Pinkney, Arnold Pinkney, who had gained a lot of experience working with the governor and with [Mayor] Carl Stokes and [U.S. Congressman Louis] Lou Stokes--is one of those experts who still can manage campaigns. He was very important to us. Ron Walters was a policy person very important to us. You had (pause)-- Speaker 1: Was [U.S Secretary of Labor 1997-2001] Alexis Herman part of that group? No, or was she? Speaker 2: Alexis ended up in 1988 being important to the campaign. Yeah, in the 1988 campaign. She was involved in it. Oh, God, who? Everybody. Speaker 1: Ron Brown? Was he (unclear)? Speaker 2: Ron Brown in 1988. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: By that time, Ron Brown had been involved with [U.S. Senator Edward M.] Kennedy, and--well, he wasn't involved in the campaign. We had begged him to manage the campaign. He did not manage the campaign. He came in at convention time and became the deal-cutter who Jesse relied on because he had the inside experience in working with the Kennedys and behind the scene, but he didn't manage or do the, you know, work in the campaign. He came in after, toward the end of the campaign. Speaker 1: Now the '84 [1984] campaign, that was the one people--it was not as predominant, sort of. When did he make the speech before the convention? Speaker 2: The first speech he had was real big, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. That was the one that Dan Rather and them said, "Gather your children around the television. You're about to experience something," you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, because it made black people feel really proud. Speaker 2: Oh God, yes. Speaker 1: I mean in a big, big way. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Story_ID: 20173 Speaker 1: Did that get your interest in Washington [D.C.] going a little bit more too, or was that not really a factor? Speaker 2: I don't know that it did. I tell you one of the things that got me more interested in Washington was apartheid and divestment because as I worked with that issue, I was learning more about not only American foreign policy, but beginning to travel different places and wanting very much to know more about South Africa and Africa, and I realized that for foreign policy, you had to be on the national scene for that. You had to be in the [U.S.] Congress of the United States to really--we done a great job of divestment of the state of California's pension funds, but there was going to be continuing policies that had to be developed for a long time, whether it was pension funds or debt relief, and now, you know, it takes up a significant part of the work I do. I work on a lot of foreign policy issues. Speaker 1: That's wonderful when you think about it. You were very involved in Haiti too, weren't you? Speaker 2: Very much involved in Haiti. Very much involved in Haiti. Story_ID: 20174 Speaker 1: Was there anything different about the election or the campaign for, you know, for [U.S.] Congress that taught you something along the way? You know, that was different? Speaker 2: Yes, there's a lot of things different about Congress. Not so much running for Congress as being in Congress and getting there. The way you're viewed, the press, the way you're defined. I never had a contrived image. I never had a real strategy for how I was going to be perceived. I was just me. You know, say what I wanted to say, what I really felt, what have you, and it took me all of these years to understand I was scaring the hell out of people and I don't mind doing that, but I must be in control and know when I'm doing it and why I'm doing it. But to start to get defined by the national press was an interesting experience and still is a very interesting experience. How they see you and how they define you is very different than being in your state. And you have to give more thought to the issues you want to deal with, the television programs you want to go on, the ones you don't go on, and more in control of--and more how you define yourself because if you respond to the press, then they began to define you on the issues they choose to hear you on. You have to learn to resist some of that and try and get heard on the issues you want to be heard on because, again, there is an absolute difference in how you're seen by whites and how you're seen by blacks. I could go on the television every day and say whatever I wanted to say and black people would just love it, and do, but when I get feedback from whites about what they thought I said or how I looked, it is absolutely amazing, and oftentimes, it's not even what you say. It's the body movements. It's all of these perceptions that television project. That you know, you never have to think about, so you know, even though I'm a little bit critical of politicians who spend a lot of time creating these images and paying consultants to, you know, tell them what side to be seen on and what to wear and all of that, there's a little something to it. There's a little something to it. Speaker 1: And it's becoming increasingly sort of important in positioning, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Absolutely. Story_ID: 20175 Speaker 1: The perception of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was that it was this sort of very liberal place. You know, it had been on sort of the leading edge, and then all of a sudden--just like Cincinnati [Ohio] is erupting, you know, you see L.A. erupting and all the cameras turn there, and what was your feeling about what happened and what was your concern? Speaker 2: Well, if you can recall, by the time the Rodney King incident [ref. to police brutality against motorist Rodney King] took place [1991], I had served in the California State Assembly. One of the projects that I worked on, put a lot of time in, was creating a job-training program for public housing projects. I had gotten fed up with seeing just scores of young black males just hanging in all of these public housing projects, day in and day out, and made a conscious decision that I was going to find out why the JEPTA Program, the Jobs Employment Partnership Training Program, was not reaching them. We had money in the system for job training, but it seemed not to be reaching all of these young black males in public housing. So by now I've got some power, some ability to do some things, and in control of a committee where some Wagner-Peyser monies from federal government come through and you can get them out, and all. So I literally designed a job training program, and then I went and organized it in the district, got the public housing projects to give me space in these public housing projects, got money for it, created a nonprofit, hired staff, and then started walking the public housing projects talking with people and recruiting folks to come into this job training program. We had people lined up around the corner. And then I went in and got with my staff and created the lesson plans based on what I had learned about what the problems were, about drugs, about, you know, single parents, about the gangs, all of that. So I created, again, lesson plans with the kind of language and the kind of perspective that I thought would hit home, and it was very powerful. I got to know the families and all of these young men who were in gangs, got to know about crack cocaine, and a lot of things. I mean I just learned an awful lot. So by the time Rodney King erupted, I wanted to use the platform to define what was going on in these cities and with these kids and in these public housing projects. I was convinced that they wanted to sensationalize all of this and they wanted black elected officials to roll out, basically saying "Don't tear up your communities, don't be angry," all of those sloganeering kinds of things that they had learned to organize black elected officials to do in the name of safety. But I was convinced that you had to quell the discontent, at the same time, not make the victims of all of this hopelessness simply the problem in the system. I was convinced that this was a moment that we had to tell the story about really what's going on with a whole segment of our society that literally was dropped off of America's agenda. So I took the cutting edge issue of "You're not going to roll me out there saying, chastising simply, and saying 'you're bad people.' I'm going to tell you about all of these young people that I've met whose mothers and fathers both are in prison. I'm going to tell you about young people who may be in gangs, but they're banded together, living in vacant houses. I'm going to tell you about all of the crack cocaine that I see being dumped into these neighborhoods. You may not like it, but I'm going to tell you about it. I'm going to tell you in my own way." So it created a real stir that I was taking this position. Black people loved it; they had a voice. God darn it, somebody was telling them what, you know, nobody had told them on television before. Many whites were outraged that I would dare not simply go out and say, "Cool it, baby, cool it." You know that old language of containment that had been used in some future disturbances. So I chose, in a very conscious way, to define what was taking place and who these young people were and the drugs and the hopelessness because I'm in these housing projects. I'm running these classes. I'm interacting with these families. I'm feeding people. I'm going to court. I'm working with probation officers. I know this business, you know, backwards and--I know what's going on, so I decide to tell it. And the press, even though they could not believe what I was saying, they wanted to cover every minute of it, so they were at my house. They were, you know, at me to be in the studio early in the morning on both coasts. They were following me. They were doing all this, and I said, "Fine," you know, "as long as I get to tell you what I want to tell you about the problems of these cities and the poverty and the hopelessness and the devastation. Fine," you know, and that's what I did. And so that moment defined me with a lot of people nationally. Of course I'd worked in [Rev.] Jesse Jackson's [presidential] campaign. I knew all of the national leadership, but a lot of people didn't know me and this was a defining moment. And again, there's some folks in the conservative community who still hate me because of those moments, but there are people who continue to say today that I spoke for them, that I defined the problems, and that catapulted me into the discussion about drugs. Story_ID: 20176 Speaker 1: And so when I took up the drugs and CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] issue, it was because I'd seen the influx of drugs during those days working in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] , and I'd asked the young people, say, "Where is all of this dope coming from?" And everybody was a Colombian, you know, foreigners. "This one is--the Colombians are bringing it in." And there was a transition from the time when you had to have money to go out and buy drugs to sell to what I call consignment drugs, where they'd put it out there, and of course if you didn't bring the money back, you got killed, you know. So I mean I was learning all of this stuff. So when the story came out about the CIA and drugs, I knew some of the kids. I knew some of what had gone on down there, so I was able to, again, take a very controversial issue and say what I needed to say about it because of my intimate knowledge with what had been taking place in those communities. Story_ID: 20177 Speaker 1: Anyway, I want to go back to one thing, and that is: you grew up in the housing projects, and here, you know, this is what, twenty, thirty years later. What are you seeing in the black community that's different than the, you know, the impoverished--you know, you came from an impoverished community; what are you seeing that's different from the community you came from? You know, was it just that things had not changed, or have they really gotten worse? Speaker 2: Well, in many ways, things have gotten worse in the public housing projects. Crack is the scourge of the earth. It is the devil. It is the turning point, I think, in many of these communities that made things so much worse. Drugs have always been around, but crack is--I mean it is an evil that is not to be underestimated, and I've seen the destruction of families and whole communities with crack cocaine, you know, having been introduced into our communities. I was in one of the public housing projects, that's no longer in my district, on Election Day, and I was profoundly disturbed by the devastation that I saw just in the last [Los Angeles, California] mayoral election. That housing project that we had worked in, we had began to turn things around with the program that we had and we had many people who had gone on to jobs that they still have, but the absence, kind of, of an intense focus and resources, the things are getting worse, I think. Part of the problem is not simply that, you know, there are drugs in public housing projects. And by the way, [George W.] Bush just cut out of his budget the Drug Elimination Program for public housing projects. We were fighting about in on the floor [of the U.S. Congress] just before I came. Public policy in relationship to housing and poor people has not advanced nearly enough. The idea that you can stack poor people on top of each other in public housing is a policy that must be undone. We've got to view housing for poor people in different ways, and we have got to continue to have a war on poverty. It can never be over. You know, this business about, "You had a war on poverty and it didn't work," that's not true that it did not work. We had a beginning for a war on poverty that is something that should have been sustained and constant that got dropped, that must be resumed if we are to get at some of these very devastating problems. In addition to that, our drug policy is wrong-headed. The idea that you're going to spend billions of dollars in Colombia buying helicopters and spraying fields and not spend money on prevention and education and rehabilitation and decreasing the demand and helping people to understand--policies that have mandatory minimum sentences, that lock up nineteen-year-olds with five grams of crack cocaine, first time offenders, without having diversion programs, this is all crazy. The American people ought to be outraged that their taxpayer dollars have been spent on this phony war on drugs in the way that it has been. So these are the kinds of issues that I'm trying to work on and that I know I'm going to have to work on for, you know, a few years. I think we're beginning to get a glimmer of hope on this drug war, and even conservatives are beginning to say, "Wait a minute, this is crazy. This is not working. The billions of dollars that we're spending just building more prisons and locking people up is a waste." Some of them are saying that, but the African American community must understand that the imprisonment of young, black males is unconscionable, and increasingly now, women on conspiracy charges, all around drugs. We've got to have new policies, again, that educate, rehabilitate, and divert rather than these crazy policies of mandatory minimum sentencing. And my work now, I've decided that in the most controversial areas, those of us who have the freedom and support of our communities to be on the cutting edge without having to have an eye over our back that somebody does not like what we're doing, we're going to be kicked out of office, we got to do this work. We've got to talk about prisons, drugs, HIV and AIDS, and we've got to be advocates for money and resources and programs, and you know, working with young, black males and gangs and all of that. Not popular, but for those who are blessed with the kind of constituent support that reelects us, you know, year in and year out, we've got take these issues on in America. Story_ID: 20178 Speaker 1: Now with Rebuild L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you were not happy with that program. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Why was that? Speaker 2: I was not happy with Rebuild L.A. because I thought it was a public relations response to a serious issue. I thought that to go get Peter Ueberroth, who had been in charge of the Olympics [1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles], who had not understood the importance of the economic development issues as it relates to the black community with the Olympics, and who had actively worked in ways that eliminated African Americans' ability to be vendors and to have an economic piece, didn't really understand what was going on. I thought he was a good political name because he had organized the Olympics. That's big. And I thought [Los Angeles Mayor] Tom Bradley had, you know, identified someone who would give, you know, a good indication to the people that he was concerned about the issue and he had brought in somebody who had shown that they could be successful with the Olympics, who could do economic development, all those things, but I didn't think they had a clue of how to do it and they didn't. That's why they went out of business. Speaker 1: Do you think anything positive happened with-- Speaker 2: Very little. The program that I'm telling you about, out of it grew a program called Community Build [Inc.] that's run by a young African American woman named Brenda Shockley, an attorney, where we created working with a lot of the gangs. This program where we helped to do life skill management training and computer training, and all of that. I think we need a lot more of it. We've built a building. We're running those job-training programs. We're running some assistance with entrepreneurial programs, all of that. We need a lot more of that. Out of that, I decided when they first designed Rebuild L.A., I met with Tom Bradley and I was an advocate for this same young woman, at least being second in command to Peter Ueberroth. Somehow Peter Ueberroth objected to the fact that evidently I was pushing the mayor to do it and a story came out in the 'New York Times' that, you know, she wasn't going to do it as was being talked about. So that's when we went and created our own program, and out of that, like I said, we're managing this job training. We've built a new building, and we're running several operations, but we need, you know, fifteen times, twenty times more of that kind of thing. I don't think Rebuild L.A. was very meaningful at all. Story_ID: 20179 Speaker 1: I have to ask you--let's see since we don't have a lot of time--about impeachment, you know. The role that you played during the impeachment, because this was really historic. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well it was. Speaker 2: Well of course, you know, the world was traumatized with this impeachment of [U.S.] Bill Clinton and I took a particular role and approach to impeachment that, again, was highly controversial. But again, my work and my approach to it is born out of my experiences, and for me the issue was not so much whether or not he'd committed infidelity, of course, that is unacceptable, but the issue for me had to do with [Independent Prosecutor] Ken Starr and how he used his power. Don't forget, I have seen district attorneys, prosecuting attorneys, and the use of power. Those are very powerful positions and [U.S.] Attorney General, the Special Prosecutor; these are very powerful positions. And you can determine, you know, in short order, whether a person goes to prison, whether or not they end up with the death penalty based on your investigations, your work, et cetera. Ken Starr was in a very powerful position and I think that he abused his power. I've seen prosecuting attorneys and DAs [district attorneys] abuse power all my life. I've seen many young black males who end up in prison without representation. I've seen many plea bargain and take sentences they should not take, simply because they don't have the legal support and the money and the wherewithal to deal with the system. Also, that's another place where there's a real soft--we're vulnerable as African Americans and people of color are very vulnerable in the criminal justice system. When you take a look at everything from our court system to our DAs and prosecuting attorneys we're not there in any appreciable numbers, and so we are at the mercy of the decisions of people who oftentimes are simply building their careers, who are practicing racism and discrimination through their work, who do not have the sensitivity to want to work to be fair, and so I saw in Ken Starr all of the things that I've worked against, and I'm trying to change public policy-wise. And it didn't matter whether it was Bill Clinton or that kid down in that public housing project. When you hold a powerful position that allows you to determine someone's fate, I think you have to be examined, you have to be scrutinized, and when I deem it to be unfair, I'm going to say it, and I'm going to try and say it in the best way that I can. It has nothing to do with whether or not Bill Clinton was a friend, whether or not I liked Bill Clinton or not. It certainly didn't have anything to do with whether or not I thought he was right or wrong in terms of his relationship with the young woman. I know the Constitution. Remember, I'm a student of the [U.S.] Constitution. He was not involved in an impeachable offense. You can examine the Constitution any way that you'd like to examine it, but what he did, did not meet the test, and they were stretching and all of what was being built around Ken Starr, the right-wing conservative lawyers, all of whom hated that administration, who worked together, provided support for that. I thought it was an abuse of power and I chose to use my station and my platform at the time to say it. Story_ID: 20180 Speaker 1: We're going to be doing the Congressional Black Caucus--a history--and I just wanted to ask you about the role, you know, you see for the Caucus, and several people have predicted its demise after, you know, it lost its funding and I'm just wondering what you see as it's importance. Speaker 2: Well I think the Congressional Black Caucus is an important voice in the Congress of the United States, really speaking to the needs, aims, goals, concerns of African Americans all over this country. A lot of the work that we do is not oftentimes understood or known because much of the work you do there is in negotiation behind the scenes. It's stopping things from happening, bad things from happening, but of course, we have taken the leadership on HIV and AIDS in this country. We created brand new funding above and beyond the Ryan White Act [Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency (CARE) Act]. Did that under my the leadership when I chaired the Congressional Black Caucus. We took the lead on South Africa. We're responsible for [former South African President] Nelson Mandela, you know, getting his freedom and helping to dismantle apartheid. We're in the leadership of talking about now the imprisonment of young African Americans and African American men and how this prison system must be changed. We're in the leadership of lower income housing. We're fighting against some of these privatization policies with Social Security, and railing against a tax cut at a time when we need more investment still in these communities of poverty. We're the ones who fight for the black colleges and universities to keep a place in the education system, on and on and on, so our work is unending. And we do that work, we are that voice, and believe me, if we were not organizing, we were not there, these issues would not be, you know, get any attention whatsoever. Story_ID: 20181 Speaker 1: During your leadership, just one more question about the [Congressional Black] Caucus, you know, have there been a lot of female leaders--it's a new pattern more right? Did you find that it was hard (unclear)? Speaker 2: Leadership of the Black Caucus is very hard, very difficult. It is a very difficult--and two years--it's very, very hard work, very hard work (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Anything else you want to say? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's managing the geographical considerations of members who are from the South, who are in states that don't have organized labor as opposed to, you know, members who are coming from states who have strong organized labor. It's about issues like guns and some folks who were raised with guns and hunting, as opposed to guns of people who see gun control as the most important issue, and they have different cultural understandings about guns and the uses of guns. It's about whether or not you go too far out and you're considered too radical, and people who have a different approach think that somehow you are defining them in ways that they don't want to be defined. It's about the many, many issues you confront in setting priorities and whether or not those priorities are supported by, you know, enough of the members, so that all people feel that they're being represented. It is difficult. It is not easy. Story_ID: 20182 Speaker 1: Is there something about the history that you learned that not many people know about the CBC's [Congressional Black Caucus] history that you find unique or different or, you know, or that people wouldn't necessarily know? Speaker 2: I don't know that there's anything except I have come to really respect the organizers of the Congressional Black Caucus, the founders. [U.S. Congressmen] Lou [Louis] Stokes and [William] Bill Clay and these guys are brilliant. They were masters in their subject matter. They learned to navigate very difficult waters in a hostile environment early on, and they learned lessons that have held some of us in good stead by listening and watching and patterning ourselves after them. So I think that story has not been told. Story_ID: 20183 Speaker 1: What do you think of the progress that you have made? Speaker 2: Well, I feel that, I wish (pause) that I could share what I do now a little bit more with my family so that--they're very proud of what I do, but I wish they could see it even up closer, and particularly my mother. I did not have a plan for this career. I did not know where I was going, but what's interesting is my high school yearbook predicted that I would be the Speaker of the [U.S.] House of Representatives, and I had no idea. I still feel that a very early age, I had a glimmer or glimpse into the possibilities, didn't know where I was going and how I was going to get there, but never felt that I was not capable of doing something special, something important, and something that would be very satisfying. I've never wanted to have a career for the sake of having some title or importance--but I've always wanted to be satisfied that I was making up for the pain, the problems, the lack of opportunity that I had experienced in our community. I get great satisfaction out of winning public policy and being able to level the playing the field to equalize, you know, opportunity, I get great satisfaction out of that. So I guess I've always had expectations for myself that I could do something meaningful, that I could make something right, didn't know how, and am very satisfied when I feel that I'm doing that, and I'm not happy when I don't feel I'm making it happen. Story_ID: 20184 Speaker 1: Legacy, what do you want your legacy to be. Speaker 2: I'm not sure but I know one thing for sure, I want it to be understood that my work and my life was not confined to simply one sector of our society. But just as I sat with the prime ministers and presidents of countries and talk about public policy and work on it, I also do that in public housing projects, with the least of these with kids who have been dropped off of America's agenda and that they are just as welcome at my table, maybe even more so. And that my work was work that paid attention to injustice and inequality, but that I gave special time and attention to troubled children. Story_ID: 20185 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Maxine Waters U.S. Congressional photo, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20186 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Maxine Waters, n.d. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20187 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Maxine Waters with the U.S. Capitol in the background, Washington, D.C., ca. 1990s. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20188 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Maxine Waters with children from the Pueblo del Rio Housing Development, Los Angeles, California, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20189 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Maxine Waters (center) showing investors and developers around the Vermont Avenue and Vermont Knolls community, Los Angeles, California, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20190 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Maxine Waters with President Bill Clinton, Washington, D.C., August, 1994. From the collection of Maxine Waters.] Story_ID: 20191 Speaker 1: [no narration]. Speaker 2: [Maxine Waters with her husband, Sidney Williams, U.S. Ambassador to the Commonwealth of the Bahamas. From the collection of Maxine Waters.].