 Story_ID: 299956 Speaker 1: --[Racine] Tucker-Hamilton and I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Today's date is Friday February 4th, 2005, and this interview is taking place in New York [New York]. Now, if you would please for the record tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it? Speaker 2: Alyce, A-L-Y-C-E, Faye, F-A-Y-E, Wattleton, W-A-T-T-L-E-T-O-N [HistoryMaker Alyce Faye Wattleton]. Speaker 1: Would you please tell us the date and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: July 8th, 1943, St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm the president of the Center for the Advancement of Women [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 299957 Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better. So I ask you to give me short answers to these questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food is fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Thailand. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is summer. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying is, can you believe that? Story_ID: 299958 Speaker 1: So let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl and her background? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ozie, O-Z-I-E, Garrett, G-A-R-R-E-T-T, Wattleton. She was born in Farmhaven, Mississippi um, on November 21st, 1915. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl? Speaker 2: Yes, she has shared a lot of stories with me about life growing up in rural Mississippi. It was in the early part of the century and, and she lived in, in the segregated, in the most segregated part of the South and Mississippi. Although her, her father [Eugene Garrett] was a minister, rode the circuit of churches, a different circuit every, every Sunday, but she was the eldest daughter in a family of nine children. There were five boys, five brothers and four sisters. And so she, as is often the case in, in rural families, rural large families, the eldest daughter assumes a lot of the responsibilities for the domestic household chores. And she of course had more than her share of responsibilities in this regard. Speaker 1: And could you share with us the, the story of um, your mother when she finally made up her mind that she wasn't going to pick cotton anymore? Speaker 2: Well, my, my mother's father was assistant minister and he also owned sawmills and he operated a country general store with just small home supplies and groceries, but they were also landowners, he and his wife [Ola Garrett]. And they had a very large spread of cotton and with--I'm sure that my mother felt that with the tremendous burden of the household chores that she had to perform while her mother was going on having more children, added to that the responsibility of going to the field to pick cotton, it was just more than she could, could take. And so one day she just decided that she wasn't going to pick cotton anymore and she would take her punishment. She told them that they could beat her every day, but she was not going to pick any more cotton, and she didn't. Speaker 1: And she, she went to live with family members? Speaker 2: She went to live with church members as I said earlier--my, my grandfather was a minister and, and so the family was very close-knit with other families in their denomination and there was a family in Ohio that was also a minister and my grandfather was, was a colleague and a friend of this minister and so she went to live with that family. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: She will say that she also had visions of being on her way to New York [New York] to become a model. And if you can think of--let's see, she was born in 1915 and she was sixteen, seventeen that would have been sort of at the end of the Harlem Renaissance, so I'm sure that, that the stories that were told of life in New York and, and the vibrancy of the culture and the beauty of, of music and all that was going on in New York at that time must have been a very compelling imagery for, for a girl from rural Mississippi. Story_ID: 299959 Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton]? Speaker 2: I would describe my mother as being very, a very powerful woman, a very strong-willed, strong-minded individual. She's described that way by her brothers and sisters by the way, who remember her when she was a small, small child. She always in, in their telling of the story, in their interpretation, found a way to get out of doing the chores that the rest of them could not escape by, by pleading with her mother [Ola Garrett] and father [Eugene Garrett] to go to church or, or other excuses. But she has always been a, a woman that expresses herself very directly, is very compelling in her, in her, in the command of her oratory. When she was a teenager she won a national 4-H competition that resulted in, in a trip to Washington, D.C. and I'm sure that this opened a, a tremendous horizon for this, again, this rural Mississippi teenager who had won this 4-H competition and appeared on a national syndicated radio--it wasn't television then, but radio, speaking about her 4-H work from the capital of the United States. So she had a very early experience that contributed to her vision and her perception of what is possible for her life. Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about your mother's ministry? Speaker 2: My mother while living in Ohio after she decided not to pick cotton became very involved with the church and the young members of the church in Columbus, Ohio and believed that she had been called to the ministry during, during those teenage years. She was only seventeen. And she began to pray and she describes it as a time of, of great reflection and studying and, and listening to the minister who said to her, you know, you have something very special as a young woman and I want the other young people in the church to hear what you have to say. And I think that was really the bud, the early buds of her ministry that became a lifelong ministry until she retired at the age of eighty-seven. Speaker 1: And she traveled all over the country with her ministry? Speaker 2: Well, initially she did not travel around the country. She eventually went, returned to Mississippi because that's really where she wanted to be in any case and now she was a minister alongside her father. And she remained there for another few years before she joined that Great Migration of blacks from the South to the North, ending up in St. Louis [Missouri] where she visited cousins and relatives and eventually settled down in St. Louis; was married to my father George [Wattleton], and became a Wattleton, not a Garrett, and they spent the, the war [World War II, WWII] years, because he was shipped abroad in the [U.S.] Army, they spent the war years and the immediate years thereafter in St. Louis. Story_ID: 299960 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father, starting with his name and his background. Speaker 2: His name was George Wattleton. He was born in 1912, and I know that because I was just talking with my mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] last night and we were trying to figure out how old would he have been if he had still lived, and he passed away at a relatively young age. He was born in Anniston, Alabama. More precisely, he was born in Hobson City, Alabama. And he liked to tell the story that it was a, a town where there were--that they, they had their own black sheriff, their own black city mayor; the chief of police was black. It was an all-black town outside Anniston, Alabama. So he came to the North with a great sense of pride in his Afro-American heritage. And that would, that would reveal itself on a number of occasions that I recall when I was growing up. Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your father do while you were growing up? Speaker 2: My father was always involved in construction or factory work. I don't remember, well, he, he was not an educated man. He did not have a high school diploma. And so he, he worked with his hands. He was an unskilled laborer, but he was a very strong man and a very industrious man. So he was always interested in finding good, rewarding work to do. Story_ID: 299961 Speaker 1: When was it that your mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] really started traveling with her ministry, when that really picked up? Speaker 2: I would say it was in the late '40s [1940s]. We were living in St. Louis [Missouri] at the time, 1241 Walton [Avenue] became the infamous, or famous, I guess address because we were so involved in, in a very tightly knit social circle, circle that revolved around the church. And we attended the, the Church of God [New Cote Brilliante Church of God] in, in, in St. Louis and Gabriel Dixon was the minister. And it was, it was really, really the center of our lives, the social center of our lives, the friendships that, that intersected our family were, were, were built around the church. And by that, well by the mid to late '40s [1940s] my mother's sisters all lived in the same house. Shortly before I was born my [maternal] grandmother [Ola Garrett] died and so she--my mother assumed the responsibility for her teenage sisters that came up from the South to live with her and an older sister who also joined them. So I lived in a very--I was the only child and I lived in, in a very extended family household for a number of years until my mother had--felt the call to expand her ministry to become a full-time minister working for the Church of God Ministries [Anderson, Indiana]. Speaker 1: And what was that like for you, since you didn't travel with her. Speaker 2: Well, initially I didn't travel with her. I remained in St. Louis with my aunts and that was a very--well, it was a happy, probably it was the, the time of my life that I remember as being the happiest because it was the coming and goings of all the church people, my aunts were seamstresses so there was always someone in the, in the house. It was a two-story home, two family building. There was always someone there trying on something to be altered or to be made. So there was a lot of activity. I was the only child in the house. I was the only small child actually in the neighborhood, so I would go up and down the block talking to my neighbors and much to my mother's consternation I would sometimes go around the corner and talk to the cab drivers. And I was irrepressible in many ways. And it was a very happy time. Once my mother made the dedication to devote full-time to what was known then as home missions, that is building churches for the Church of God around the county, I--it was, my life was disrupted and it really took a very different turn. Speaker 1: And so you began to stay with various church members? Speaker 2: Well, yes, my--one thing that I think that I should point out here is that my mother's upbringing had, had, had included a very strong emphasis on education. Her father [Eugene Garrett] was very committed to the (gestures) Negro being educated and realizing that that was really the ticket to, to any kind of advancement for African Americans. He was in fact, the son of an African American mother [Maria (ph.)] who was born the year of emancipation to a white father. So his, his background was very similar to many blacks in the South after the Civil War, during, during Reconstruction. So there was a really strong value placed on education that transcended, just my grandfather but also was passed on to his children. So my mother always believed that whatever she was doing, wherever she had been assigned, that I needed to remain during the school year in one place, and that often meant leaving me with members of the church in various locations around the South and in, in the North who might provide a home for me so that I could attend schools in those cities. I, I--to, to give you a sense of how much moving around that entailed, after the third grade, actually after the second, after the third grade that's correct, after the third grade I did not attend the same school two years in a row until my senior year in high school [Calhoun High School, Port Lavaca, Texas]. So it really meant a lot of moving around, getting to know people in a lot of different situations. But also longing for those days in St. Louis where the neighbors were, were familiar. The neighborhood was known, the certainty of what, what life was going to be about was well prescribed, and always being loved by my aunts and by the friends in the church with whom I had great relations, my Sunday school teachers, my friends whom I loved to play with after church and, and so it was really a very unstable and, and nomadic life style after we left St. Louis. Speaker 1: And, and if you can, can you just talk a little bit about there, there was a time when you went to stay with a, a family who did not treat you very kind? Speaker 2: Well there were many times that I was--let me start that over. There were many times when I did not experience the best circumstances. My mother thought that she was doing the best that she could in, in fulfilling her, her view of her ministry and to create an opportunity for me to get a good education, did not always mean that she was creating the best emotional opportunity for me. And people will sometimes say, yes, she can stay with us and, and that seems reasonable. But taking on the responsibility of a young child and all of the, the challenges of rearing someone else's child who is not your own and is a temporary resident in your home, meant very often that, that I was not treated very well. In some cases I was physically, but very often emotionally abused. Story_ID: 299962 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your grandparents. Did you know your paternal grandfather [Louis Wattleton] at all? Speaker 2: I did not know my paternal grandfather. I briefly knew my paternal grandmother, who lived in Alabama, in Anniston, Alabama. She would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name? Speaker 2: --sometimes come to visit. Oh, God whatever was her name. That-- Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: --let's come back to that. Speaker 1: Okay, and if it comes to you let me know. Speaker 2: It will come back to me. Speaker 1: So she would come to visit sometimes in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yeah, but yeah, but she died when I was very, when I was a very small child-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she would visit us in St. Louis. Speaker 1: And what about your maternal (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jessie. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, Jessie Wattleton? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Jessie Wattleton was her, was her name. Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandfather? Speaker 2: My maternal grandfather was Eugene Garrett and we called him Uncle Dean--I mean, I'm sorry, I'll start that again. My maternal grandfather was Eugene Garrett and we called him Grandpa Deeny. Speaker 1: And did he come to visit often? Speaker 2: He often came to visit and those were very high points in the family time that often relatives from Chicago [Illinois] would come down to visit when they heard that he would be up from Mississippi to visit us. So we often had a house full of relatives enjoying his time with them and reminiscing about all of their experiences living in the, in the country and outside Canton, Mississippi and Farmhaven [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: And tell us about the time when he came to visit and you were a little adventurous in the tree? Speaker 2: Well I, I was always adventurous if you listen to the stories of my family. I would, I would--it seemed that from the moment that I could walk and talk that I was somehow engaged in activities that confounded them. And, and you have to remember these are people who grew up in the South and who grew up in the rural areas. And we were now in a big city and, and that's where I was born. So I felt no constraints about talking to strangers and, and doing what seemed to be the, the, the natural thing to do. And I had a great imagination, and, and sometimes that did not comport with common sense. And so once I decided, having seen birds fly in the sky, I mean, fly out of trees and towards the sky, that I should certainly be able to do what they could do, never stopping to think that maybe they were constructed a little differently and, and that I didn't have the equipment to do, to make the same journey. And so one Sunday afternoon I was playing with my friends from the neighborhood and we, we climbed up this-, the tree in the backyard, it was an oak tree that we very often climbed, and we climbed to the top of it and I decided well, that it was time for me to fly out of it. And so I said, look at me Miss Sue [ph.]. Miss Sue was my friend, we called, I called her Miss Sue. And I said, look at me Miss Sue, I'm a bird, tweet, tweet. And with that I took off from the branch and landed on my head. I guess some might say that, that the evidence of that fall on the head has, has been with me throughout my life. But the, probably the most I sustained was just a big headache and a lengthy, although now, as a, as a professional nurse I know that it was a, a very dangerous way in which they handled it to just let me sleep it off, which could have been really the evidence of severe brain, brain hemorrhaging and brain damage. Story_ID: 299963 Speaker 1: Tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up? What's one of the earliest things you remember? Speaker 2: Well my earliest memory is riding my tricycle up and down the street and break-, carrying a milk bottle. I loved cold milk and I remember that in those years the milk man delivered milk every day or several times a week and put it in a small box that was presumably insulated to keep it cold until it could be transferred to the icebox, because there were still icebox, iceboxes in the early '40s [1940s]. So I remember once grabbing the milk bottle and dropping it and cutting my, my arm, a scar that is still with me to this day, but also that was another time in which my parents [Ozie Garrett Wattleton and George Wattleton] were, and my aunts were just completely out, at their wits end with me. But I, but, but my, I had transportation. My tricycle was my transportation. And so I had freedom. I took freedom early on and I took off and my imagination was-, I was only limited by imagine, by my imagination as to where I would go. I mean it was always in the neighborhood [in St. Louis, Missouri]. But I was not--I never saw my world as limited to my yard. And their challenge was to somehow to always keep an eye on me for safety's sake, because even in the '40s [1940s] it was not a safe proposition for a two or three or four year old to run around the neighborhood without supervision. And I was also very creative in listening to adult conversation around me. And so I had--I remember with great enjoyment that I would often mimic the conversations that I heard among the, the women in my--who came to visit my mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] and her sisters and my aunts. And I would--they would sometimes hear me having conversations with myself playing the different parts of the different women. I loved having pocketbooks. And that's, that's a quality that has, has been with me through my adulthood. I would, I would very often carry around an old pocketbook and go throughout the house picking up items and, and stuffing them in my purse as I called it. So if my mother missed something she would go first to my purse to find out if it was there because very often, if it was something that was pretty nice I had already spotted it and put it in my cache. Story_ID: 299964 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry? Do you know if you came from freed people, slaves, how far back? Speaker 2: Well, as far as I know my, on my maternal grandfather's [Eugene Garrett] side, and actually grandmother's [Ola Garrett] because they were cousins. Speaker 1: Your maternal grandfather and grandmother were cousins (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My maternal grandfather and grandmother were cousins, which is not uncommon in those years. On my, on, on, my maternal grandparents' side, my great-grandmother, who was my grandfather's mother was the daughter of a slave. As I said, she was born in 1863, the year of slavery. You know I'm sitting here, I think that I remember my great-grandmother and that she was a slave. I mean how short a period of time in history that in, in which slavery has been, was ended officially ended that is. But I remember Maria [ph.]. She spent the last thirteen years of her life in bed. She decided that she had lost lots of friends, a number of friends had died and it was time for her to die. So she went to bed to die and she didn't get out of bed until she died thirteen years later. But she was the daughter of a, of a slave. And these were slaves that had been brought from South Carolina by a slave owner, which was not uncommon to history in those, at that time I'm told. As the land began to wear out from over production in the Carolinas many of the, of the plantation owners moved west to Louisiana and Mississippi. And he brought with him his slaves. Their, their last--his last name was Thompson [ph.]. He brought with him his slaves and they stayed in Mississippi for a while and he decided to return to the Carolinas and allowed his slaves to make the decisions as to whether they would remain in Mississippi or return with him. Part of them decided to remain in Mississippi and another segment; segment of them chose to return to the Carolinas. So someplace along the way there are brothers and sisters' children that have been separated, or that were separated by that decision that are related and have lived a very different lineage. But that particular group of brothers and sisters, the Browns [ph.], chose to stay in Mississippi. Speaker 1: And what about your, that's your maternal side, right? What about your paternal side? Speaker 2: My father [George Wattleton] knew--I don't know very much about the background of my father. He only says that my, that his grandfather came from the islands to Alabama. So I, I assume that it meant that he came from the Caribbean, or maybe he came off the coast to Georgia. Those were the islands that many Africans (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --were, were, you know departed or, or embarked, embarked--I want to just--those, the islands off the coast of Georgia were islands in which there were a number of African and slave settlements. So that could have been where his parents [Jessie Wattleton and Louis Wattleton] came from, but I know more about the, the genealogy of, of my maternal grandparents than I do about my, my paternal grandparents. Story_ID: 299965 Speaker 1: Do you remember what holidays were like in your house growing up? Were they--did you all celebrate a lot of holidays? Speaker 2: Well that's a very interesting question because I don't remember celebrating holidays other than Christmas. I suppose there was Easter, Christmas and Easter because Easter was a big time for making dresses, so there was a lot of activity among the seamstresses [Wattleton's maternal aunts] in the house. And also there was a, a, a lot of activity at church around Easter and Easter baskets and Easter egg hunts. And, and then Christmas was the time of decorations and Christmas trees and, and that sort of thing. I don't remember much in the way of celebrations around birthdays or other holidays that have become so significant in the life of our country, maybe in the, in the mid-century there wasn't a lot of holiday celebration as we have it today. Speaker 1: Was your house in St. Louis [Missouri], was it a gathering place for Christmas celebrations and, and the Easter celebrations? Speaker 2: Not more than usual, I would say that it, it, it was, it might have been, it would have been the gathering place of, of, for relatives but, not for any wide circle of, of friends or, or, or others who came to celebrate. You know that was a time when families really stayed together a lot. People stayed in their homes and, and enjoyed their families. There wasn't the kind of mobility in which neighborhoods were made up of, of people who were strangers to each other and who were not related to each other and they sort of come together to create a sense of family around holidays. People pretty much lived in their neighborhoods for most of their lives and so their families were with them and, and they, they shared the holidays with their families. Story_ID: 299966 Speaker 1: And do you remember much about your community that you lived in in St. Louis [Missouri], like your block, can you kind of describe your block for us? Speaker 2: Well the block, interesting--that's an interesting question because as is often the pattern of, of, of upwardly mobile immigrant populations, we were one of the first families of, of African American descent in our neighborhood. It had been largely a Jewish family and once blacks started buying and moving into the neighborhood then the neighborhood quickly changed and, and the Jewish families fled to Wellston [Missouri] and to Clayton [Missouri]. And fled to the suburbs actually, and St. Louis, the intercity of St. Louis eventually became mostly black and, and mostly a, a slum. But it was a very, it was a, a block of row houses, there was one house--each house was identical to the other. Each house had two porches on the front. One porch led to the stairs that led upstairs to the second floor and the other porch led to the downstairs and there was usually a backyard, a small front yard and a large backyard where we had barbeque pit, a barbeque pit. My [maternal] grandfather [Eugene Garrett] loved to barbeque with my uncle and my father [George Wattleton] when he came because they had a big barbeque pit in the back, in the backyard. Speaker 1: And, and evidently there was a, a cabstand nearby? Speaker 2: There was a cabstand, as I mentioned earlier, around the corner that was, that--well you, you have to understand that these were very high-minded African American people up from the South, lots of aspirations and lots of classism. There was a right and a wrong about what people who had class did and did not do. And a cabdriver was one step above being, you know, somebody who was engaged in, in quasi-legal endeavors, or, or works. So cabdrivers were really not people that you wanted to associate with. But I didn't know anything about class and, and about what, what were the, what were the class limitations, the, the boundaries of class associations and communications. They were just guys that would talk to me when I would get on my tricycle and go around and talk to them and I'm sure they were as amused by, by my gregariousness and my exuberance as a child and, and I was not--and my extroversion, I guess was the word I was looking for, so I enjoyed it. I remember having a lot of fun going around talking to the guys at the cabstand. My mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton], I'm sure she was worried that they were going to rape me or kidnap me or some such, such other, other heinous crime, but no one ever conducted himself in any way other than just a friendly cabdriver; just like the friendly Chinese restaurant owner on the corner. There was a Chinese restaurant on the corner. I would go talk to the Chinese restaurant owner who would sometimes give me bowls of rice. So, it was, it was a neighborhood, I mean--and you know one of the, the aspects of growing up in, in a more integrated society that I regret that my, my daughter [Felicia Gordon] does not experience, is that sense of neighborhood. I, you know, I went to nursery school with our, our doctor's son. If I got a, if I got a nose sniffle, I just went across the street, went up the steps to Dr. Evans' [ph.] office and he would take care of me. The drugstore was right across the street and that was, there was a soda fountain and that and you know, you bought all of your sundries and the cleaners was around the corner and Mr. Elroy [ph.], the house painter lived three doors down and he had the most beautiful house I can imagine because his wife made him paint it every year. So it was always spiffy and beautiful and well maintained. So there was really an eclectic mix of people that were thrown together because we could not live in any location, in any neighborhood in St. Louis. It was a segregated neighborhood, but what that meant was that all classes of black people lived together. And there was this much stronger sense of black identity. We went to church on Garfield Avenue and the church was, that we, to which we traveled, we got on the streetcar and we went through the neighborhoods and we became acquainted with people in the neighborhood around the church. Story_ID: 299967 Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit now about elementary school. You started school very early, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I started well, I started, I, I started actually, nursery school at two. My mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] tells the story that she had taken me to the hospital clinic for some, some, I, probably my immunizations, and the doctors asked her if they could take me to another part of the hospital for a while. They wanted do some additional tests. She thinks that they did some sort of psychological test, but when they came back with me because, you know, I talked nonstop. I mean it drove everybody crazy because I was such a talker. And she said that when they came back--when he came back and, and, and deposited me, he said, you know you really should put this child in a nursery school immediately, she needs to be with other children. She's such a, a, a, a gifted child for her age. So I landed in nursery school, Mrs. Taylor's [ph.] nursery school, Mrs. Taylor's nursery school. And among the people who were there were, were the children from the neighborhood and Linwood Evans [ph.] who was my doctor's son. We were the best friends in nursery school. And so I sort of had a beginning, you know, an early start, an early beginning. At four and a half, I went to kindergarten. I stayed there two weeks. I talked, out talked them and they put me in first grade. So at the end of my first year in, in school I went from kindergarten to second grade. So by the time I was five I was in, in second grade. Speaker 1: And what was the name of that elementary school? Speaker 2: Washington Elementary School [Washington Montessori Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] on Euclid Boulevard. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. And do you remember your teacher there? Speaker 2: Actually, I'm sorry, I'll take that back. This will be edited, right? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, it's not being edited, oh, okay. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, it was Washington Elementary School on Euclid Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember your teacher there? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember my teacher's name. Speaker 1: Okay, but do you remember like your first day and your experiences there in kindergarten, well, first grade? Speaker 2: I don't remember so much. I remember being taken to school by my, by my mother's younger sister, Ola [Ola Garrett], who was living with her at that time. I remember being walked to school because I couldn't--even in those years they wouldn't let a four year old walk the probably six or eight blocks to school. But I don't remember a lot other than going out to play and maybe, maybe I do remember a little bit of doing the same things that I had been doing in nursery school, which is drawing and adding and those kinds of things. But, by the time I was in the second grade I remember being able to come home alone with my friends and we would always stop at the candy store on Fountain Avenue. There was a park right over from the, from the school. And it was--it was on Fountain Avenue around Fountain Park [St. Louis, Missouri]. And we would always stop at the candy store and get penny candies. Mary Janes were our favorites. Story_ID: 299968 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned earlier the barbeque pit in the backyard and that is a smell that always evokes life on Walton Avenue in St. Louis [Missouri]. The sounds of the city have always been compelling to me. I live in New York City [New York, New York] now and even though many of my friends have homes in, in, in the rural areas around New York, I have never had a desire to live in rural anywhere, let alone outside New York City. And I think it was because I grew up, my early formative years were spent in a city. In a metropolitan, a metropolis where there was a vibrancy of life and there was life all around and there was a density of buildings and homes and things weren't so spread out and isolated. There was Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], we'd go in the summer and, and in those years you could actually sleep in the park overnight when the city got to be, be so hot that it became unbearable. St. Louis is, is renowned for having extremes in climate. And in the wintertime it can be very cold and the wind can be very bitter. In the summertime it is famous for having the hottest, most humid summers in the country and some, so to escape the brick homes that sometimes become kil-, kilns because they, they maintain the heat after sundown. We would often go to Forest Park and sit out in the park and sometimes people would sleep in the park. They would take their blankets and their picnic baskets and, and they were not considered vagrants in those years. It was a very common thing to do. It was also common to go to Forest Park opera [Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis (The Muny), St. Louis, Missouri] in the evening. And again, keep in mind, I came from a family of, of upwardly mobile blacks, not highly educated, or, and certainly not wealthy, but, but highly cultured and aspiring to culture and to education and so going to and seeing the opera in the summer as an escape from the summer's heat was a very common activity and event which I grew to hate because as a young child being stuck at Forest Park opera drinking these bitter lemon drinks that they sold with no sugar in them became really a punishment more than, an, an expedition, or a particularly pleasurable experience. It was not, Six Flags experience. Story_ID: 299969 Speaker 1: So what kind of student were you during the elementary school years [at Washington Elementary School; Washington Montessori Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: I would say that, that my mental talent was, was probably the single most important reason that I was able to survive the turmoil and the instability of my childhood. Wherever I was placed, and I do mean that literally, my mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] would place me with families for the school year, I became the, the kid in the class who was the smartest. And that, I suppose, was a two-edge sword, but mostly it was a source of affirmation which was very important when you're new and when you don't know what to expect and you don't know people who you, with whom you are having to relate and to be able to gain recognition and praise for doing my work well and doing it at a high level always getting A's always getting one hundreds became really the glue, the thread that held me together during those years of instability. Speaker 1: Why didn't you, why didn't your mother just have you stay with one of your aunts who was there in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well, one aunt had, had decided to go back to college and had, and had married. Her youngest sister had married and was living in Anderson, Indiana, which is the headquarters location of our, of the denomination [Church of God] that we were raised in, so, basically my aunts had began to scatter once my mother became involved in the ministry full-time. The one aunt for whom I am named, Aunt Alyce, remained in the house, actually remained--she stayed there until it was, literally the house fell down around her. But she was married to a very abusive husband and so it was not a, a, even under the circumstances in which I was living with different families, it was better than living with, with an abusive relative and the uncertainty of knowing when I might be the subject of his abuse. Speaker 1: And what was it like for you, did you understand what was happening during the elementary school years? Did you, did you know that at a certain time you would go to live with another family during the school year and then you'd spend the summers with your mother and your father [George Wattleton]. Did you understand that? Speaker 2: Sure, I mean you know, what's there not to understand about that. I mean I knew that we weren't going back to St. Louis. And I knew that my mother traveled around the revival circuit. These were not my relatives. I, I stayed two years with, with an aunt and an uncle and that was not a particularly happy two years. And I think my mother was always sort of in search of the best place to find, to find a place for me to be. So, I mean, it, it, I mean I, yes I knew that I wasn't going to be there, but what, what, what that meant for the future was uncertain. It, it, it I suppose could be characterized as similar to what a military family experiences, except maybe not quite the same because even in the context of moving around in the military you know that you're going to be on the base and what the base is going to be like and you're still going to be with your family. Speaker 1: Right, the whole family moves. Speaker 2: So that the expectations are, are pretty well known to you. Here it was really adapting to different expectations and learning very quickly whom to trust and who not to trust and what I needed to do in order to survive the circumstances. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And during elementary school did you have dreams and aspirations, like what did you want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted to be a nurse and I don't know where that dream or aspiration came, from where it, from whence it sprung. I have a feeling it was suggested to me and so you sort of pick it up. But in those years being a nurse or a social worker or a teacher were in the professions that women pursued. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Being a doctor or lawyer were the professions that few women pursued, a very tiny class of women pursued. But the, the, the point is that, that is very important is that there was a perception that I would be someone. There was no assumption that you would just simply be nothing, that you wouldn't have a profession, that you wouldn't have a higher education, even though I did not come from a well-to-do family and, and they had very limited resources. There was a tremendously strong sense of aspiration. Story_ID: 299970 Speaker 1: What year was it for you when your mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] got that job in Nebraska? Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you still in elementary school [Washington Elementary School; Washington Montessori Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: That was in 1954. We were there in '54 [1954], '55 [1955]. I don't think I was quite ten. I think I was nine. I think I was there between the ages of nine and eleven. And she was asked to come to Columbus, Nebraska, which is in the middle of the State of Nebraska to pastor an all-white church. I think they thought, I think everyone, as I, as I look back on it, I think there was just a lot of being caught up in the novelty of let's have this black woman pastor our church. I've learned subsequently that, that the church congregation eventually folded because there were so few parishioners. There was so little interest and appeal to this very fundamentalist denomination in this all white town in the middle of Nebraska; town of about ten or twelve thousand people with an unwritten rule that blacks would not be given jobs, so that it would remain all-white, so my father [George Wattleton] had to drive every week to Omaha [Nebraska] in order to seek employment, because my mother earned insufficient amount, an insufficient amount to support the family. But, but it was an, it was an exotic experience. Speaker 1: What was it like for you, I mean did you adjust pretty quickly, or did the adjustment period take some time? Speaker 2: Well, keep in mind I really had a lot of experience adjusting. So it, it, it was a new environment, and that--that was taken for granted that it was going to be someplace different. It was not an easy adjustment however, because I was among people who had mostly never seen a black person in their lives. Do you want to stop? (Background noise) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Mostly I was among people who had never seen a black person in their lives. There were a lot of post-war [WWII, WWII] German immigrants who had moved to that area to open farmland and to reconstruct the life that they had fled from, from Eastern Europe. And, so it was, it was a time in which we were, I can't say that we were, there was a great deal of prejudice or bigotry extended toward us. There was a lot of curiosity about us, but we certainly weren't embraced beyond the small circle of the congregation that my mother pastored. And we were seen as rather exotic. The first time that we went to the town center I remembered people actually stopping in the stores, in the dry good stores because in those days there were-, wasn't like department stores. It was that you went to a dry goods store and there was a section for dresses and a section for notions and different sections and so you walked down the aisles with the displays on the counter with the products that displayed openly on the counters. And those were the years in which we--I, I learned how to conduct myself in the most unfriendly circumstances and they weren't unfriendly, they just simply weren't friendly. We were creatures that, to whom they did not relate, but they didn't particularly reject us, in a way that sort of puts you in a, in another-land kind of, of existence. But to have people just stop on the street and stare, to stop what they're doing in the store and stare, as a nine-year was a very traumatic experience. That is the one time that I remember feeling enormously unhappy and, and wishful that I could go back to the happy days of my childhood in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: And so you all stayed in Nebraska for two years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so this was around junior high school time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would have been junior high. Story_ID: 299971 Speaker 1: What happened next? Where did your mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] go, where did you go next after Nebraska? Speaker 2: After Nebraska, that was a very unhappy separation from the congregation there. My mother was, was a wonderful evangelist. And as is the case in many professions, what one starts and is able to get motivated and going is not the same person that can stay with it and nurture it for the long haul. And I think that her ministry was much more of a short-term ministry than, than is the case for some ministers who are in, who pastor the same church for thirty or forty or fifty years. So we left Nebraska after two years. I think that her very strict rather doctrinaire style of ministry and, and she was a very clear authority about her ministry, became a little difficult for, for the congregation to sustain over a period of time. And also the congregation was not growing. The novelty had worn off. And so we, we did depart with, with, in a rather acrimonious way. I think they, they asked my mother to resign and she did, and it was very traumatic for her, as I recall. She was very upset because we had sacrificed a lot to come to this rather foreign place to work and to serve and, and in my mother's mind to create the spiritual environment for her congregation to flourish and to the, to the family's condition of being separated during this time, with my father [George Wattleton] having to go back and forth to Omaha [Nebraska] to, to seek work. So we did leave and headed back to the South. I believe the next year I attended school in Louisiana. So I was right smack in the middle of the South from the middle of Nebraska and I had changed a great deal because as you said earlier, those were the years of budding adolescence. And I had reached puberty during those years. And so it was, it was a new, a dramatically different experience to be in southern Louisiana where I was living in a small town called Franklin, Louisiana, but it was still small town again. Story_ID: 299972 Speaker 1: And what type of young lady were you starting to become? Speaker 2: I, I, I always wanted to please and, and even though I, I had, I clearly was a, a very talented child, a very smart and verbally talented child, I, I always had a desire for affirmation and maybe this came about because of the early years of instability and abuse that I experienced at the hands of church going people. But I always wanted to please my mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] and I always felt traumatized by the separations even though I knew that, that I had no control over them I was always really, really unhappy because I loved my mother very much and, and she was very kind whenever I was with her and very loving. Although, I don't remember my mother ever, ever picking me up and hugging me, but she was still very kind in, in the way she dealt with me. So I, I, you know, I really wanted to please her a lot. And, and I pleased her a lot when I, when there was not an unfavorable report about my behavior from my caregivers or caretakers. And I sometimes didn't fulfill those expectations precisely, but I was always very--my report cards were always very high. I always had A's and Bs, mostly A's, so that went a long way toward making her happy as she went on in her ministry and, and I suppose that if I had been a child that acted out more I might have gotten more of the attention that I needed at that time. But it was really clear that it was important for me to behave, not to make a nuisance of myself. Not to make a problem for the people who were my caretakers. That was important to my mother so I tried very hard to live up to that standard as much as one can as an adolescent and becoming a teenager. Speaker 1: And during this time, like the, the tween, pre, the tween, teen years, who was influencing you? Who were you being most influenced by? Speaker 2: I was being influenced by music, by my friends, you know, I was being influenced by the same thing that influences teenagers today. Speaker 1: What kind of music did you like to listen to? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved to sneak and listen to Randy's Record Shop from Gallatin, Tennessee. Those were all prohibited activities. In, and, and here's one of the other sides of, of not having the supervision of my mother's very strict and very religious living standards is that the people with whom I lived didn't always have such strict living standards and so I sometimes would go off to, to parties and listen to music that I, that would have absolutely been foreboded by my mother. So, you know, artists, one of my first recollections of, of rock and roll or, or rhythm and blues was Ray Charles. I loved Ray Charles; Ike [Turner] and Tina Turner, I loved Ike and Tina Turner. Those were the early, James Brown, I, the early James Brown those were the, the, in the late '50s [1950s]. It's hard to believe that those people are still around performing. But they really had an influence in shaping my ideas about black culture as, with respect to music. Story_ID: 299973 Speaker 1: During high school you, your family was reunited again during high school, right? Am I correct? Speaker 2: My family was reunited, what do you mean by that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you spend your high school years with your parents [Ozie Garrett Wattleton and George Wattleton]? Speaker 2: I spent two of my high school years with my parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated from high school a year early, so I spent my, actually three of my high school years with my parents. After we returned from Nebraska I spent one year in Louisiana and then I went to Tougaloo College Preparatory School [Tougaloo, Mississippi]. And I was with my parents at that time. My mother was still on the road a lot during that period, all, she was always on the road. So that even if, if she came back, even if I was not living with another family there was always someone who was there as a companion to me when she traveled to her various revival meetings. Speaker 1: Now was Tougaloo similar to a boarding school? Did you live there? Speaker 2: I did not live in a boarding school at Tougaloo. I lived in a, my parents had purchased a, a mobile home, a very fancy one. And we had, they rented a lot outside the gates of Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] and I walked every day to Tougaloo Prep, and unfortunately after the first year of that, I was in the ninth grade, after the first year at Tougaloo, Tougaloo Prep, they decided to close it. I'm sure that had they not closed it I would have graduated. Because it was a college prep situation and it would have been really an excellent education and for, for once it would have been a stable educational experience for me. Speaker 1: So after Tougaloo where did you go next? Speaker 2: We then moved to Texas. My mother was working with a congregation in, in Houston, Texas and my father got a job in an, in an aluminum plant [Alcoa Point Comfort Operations, Calhoun County, Texas] in southern Texas, in a small town called Port Lavaca, Texas. And my last two years were spent there in tenth and eleventh grade. And I graduated from high school in the eleventh grade. Speaker 1: And what was the name of high school that you attended in Texas? Speaker 2: Calhoun High School [Port Lavaca, Texas]. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: Well, this was right after Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954], which occurred while we were in Nebraska. And segregated--well, segregation was officially ended by the [U.S.] Supreme Court's decision in Brown versus Board of Education that there could not be separate but equal schools. Integration was still an ideal to be achieved and yet legally blacks and whites were going to school, but there was still a great deal of, of separation. And here again, I tried very hard to fit in to, to the scene, to the situation. On the one hand I wanted to relate to my black friends and to all that went on with, with a minority within a, a hostile or a benign environment it went all, it, it ranged from benign to hostile, but also to relate to the majority and I was active in intramural sports and basketball and I was in the band and I was in the thespian club and I was in a number of, of the activities that other, other of the black students didn't participate in. And, and yet I really wanted to be accepted by, by my black friends as well. So it was a very difficult balancing act to, to maintain. Story_ID: 299974 Speaker 1: And what were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school [Calhoun High School, Port Lavaca, Texas]? Speaker 2: Well, I always knew that I was going to go to college. I mean I knew that I was going to be a nurse and so it meant I had to go to college, right? Not necessarily so, because there were nursing schools that were not college based. But there was just an assumption or presumption that college was going, was in my future. Now there was a big debate within the family about whether I should go to college or whether I should just simply go get a nursing certificate in a three-year program. My mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] was the, the, the, the holdout there. She stood up for attending college. My father [George Wattleton] did, did not believe that it was necessary, that it was sufficient just simply to let me, or to send me to a nursing school, preferably a church nursing school because they believed that I was going to prepare for a missionary career as well. So all I needed to do was learn the skills of nursing. Fortunately by the time I arrived in college, my mother had been called to pastor a church in Cleveland, Ohio. So that that meant that the, that the center of gravity now of the family had shifted to Cleveland, back to the early beginnings of, of her ministry in Columbus [Ohio]. And she had friends in Columbus who suggested that she enroll me in Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], which happenstance as faith would have it had a nursing program that provided room and board free of charge to the nursing students, which really made it possible for me to complete my college education. Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1959 and I graduated from college in 1964. Ohio State's program was a five-year program and I attended Ohio State from '60 [1960]--I actually spent a year in, in pre-college and, and nursing course work and then I went into nursing in the four-year program for nursing. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about when you first arrived at Ohio State. You were thinking that the tuition was one amount, when it was actually-- Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, we thought the tuition was, I think was fifty-nine dollars. And this was again 1960 and, so I went to pay my money at the bursar's office and she, the woman said, "How long have you lived in Ohio?" And I said, "We've lived here four months." And she said, you, that you haven't lived in Ohio long enough to be considered an Ohio resident. You're an out-of-state resident, so that will be three hundred dollars. And three hundred dollars seems like nothing today, by the standards of college tuition, but that was a tremendous amount of money, which my parents really could not afford. Speaker 1: So what happened? How, how were you able to stay? Speaker 2: Well, I was able to stay because somehow my mother put it together and I took on a part-time job to cover my expenses and we were able to cobble it together until I was accepted into the nursing program and then my room and board were free. And my parents only needed to come up with the tuition. And I remember that the last quarter of, of my senior year at Ohio State, the tuition, I won't ever forget this, was ninety-eight dollars. And my mother was worried about whether they were going to be able to put that together. So you see how, how really hard it was for them to provide the support necessary for me to get through and without the room and board provision I probably would not have been able to stay with it as long as I did. Story_ID: 299975 Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about what you were going to do career wise? Were you still thinking along the missionary line of work, or what were you thinking at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, by the time I arrived at the nursing, in the nursing program, I didn't really have, I mean, the, the idea of missionary work was sort of overwhelmed by all of the experiences that I had had and were having in college on a big university campus, state university campus. A circle much broader than the church circle in which I had been raised and, and the cocoon of a very strict religious upbringing, and so it be--you know, I was still young. I was only sixteen when I went to college. And so that was really sort of a time in which I was really still very much in formation and learning a lot about life that had not been, to which I had not been exposed as a child growing up. Speaker 1: Did you find you were kind of moving away from the strict, fundamentalist church upbringing you had? Speaker 2: Well, in the first years though I tried very hard to maintain a strict adherence to church attendance, Wednesday evening prayer service, didn't participate in sorority activities, didn't participate in any of the social life of, of, of the school. And probably by the end of my freshman year that was getting increasing more difficult to maintain. And so I eventually became more involved in the social life at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] because I wanted, you know, once again to belong. I had not really been in a situation of belonging since I left St. Louis [Missouri]. Story_ID: 300015 Speaker 1: Your experiences at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], you were kind of moving away from the strict fundamentalist church upbringing and becoming more social and that kind of thing. When did you start becoming involved and getting interested in women's reproductive rights and the rights of women? Speaker 2: I, I did not become involved in women's reproductive health until after college. A nursing program takes you through different phases of health care. I went through medical, surgical, pediatric, obstetrics and gynecology, psychiatric, public health, so, you know, you're learning about many different aspects of, of nursing and how to provide nursing care in those various specialties. So it was more a gaining of an understanding of human nature and human circumstances that, that I was learning in those years, which was very, very important. I'm sure that if I had chosen to pursue an education to become a teacher I would not have followed the course of my political and, and social impulses that, that eventually were developed. So, I, you know, I think that that--those years were very seminal in that it separated me from a narrow view of the world and, and thrust me into the circumstances of real, real time, real world situations that people experience, because when you're in the hospital you see people at their most vulnerable and at their most difficult circumstantial, really difficult conditions. While I as at Ohio State I also worked at Children's Hospital [Columbus Children's Hospital; Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio] on the weekends and some nights to help to support myself. And so I had an experience with children that was beyond the, beyond the amount of experience that I would have had just through my regular nursing curriculum; and that was a great awareness building for me in terms of children's neglect and, and children not being wanted and the diseases of children. And so I sort of knew then that I didn't want to be--first of all I knew that I did not want to be a clinical nurse. That this was not the, the life that, that, and the career that I wanted to pursue. But I, but I knew that getting a college degree in nursing would give me a launch pad to be something more than, or other than--I'm sure my nursing colleagues would rather that I not describe it as more than other than a clinician. So that was a time of, of opening my world. It wasn't a time of, of political consciousness raising. That would come later when I trained and, and would, decide to come back to, to graduate school, to go to graduate school to get my master's [degree]. And I ended up in graduate school because I knew I did not want to stay in, in the nursing clinical area as I said. And in order to completely prepare myself for a higher position I had to get a graduate degree. And I decided that I really liked obstetrics a lot. I liked dealing with well women. I liked the circumstances of birth and I enjoyed that a great deal. And so I asked my obstetrical professor in college what she thought I should do in pursuing a graduate program in, in maternal and child health. And she said, I think it would be a great ideal for you to, to follow your, your desires in that regard, but wherever you go try to go to a program that has a midwifery degree. And so I started looking for those programs and there were two, one was at Columbia University [New York, New York] and one was at Catholic University [The Catholic University of America] in Washington [D.C.]. And the one at Catholic University--and there was another one down in Berea, Kentucky [at Berea College]. And I decided that I didn't want to go horseback delivering babies in the hills of Kentucky. I decided that I didn't want to spend two years delivering babies on Indian [Native American] reservations in New Mexico, which was required by the Catholic University program (cough). And the Columbia University program seemed an ideal fit because I knew that I would spend a lot of my training at a black institution, which turned out to be Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. So it, that was the program that I selected. Speaker 1: And where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Earned my degree in 1977 or, I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty-seven [1967], yes. Story_ID: 300016 Speaker 1: Were you at all involved in civil rights at all during this time? Speaker 2: Well I think that there was always this sense of, of social obligation and political consciousness within the family. Remember those times that my [maternal] grandfather [Eugene Garrett] came up from Mississippi to St. Louis [Missouri]? There were always political debates about this politician or that preacher. And the--and, and by the way, the politics of religious institutions are nothing to be sniffed at. They, they can get pretty, pretty vicious. And, they, they hold their own very favorably to, to partisan political maneuverings and shenanigans. So I, I had always been around politics perhaps, with a small p. And my parents [Ozie Garrett Wattleton and George Wattleton] had always been voters that always talked about candidates. My first consciousness about that was when Adlai Stevenson ran for the presidency. I think this all still emanates from my grand--the, the values that my grandfather instilled in his nine children, so that, it was always around. When Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] was handed down there was a lot of discussion about it. My mother preached against segregation in the South. My father was very often frightened because she was outside in these tent revivals over the loud speaker decrying segregation. We would not stop at a gas station that did not allow us to use their toilet facilities. We wouldn't pay gas for that if it meant stopping on the side of the road to relieve ourselves. It, it was, it at least preserved the dignity of not, of, of giving money to a proprietor that, that didn't think that you were good enough to use the toilet facilities. So, there was consciousness always and, you know, and there's a great temptation I think some time to always try to find an epiphany. I had this experience and that's what turned me around. Well some people do get turned around, but there always also a lot of different ways of many, many, many experiences becoming integrated into the person you are and a, a person you evolve to be. Story_ID: 300017 Speaker 1: So when you got your master's degree [from Columbia University, New York, New York] did, did you then go to Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] in Daytona, Ohio [sic. Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: When I got my master's degree I had--after college I--my mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] was at that point pastoring a church in a small town in Ohio. And I had, had been assigned to my public health rotation in Dayton, Ohio. And I really liked Dayton and I enjoyed that experience, so after college I applied to teach at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] as an instructor in the nursing school and I was turned down because I wasn't a straight A student. With great satisfaction after I got my master's they wanted me to come back as an instructor. And I was accepted in a position to teach obstetrics and gynecology, or obstetrics nursing in the delivery room of Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton, Ohio as my first job after college. For two years I taught three-year nursing programs in, in a three-year nursing program. And I taught the labor and delivery room affiliation. I learned a couple of things from that experience. I learned that I didn't want to be a teacher and two, I learned a lot about women's experiences in pregnancy and surrounding pregnancy because in those years if a woman came in with an illegal abortion she was put in the same ward and often the same room with a woman who has just delivered a, a normal pregnancy. So it was teaching in an environment in the late, in the mid-'60s [1960s] in which illegal abortion was very much the experience of American women's lives. Speaker 1: And were you outraged by you know, these women who came in who had to seek illegal abortions? What were your feelings and thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Well, my feelings were that it was, it was a scandal, you know, and I, I was not separated from that, from, from that experience in terms of that social conditioning that doctors were performing illegal activity until I had experienced an unintended pregnancy myself and had an illegal abortion. And that became much more of a real time experience for what that meant. And a growing recognition that there were doctors who were characterized as being opportunists, that is, making a lot of money from the miseries of women by performing illegal abortions, but in many cases they were the only safe resource for women to turn when they wanted to end their pregnancy and they didn't want to, and they had the means to avoid risking an illegal and dangerous one in, at the hands of a non-medical person. Speaker 1: So before 1973 was it, not easy, but if you wanted to get an illegal abortion did you pretty much kind of know where to go? Speaker 2: Well I think people kind of knew where to go. You could, you could--it was never easy, even--and this is the fallacy. A lot of people will say, well you know, wealthy woman were always able to get abortions. Yes, they were, they were, but that meant they had to go to Mexico or they had to go to Puerto Rico, or they had to go before a panel of strangers at a hospital and declare that they were going to commit suicide or have a nervous breakdown if they didn't have this pregnancy terminated. So there was a degree, it was, it was a matter of degrees of what level of humiliation (cough) and danger women were willing to endure to end an unwanted pregnancy. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And the, the, the advocates of restoring illegality or, or criminality to the act of terminating pregnancy somehow overlook and go right pass the reality, the, the fact that women were getting abortions. Nineteen seventy-three [1973], legalizing it did not create the practice of abortions. It created a practice that was safe and not dangerous. And if we go back to those times those will be the years in which I remember all so well-- Story_ID: 300018 Speaker 1: And for you personally, was, was it a very scary experience or did your background as a nurse, did you have a better understanding of exactly what was happening? Speaker 2: In terms of my, having an abortion myself, some of it was a very, very scary experience because it was without anesthesia. It was enormously painful. It was at a time when oral contraception was just coming available and, and coming to market, but I was too embarrassed and this is after college now, and I was too embarrassed to acknowledge that I was sexually active as a normal young adult would be. And so I became pregnant even though I, we attempted to use condoms. It was not successful as often is the case with the use of condoms. And yes, it was embarrassing to go to the doctor and to come up with the money that was required and, and I didn't return for my follow-up visit so he became very concerned because he had been arrested several times. He became very concerned that I somehow had experienced complications and that I might have been reporting him to the authorities. And he was looking at the possibility of another arrest. And so when he saw me in the labor and delivery area [at Miami Valley Hospital, Dayton, Ohio], because he was an obstetrician gynecologist, he scolded me very bitterly, "Why didn't you come back?" And it was, it was, as it is so much today with women who experience legal abortions. I was just so relieved to have the pregnancy terminated and so you don't want to go back into the system to go through the examination although it was, that was very dangerous on my part and very foolish on my part, but we hear the same sentiments expressed by women, I felt great relief. I didn't want to go talk to anybody at the clinic. I didn't want to go see those people again. I wanted to go on with my life. Story_ID: 300019 Speaker 1: So you taught at the hospital [Miami Valley Hospital, Dayton, Ohio] until 1969. And then what did you do after that? Speaker 2: No, I taught at the hospital only from 1964 until 1966. And then I went back to graduate school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I came to New York [New York] to Columbia [Columbia University] and to get a master's [degree] in maternal and infant health and midwifery. And that was another seminal moment. You know, keep in mind just my, my, my, my obstetrics professor in college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] making a very simple statement to me saying, if you are going to go to graduate school in this area, be sure to go to a midwifery program. It was--those two sentences turned my life around. And so in the pursuit of that, I ended up at Columbia, which is affiliated with Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And the midwifery students were very often assigned to Harlem Hospital. And that was really, really the breakthrough for my understanding of the circumstances of, of women's lives in a large, poor, urban community. Speaker 1: And so once you received, once you got your master's degree, what did you do next? Speaker 2: I was invited to come back to Ohio to become the assistant director of a nursing program in Dayton [Ohio], where I had taught and now my public health professor had heard that I had gone back to graduate school and gotten a master's. In those years a master's in nursing was really the gold standard. And if you had a master's you were in much demand. I knew that I didn't want to teach and I thought that administration might be a good avenue and so I went back to the Dayton Public Health Department [Dayton, Ohio], became the assistant director in nursing. And I supervised maternal and child health programs, out of school teenage mothers programs. In those years, teenage girls who became pregnant were segregated from their regular schools presumably so that they would not contaminate their cohorts, and so there was the downtown daytime school for girls that was the prenatal program where girls could come and continue their education, get prenatal care and the health department supervised that program. We started a neighborhood prenatal program. We really beefed up and flushed up our prenatal programs throughout the public health nursing system. And I served in that capacity for three years. While doing that I served on the board of the Dayton Urban League [Miami Valley Urban League] and became a junior leaguer and left the junior league because they wouldn't support the ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] and was asked to join the board of Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley [Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley Foundation, Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Ozie Garrett Wattleton] think about you joining the board of Planned Parenthood? Speaker 2: I don't think she knew much and we didn't talk much about that because that was my ilio [ph.] mercenary work. I mean that was my do-good work. I was on the board of--these were, these were outside of the realm of my work. She knew that I worked for the health department and that was--what she was most, most concerned about was did I come home to Washington Court House [Ohio] where she was located by four o'clock on Friday afternoon and stay until after church on Sunday. So even though I was a young professional, she expected me to still come back into the family circle because I think she was very much afraid that she was losing control of my life. And for a while I adhered to that. I actually, I did adhere to it pretty much to, to, to satisfy my parents until I went back to graduate school. And then after I, I went back to graduate school and working in public health my outside activities were not really much on her radar screen. Story_ID: 300020 Speaker 1: And when did you become the director of, of the Dayton [Ohio] chapter [Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley Foundation, Dayton, Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About, well I became the executive director of the Dayton affiliate of Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] in 1970, but that was after I had been on the board of directors for about a year and a half. And the executive director left and they asked if I'd be willing to join as executive director and, and I said, sure. I, I actually wasn't that straightforward. I was on the search committee to find a new executive director for the affiliate and one of the members; well actually, the chairman of the search committee turned to me one day and said, "Well, why don't you take the job?" And it was like one of those situations where it never occurred to you. I mean, you know, why don't you become president of the United States? Would you ever think that you would be? And, and I didn't think about it and I thought well, you know, I, could I do that job? I mean, you know, that's, that's really something. And they, they coaxed and they said we'll support you and so I took the plunge and so at twenty-seven I became the executive director of Planned Parenthood of Dayton, Ohio, which was Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley, which was located in Dayton, Ohio, which was a six-county organization. I served in that position for seven years. And, and the fifth year that I was the executive director, by that time the affiliate had grown tremendously. And by the fifth year that I was in that position I was elected to represent all Planned Parenthood executive directors on the national board. I became the chairman of the local, of, of the local affiliated executive directors' council. And that's sort of a funny story because by that time I had gotten married and I'd, I had become pregnant and while I was being elected to the national board in Seattle [Washington], I was in Dayton having my daughter. So that was in October, on October 20th 1975, I was elected to the board of the, national board of Planned Parenthood and I gave birth to, to Felicia Gordon, my daughter, who is now twenty-nine. Speaker 1: And what was it like for you in 1973 as the executive director of the Miami Valley Chapter of Planned Parenthood when Roe v. Wade [1973] came down? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was you know, it was, I was a very young executive director and it was a really big challenge for me to take on this responsibility and I, I, I, I, I entered an organization that was especially hostile to me. The staff were not, did not welcome me with open arms because they thought I was too young and too inexperienced to do the job that, that needed to be done. And I think there was probably a person there who wanted the job, but was not selected. So it was really trying to learn so much, it was learning about government grants because the federal government had just entered the field of family planning and was making huge amounts of money available under Title X and under the Office of Economic Opportunity, making family planning funds widely available to Planned Parenthoods and anti-poverty organizations. So learning the whole federal system and learning how to implement services for expanding. When I took over the affiliate we had tiny, tiny offices over, on the second floor over a real estate office; moving the, the affiliate out to bigger quarters and adding services really was a, was a big challenge and so I can't say that I was really as conscious of what, what, what was going on around Roe v. Wade. I knew that there was the clergy consultation service in Dayton that helped women to go to, to Puerto Rico and Mexico to get abortions. These were ministers that counseled women to help them to get to locations with safe abortions. But we as an affiliate were not at all involved in abortions. And I can't say that I had a great deal of consciousness about the movement for the reform of abortions. But when '73 [1973] came down and, and the decision came down in '73 [1973] there was believe it or not, and I, you know these days with abortion being characterized as widely available and anyone can have abortions right up to the moment of birth, we were very deeply concerned that the court [U.S. Supreme Court] had handed down a decision that was going to continue to be very restrictive on the ability of women to terminate their pregnancy. We considered it a very conservative position that left the decision mainly in the hands of physicians and we knew that physicians have always been conservative, as a matter-of-fact it was the AMA [American Medical Association] that was the driving force behind the illegality of abortion. So we, we had no hope that this was really a reformation for women in being able to make the choice to end an unintended pregnancy. Story_ID: 300021 Speaker 1: What did your parents [Ozie Garrett Wattleton and George Wattleton] think of, of your position as the executive director of Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley Foundation, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well as the executive director I still did not feel any opposition from my mother. At this, by this point she had moved to the South again to take on a ministry in, in Atlanta, Georgia. So she was not living nearby and, and I was married and I was building a young adult life. And so, and also in the year that I took over the presidency of Planned Parent- I mean the executive director position of Planned Parenthood of Miami Valley my father passed away of lung cancer, so there was a lot of family transition going on at that time. And she was much more focused on his health and really a very short-lived illness that really, he, he passed away six months after, after diagnosis. And I, he, I took the position at the beginning of September of 1970 and he died at the end of, of 19-, of September of 1970, so that was a really a time in which a lot of, of, of, of her life was internally focused. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So when did it become an issue with your mother? Speaker 2: It became an issue when I, when I was appointed to the presidency. Speaker 1: In 1978? Speaker 2: In 1978, because at that point Roe v. Wade [1973] had been handed down. The resistance to and the backlash to Roe v. Wade had, was in high gear. The clinics were being burned; Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] was being identified as an organization that provided abortion services. Planned Parenthood certainly had, had made public statements in support of legal abortion. So the abortion was a part of the organization's profile at that point and so that certainly got my mother's attention. But in those years she was also very conservative on contraception because she believed as she frequently preached, in the whole Bible, both the Old [Testament] and the New Testaments and in the Old Testament one is instructed to be fruitful and multiply. So she was not at all supportive of, of contraception in those years. She grew to become more accepting of contraception, but never of abortion. Speaker 1: And didn't she ask like members of her congregation to pray for you? Speaker 2: Yes. She did ask members of her congregation to pray for my soul that I would find, that the work that I was doing was against the will of God and that I would, would, would resign, turn away from it. And I think she would be very happy if I had just simply become a nursing instructor or to become an, an administrator in a health department. But the profile at the lead, you know keep in mind I wasn't just working at Planned Parenthood, I was becoming, I became the spokesperson, the mouthpiece. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: I mean the, the, the face (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're right, the face-- Speaker 2: --of the organization. Speaker 1: --right. Speaker 2: It wasn't--I think that she would not have been as upset and distressed by it if I had simply been working there, but not the persona of the organization and that really, really was very, very distressing for her. Story_ID: 300022 Speaker 1: And what were some of the bigger challenges, like in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: The big challenges for Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of American] was how to deal with the political opposition that was growing and an organization that, believe it or not, was a very conservative one and did not want to get involved in politics. It was a time that--in the early part of my presidency and, and I must say that there was a great deal of opposition to my being appointed to that position, the executive director of Planned Parenthood of New York City [New York, New York] had applied twice for the position and this was going to be the second time that he was turned down. So there was a lot of, of, of anger about that. And here again, I was initially on the search committee to find a, a replacement for the outgoing president of Planned Parenthood and was again approached to get off the search committee and to become a candidate and, and I did, and, but so my appointment was not, let's say unanimously approved of. There were a lot of people who were aiming to gun for me to assure that I did not succeed. Although I remember the candidate, his name was Al Moran [Alfred F. Moran], saying to, to some folks who said, well she'll only last for five years. And he said, I think you're wrong. I think she'll, she'll last a lot longer. And as it turned out I at this point hold the record for, for the position at fourteen years. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But it was a time when the opposition was--remember the late '70s [1970s] that was the ascendancy of the Right Wing. Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected in 1980 and I believed that from the experiences that I'd had in Dayton, Ohio and the opposition that the affiliate attracted from the Catholic dioceses in Dayton, Ohio, and we weren't providing abortions, that the organization was really going to have to, to redesign its, its programs and its message in order to counter what I felt was going to be a growing opposition to everything that we stood for. Speaker 1: And what was happening in later years, the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Well, in the, in the early '80s [1980s] I must tell you that I sustained an effort to, to call for a no-confidence in my leadership because I proposed at the behest of a very brilliant and well regarded political consultant that we develop a political organization separate from Planned Parenthood that would give us the capacity to support candidates that were supportive of pro-choice positions. I also wanted to open a Washington [D.C.] lobbying office. I also proposed to develop Planned Parenthood condoms that would be marketed in drug stores all over the country. This was a little too much for the people who had opposed my presidency and they attempted to call for a no-confidence vote in my--and the initiatives that they believed were destroying the organization. In fact, they were well ahead of the needs of the time that would show themselves to be very much the case in the late '80s [1980s] and the early '90s [1990s]. During the '80s [1980s] the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and, the Reagan and the Bush years, we really encountered a tremendous amount of opposition, whether it was in the effort to try to force Planned Parent clinics to report kids, girls coming to the clinics to receive birth control, or the Robert Bork battle in which he now says that it was Planned Parenthood and People For The American Way who defeated his candidacy, to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, or the international gag order, which meant that we could not, in our international programs, provide support to organizations that gave women counseling about how to prevent unintended death from abortions. Story_ID: 300023 Speaker 1: What impact did the Webster [Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 1989] decision have on your work [at Planned Parenthood Federation of America] in 1989? Speaker 2: Well, it did not have an impact on our work, other than that obviously, that [U.S.] Supreme Court decision allowed states to begin to impose restrictions on, on clinics. But that wasn't the first restriction. The first major restriction was the Dooling [Judge John F. Dooling] decision that allowed the government to withhold Medicaid funding for abortions for low-income women. That was really the first major lost for women after Roe v. Wade [1973]. And that was, that was also a time when the opposition to Roe v. Wade understood that they had no prospect of getting a constitutional amendment overturning Roe v. Wade, but that they could use a strategy of chipping away at various aspects of it and chipping away at the ability of women to exercise their right. And that is the strategy that they have pursued for twenty-five, going on thirty years. And that is the strategy that has brought them a great deal of success that resulted in the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] of significant progress toward restricting ever growing numbers of women from exercising their right to abortion. Speaker 1: Do you think that Roe v., Roe v. Wade will eventually be overturned? Speaker 2: Well, I think that, that in a real practical sense Roe v. Wade has been overturned, but it has been overturned in a way that people don't seem to recognize. When you don't, when, when poor women do not have access because they don't have the resources through their health programs to terminate a pregnancy that chipped away at Roe v. Wade. More than thirty states now require-- Story_ID: 300012 Speaker 1: So we were just talking about the future of Roe v. Wade [1973]. What eventually do you think, do you think eventually Roe v. Wade is going to be overturned? Speaker 2: I think that for all practical purposes Roe v. Wade has been overturned for many women. It certainly is not being permitted in, in, at, in the same context as handed down in '73 [1973]. The courts have allowed states to impose restrictions that make it more difficult for increasingly greater numbers of women to exercise the right. The most recent debate over legal abortions centered on late term abortion among women and whether women could exercise their right to terminate a pregnancy after, late in the second trimester of pregnancy. That decision is now before the [U.S.] Supreme Court and its possible that with a court that is very much opposed to Roe v. Wade and there are significant, there is a significant component of the court now that does not believe that Roe v. Wade was properly interpreted or properly decided, that it could uphold the right to outlaw a late term abortion procedure. That would be a very significant development because the law that is now being considered makes no exception for a women's health. And one of the, the, the principal foundations of Roe v. Wade was that the government could never prevent an abortion, ever, if a woman's health or life are in danger. Speaker 1: And do you think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Somehow that court remembered that women's health and lives were endangered during those years before the decision. Speaker 1: And do you think that the choice of abortion and the issue affects women of color differently than it does white women? Speaker 2: Well, you know that's been an interesting conversation that I've had for now the thirty years that I've been associated with this issue and, and, and I answer it yes and no, and I, I believe that the, the contribution that I've made that has been unique is that I am a black woman who was raised as a black woman and that was my ethnic background and, and I have a very strong identity with my ethnic, with my ethnicity. I'm not confused about my, my African American heritage and very proud of it. As a professional in the days when women did not have birth control, did not have the means to prevent unintended pregnancy, did not have access to relative safety to end an unwanted pregnancy, I knew who were the women most likely to have those experiences and they were poor women and since we still are a minority that is disproportionately disadvantaged, I know that poor, black women are the ones who suffer most. And so I have a perspective as an African American woman that perhaps is an identity that is different from that of a white woman who might not know what it's like to be a poor black woman. Or who might not have had the living experiences of, of poverty in the black community. Does our choice to end an unwanted, unwanted pregnancy have to be different from a white woman's? I don't think so. I think that we have the ability to think for ourselves. I believe that we can make a, a decision, that we can make a determination as to what's best for us without the government telling us what to do. You see this battle is not about you should or you shouldn't. It's about do you get to decide, do you get to make that decision. Do you have all the tools necessary to make that decision; have you been helped to avoid an unintended pregnancy. I mean women who are, make the choice to terminate a pregnancy are women who have not been successful for whatever reason, all the way to just simply human failure, have not been successful in avoiding an unintended pregnancy, or after they are pregnant find themselves in certain circumstances that would be very detrimental if they continued. So this, this is a very intensely personal choices. Now why should the government interfere in a black woman's choice any more than government should interfere in a white woman's choice? We all bring to the circumstance our history, our ethnicity, our experiences in life, our value system, whether it's religious or family values and that's the interpretation that we make, not whether we're different. I mean, you know, there are millions of black women in this country and I would defy you to tell me, to show me two exact, same black women who've had exactly the same experience, and on all things will agree. I mean that's preposterous to say that somehow it's different for black women. It's different for every woman. And every woman brings a very unique perspective. But for some women the stakes are much, much higher, or you might define them as much graver if we lose this battle. Story_ID: 300013 Speaker 1: And why did you decide to step down from the organization? Speaker 2: After fourteen years I think it was time for me to have a rest because I was running a big organization. Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] at that point had grown to be the seventh largest charity. I had all the headaches of a CEO of a large organization. I was running a staff of two hundred and fifty people scattered here at the national headquarters in New York [New York], three regional offices in the United States, three regional offices in developing countries because we were supporting organizations in poor countries around the world, traveling one hundred and fifty miles a year, making speeches, appearing before [U.S.] Congress. It was really a very, very demanding work. But perhaps most of the demands were within the organization. The internal demands were the most difficult. And I, and after fourteen years of this struggle of leading an organization in a direction that it often did not want to go, instead of being pleased and proud that we had defeated Robert Bork, very disturbed that some donors threatened to withhold their support and calling for a referendum that would require a full approval of all of the organization before taking a position on the [U.S.] Supreme Court nominee, those kinds of battles. Raising, being in a position of having built a national donor base of over a million donors to the national organization and the local affiliates thriving as they had not throughout the history of the organization and still having to deal with the attacks, the internal attacks from local chapters simply because you did something, or another this or that that they didn't like, or you didn't come to the bar and socialize after the meeting, or, or in my case there was a, a rumor that prevails to this day that somehow I had a, a clothing allowance, which is, which was the only way that I was able to dress properly, as opposed to, perhaps there was something in my background that taught me to dress in a certain way. I was raised by seamstresses [Wattleton's maternal aunts] who taught me to appreciate good fabric, good, good tailoring and I had a knowledge about that. But these are all the things that a leader has to contend with. I'm not suggesting that somehow I should have been exempt. But those are all of the, the elements of, of the leadership of an organization that you have to balance. After fourteen years it really does take its toll and, and I decided to step down and, and to move on to other work-- Story_ID: 300014 Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as a person who, who had strong beliefs, who, who respected the views of others, and who dedicated a career to giving women, especially women, the power that has been denied us. I'd like to believe that, that my contribution has had a greater impact on women of my ethnicity, than perhaps women of any other group and, and that's it's had a greater impact on women in the poorest parts of the world, to be remembered as someone who cared about women in the village of Sierra Leone as much as I cared about a women in, in, in the clinic in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And I'd like to be remembered as a woman who is enormously grateful for being given the talent, a vision, because vision is not a common quality of human nature. There is a high price to pay for seeing ahead of others because there is often disbelief and rebuke and scorn. But I do see it as, as, as an incredibly important gift that I was given. I'd like to be known as someone who used many of my talents for not just my own personal comforts, but also hopefully, to help others. Maybe I'd like to be remembered as someone who feels very guilty if I don't, if I didn't do that, so perhaps that was a bit self-serving as well. But I'm really also enormously grateful that I had a platform because so many people share my beliefs, they share my views, they don't know how to express them. They don't have the opportunity to express them. So getting that opportunity for whatever reason got me there is something that I think puts me in the category of the very grateful. So I'd like to be remembered as very grateful. We haven't talked much about motherhood, but I would like to also be remembered as a mother, a mother who is very proud to have given birth to and raised a young woman [Felicia Gordon] that reflects a lot of the same values, not the same life, but the same values that, that perhaps by example, I gave her. But I didn't preach a lot to her, but I tried to in the way I dealt with people and the integrity that I tried to present to her, share some of those values now in her life and hopefully that will go on. But that's only, you know, that goes on into a family lineage and the fact that I perhaps have influenced the human lineage is a very important, is very important to me and hopefully will be important in the years to come for women all over the world..