 Story_ID: 667397 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, McClain, M-C- capital C-L-A-I-N, Young, Y-O-U-N-G [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]. Speaker 1: And, ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, fourteen, forty-four [September 14, 1944], and I was born in Atlanta, Georgia at Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired teacher. And, now, I work as vice chair of the Andrew J. Young Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia], and I do a lot of volunteer work. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: October 4, 2016. Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the Georgia Public Broadcasting company [Atlanta, Georgia] in one of our conference room. Story_ID: 667398 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is a hot dog. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is ivory. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: South Africa, Cape Town. Speaker 1: And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have so many, let me think. (Pause) Now, abided faith, hope and love, but the greatest of these is love [1 Corinthians 13:13]. Story_ID: 667399 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Dorothy, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Wilmont, W-I-L-M-O-N-T, Harden, H-A-R-D-E-N [Dorothy Wilmont Harden]. Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 18, 1926. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about--oh, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Gainesville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. How--what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can't trace very far back. But, my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] lived in Gainesville. She had my mother at thirteen because she was raped by a white man. And, his name was Dr. Allen [Myron B. Allen]. She worked for him ironing after school. And, my mother was born when my grandmother was, I guess, my grandmother was raped at twelve 'cause my mother was born at thirteen. She stayed in Gainesville until my mother was five years of age. And, they want--the doctor wanted to take my mother 'cause my grandmother was, very dark complexion but my mother is very fair with brown hair. So, they moved to Atlanta [Georgia]. And, in moving to Atlanta, my grandmother worked at one of the hotels that no longer exist, the Dinkler Plaza [Dinkler Plaza Hotel], as a maid. And, my mother and my grandmother stayed with a cousin here on Sunset Street [sic. Sunset Avenue]. The same street that Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] lived on when he was married to Coretta Scott King. And, my mother went to elementary school, Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], graduated from Washington High at sixteen. I had an older brother [George McClain, Jr.] who is now deceased. She got married to my father whose name was George McClain [George McClain, Sr.], and at the time, she was pregnant with my brother. And, to be honest with you, my daddy was in World War II [WWII], and he left going to the [U.S. military] service and when he came back home my mother got pregnant with me. He left when my mama was three months pregnant with me and we never saw him again. But, we did have the private detective to find him when I was nine years old. And, he said that he would go back to--he was a very successful man. He had married a white lady. And, he said that he would go back and give all back child support but he requested that we would have to stay with him, you know, during the summer and during the winter. And, my grandmamma said, "Hell, no. Because if you didn't take care of them and didn't--," I mean, he didn't, he's ever seen me. My grandmamma burned up every picture of him when he didn't come back. And, before I, I mean, when I was six months old, she burned up the pictures. I've never seen a picture of my dad. Speaker 1: So, your grandmother burned them up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 667400 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] had been abused. She was a brilliant woman. She had a seventh grade education but she had an A plus mind. And, she read the paper, she kept up with everything. She knew everything. She gave me--taught me in quotes and sayings that really stuck with me. They were really funny but they had a lot of truth to them. And, so, my grandmother sent my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] to Chicago [Illinois] when we, when my brother [George McClain, Jr.] was like ten, and I was like, seven, to go and--to school. To get training in business. And, so, she went there and we lived with my grandmother and my grandmother hired one of our cousins from Gainesville [Georgia], one of her cousins as a nanny. And, so, she kept us and my mother was up there two years completing a course in business. And, my grandmother was very protective because of what had happened to her. So, she said, "No. If he didn't want you as a child, I'm afraid to send you all as young children." So, but, that was the stipulation that the lawyer told my mother, if he paid back child support and pays child support until they get eighteen, then he's requiring that they stay with him those times. And, he said that would have to happen. And, my grandmother refused it. So, I haven't ever seen my dad [George McClain, Sr.]. When I was graduating from high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], when I was queen of my high school, when I was in college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and, and graduated from college, and when I was getting my master's [degree], and when I was debutante, sub-deb, I felt all of the time, I always say, "I wonder if my dad's in the audience." And, the last hope I had of seeing my dad was when I married. It was all over every paper, every--Ebony, Jet. And, I said, anywhere he is, and I made sure I used McClain. And, my mama always--I questioned her all the time. She said, "You know your brother looks just like me. You look just like your daddy. Even though your daddy, the two of us favored. You look like your dad." And, I thought maybe if he sees my picture and sees I'm married to a great man like [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young that he would go and, you know, seek me out. But, that didn't happen. So, he was five years older than my mother, so I know now that he is probably deceased. Speaker 2: Where did he live? Speaker 1: He came from Akron, Ohio. And, he came to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and that's how my mother met him. She was the leader of the majorettes at Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and then they, you know how the Morehouse boys would pass by while they were rehearsing out on the field. She's a beautiful woman. She's ninety years old but she looks just like my sister. Very gorgeous. And, so, he was attracted to her and he was too old for her, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. And, did he go back to Ohio? Speaker 1: We don't know. When we found him he was in Flint, Michigan; when the lawyer discovered him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, said that he was doing very well. So, he could, you know, go back and paid back child support. Story_ID: 667401 Speaker 1: But, my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] worked on the Southern railroad [Southern Railway]. And, she made at that time, a better salary than teachers were making. So, she said, "We don't need his money. You know, we will be--do very well." We took vacations. I was queens and had the most gorgeous dresses. And, we were able to do a lot of things. We were poor, but yet know poor. We were exposed. And, I was raised up in a Christian home with my mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] and my grandmother. They were both God fearing women. So, we just felt like, we could do anything. But, I think--and my brother was a borderline genius. He had an IQ of 159. And, he went to college and he would give his papers--I mean, both of us are very kind and loving people, and we were taught that way. Because we were given love, people give in life what they have been given. And, I was--with just mother and a grandmother, we were given a lot of love. And, my brother would take his paper and give it to one of his friends who was not as smart as he. So, he ended going three years of college and then he stopped. And, then he married an older lady who was seven years his senior, and she taught school. And, then he got in an accident and became crippled and never walked again. And, consequently, this was two days before he turned thirty. At forty-two he died of a massive heart attack. Speaker 2: What was your brother's name? Speaker 1: George McClain, just after my daddy, George McClain, Jr. My father was George McClain, Sr. Speaker 2: And, so, he was older than you by? Speaker 1: Yeah. He was older than I was. That was the child that my mother got pregnant with. Story_ID: 667402 Speaker 1: And your father [George McClain, Sr.] disappeared right after you were conceived (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he found out, he came home from the [U.S. military] service and found out mama was pregnant with me and he just didn't come back. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And, it mu- it was very devastating to my mother. So, my grandmother [Montine Wilmont], after we got up, she said, "I'm a send you back, send you to Chicago [Illinois] to stay with my aunt." My grandmother's sister, she had one sister who--and she was a nurse. And, she told, "I'm a send you there to stay with she and her husband." And, her children were grown and were deceased. She was older than my grandmother. My grandmother, there were I think, nine children; two girls, seven boys. And, my grandmother was next to the baby. So, she said, "I'm gonna send Dorothy [Young's mother, Dorothy Wilmont Harden] up and you, I'll put her in school and she can stay with us free." So, it's been a, you know, I often do a lot of mentoring. And, I talk to kids and, you know, people think that because I'm married to [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, I went to college and I got my master's [degree], I worked on my doctorate, and they feel like, you know, it's a fairytale life. But, I, when I go to the schools to talk to children I first, I integrated the Atlanta Public Schools in 1966. I had taught, my student teaching was at a very poor school, Wesley Avenue [Wesley Avenue School, Atlanta, Georgia] in the northeast side of town. And, my principal said, "You did such an excellent job," he said, "I would love for you to come back and be a teacher. Would you consider it?" And, I said, "Yes." When he called downtown, I had interviewed--there was a white lady by the name of Miss Satterfield [ph.] who interviewed all of Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] teachers that was suggested. You first had to make a certain score on the national teachers exam [National Teacher Examination; Praxis Series]. Which I did very well on. And, so, when I went to interview with her, she called back to Mr. Long [Ralph Long], Dr. Long was the principal. She said, "She can't come to that school. She has to go integrate East Lake Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia]. I'm sending some of my top seven, seven black teachers." The custodian was white. The principal was white. The secretary was white. The children were 98 percent white. So, we went in in 1966 and integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That school. Speaker 1: I'm--okay. I'm gonna get that story later on. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we're going, we're going way too fast. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Because we're already in '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We haven't asked you about growing up yet, so. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. All right. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 667403 Speaker 1: What kind of--well, we know something about your father [George McClain, Sr.]. But, what kind of character or personality, what kind of talents did he have? We already know you look something like him, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what do they say about him? Speaker 2: Well, for a long time, my mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] was so hurt she didn't even talk about him. But, then I became inquisitive. And then my brother [George McClain, Jr.] told me, he say, "I saw him. He looks like you." And, so, she said--I know he was very handsome. She said he was very smart. He was majoring, at the time, in political science at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. She said that, a very persuasive and sweet personality. And, he wrote her, which my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] destroyed too, and I really, really, that's the only thing I hold against my grandmother that she destroyed his pictures, she destroyed his letters. My mama had a stack of letters. And, I remember when I was two and three that I remember seeing a lot of letters in green ink. It wasn't a ballpoint pen but it was ink and it was a great handwriting. And, so, my mama said, "I'm keeping these letters for you so that you could read them." But, my grandmother destroyed them. She was very angry because my mother too was brilliant. I mean, she was very, very smart, and would've gotten a full scholarship to college. And, she felt like he was too old to date her and she told him that. But of course, my mama loved him. And, when my mama became pregnant with my brother, my grandmother--and then he left and didn't see about us. My grandmother, it was just devastating for her. Speaker 1: Now, did you mother have to drop out of high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]? Those are the days I know a lot of people--? Speaker 2: What my mother did was, my mother was very smart. So, she was like fifteen in the twelfth grade. But, she was pregnant. She didn't get to march. Speaker 1: So, that was her last year? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So, she was able to graduate? Speaker 2: She was able--she got a diploma. She didn't march. Her principal really liked her and knew she was great--and knew she was pregnant. So, they gave her her diploma but she couldn't march. 'Cause during those days you couldn't march if, you know. My brother was born in December. So, in May she was what, about five months pregnant [sic.]. But, you know, young girls don't show that much but she couldn't. You know, she had to drop out. And, my grandmother never forgave him for that. Speaker 1: And, by that time, he had left the--? Speaker 2: Well, he, he had gradua- he was graduating, he graduated that May. And, then he came and he joined in World War II [WWII], and he came back home. My brother saw him. He came back home when my brother was, see my brother was two almost three years older than I. And, so, my brother saw him but he doesn't have a reco- I used to question him so. He said, "I just know he was tall, and had dark hair, and han- he was handsome," you know. Speaker 1: So, your brother was born in what, '40 [1940]? Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941]. Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. All right. So, this is the beginning of the war basically. Forty-one [1941], for the United States (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the beginning of the war. In fact, he was born five days after Pearl Harbor, December 12th. Pearl Harbor was December 7th (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right a day that will live in infamy, right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So, at first we thought he was killed in the war. After my mama--he came back and then went back and my mama had gotten pregnant with me. And, we didn't hear from him, and we wrote his people. They hadn't heard from him and, you know. Story_ID: 667404 Speaker 1: So, how long was it before your mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] remarried? 'Cause I know she's a Harden now. Did she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's a Harden now. Oh, my mama didn't remarry [to Moses Harden] until I was thirteen years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was a while. Speaker 2: Because my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] didn't trust men. And, she saw that my stepfather was a wonderful Christian man. But, to show you how the raping of my grandmother affected her so, she never ever allowed--she had seven brothers, they could never come to our house if I was there. Speaker 1: So, she suspected that all men would take advantage of women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. She suspected all men would take advantage. She said, "I don't trust men." And, my mother used to say, "But those are her great uncles." She said, "No. They could come, I'll go visit them and I can, they could come here if Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young] is not here." They would come, you know, while I was in school or something like that. She just, that's, you know, it was devastating for her. My grandmother never dated again. She never married again, after thirteen, after having a child at thirteen. She worked all her life to send us to college to make sure we had a better life. She gave up her life for us. Speaker 1: So, she worked for the railroad you said. Speaker 2: Southern railroads [Southern Railway]. Speaker 1: Was she, did she travel or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She cleaned the cars. She cleaned the cars. Speaker 1: Okay. She was right in town? Speaker 2: She was right in town and we could travel anywhere the Southern railroad went, the Georgian. And, we would go to Chicago [Illinois] and different places, you know, because we could get passes and pay little or nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, so, when you were growing up the household was basically your mother and your grandmother? Speaker 2: And, my grand- and brother [George McClain, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And your brother, okay. Did you have other brothers and sisters after your mother was married? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay, so just the two? Speaker 2: I was the youngest-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --younger of the two. No more children. Story_ID: 667405 Speaker 1: When you think back on it, I mean, do you think you, what traits, I think, did you get from your mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] or your grandmother [Montine Wilmont] or what traits do you think you got from your father [George McClain, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Well, I can't say what traits I got from my father except for physical. But, from my mother and my grandmother, like I told you, they were God fearing people. They always wanted to help somebody or do something for somebody. They were kind people. They were both smart. I grew up smart. My brother [George McClain, Jr.] grew up smart. And, that probably was in the gene pool for my father as well because he had done well at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Basically, to love people and to reach out. And, what attracted Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I together, that we love people and do things for people. That you have a responsibility to pass on the blessings that you have received to others. You can't just receive a education and receive good things and keep it in. You have to pass it on to somebody else and make, try to make life better for them as well. Story_ID: 667406 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at Slater Elementary School [Thomas H. Slater Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, then I-- Speaker 1: And, what neighborhood is that in? Speaker 2: That was in a southeast neighborhood [of Atlanta, Georgia]. It was over by old Gammon [Street], off of Pryor Road. And, it was a school that really gave me a great basis. And, the reason I say it gave me a great basis, it was set in the midst of a housing project [Carver Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] but I lived in some apartments where a lot of my teacher lived. 'Cause like I say, my grandmamma [Montine Wilmont] made good money. Then my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] have begun to work. And, so, but, this principal at this school, this is the reason I became a teacher. Because I know that the impressions that teachers live--leave on children are so important. My teachers loved me. Now, I looked a little different from the kids in my--I used to sit on my hair. They would push me down. They would--I was real skinny. I was tall. And, they would be mean to me. But, I realized, my grandmamma sat down and talked to me, "You look different from them. They're--we're all poor but you have so much more than they do. And, they, they're jealous." So, a lot of times I would have to run home from school because they would--the teachers loved me. I had one teacher, my favorite teacher, Miss--and my mama ended up playing bridge with her about ten or twelve years ago. But, her name was Mrs.--Miss Dixon [ph.]. And, she said, "You remind me of how I looked when I was a little girl." Her dad was a bishop and she would--my mama let me go spend a weekend with her. She was single and she'd take me to church and, and different things. And, all of my teachers reached out and they loved me. And, I said, "I wanna be a teacher." And, they made me feel so important. They built my self-esteem. We had a principal by the name of Andrew Lewis [Andrew Jackson Lewis] and he and the superintendent at the time, Dr. Ira Jarrell were best buddies. She was white, he was black. But, they were best buddies. And, every time she would--we were the first school in the city with a piano and an organ because she gave it to us through her, you know, during those times there weren't any regulations. You did what you wanted to do. The white people were in charge. So, if they wanted to give a black school something, they could give it to her. And, we, no other school had that. Not even the high schools. They had pianos but they didn't have the organ. So, every time Miss--Dr. Jarrell came, she would ask, "Where is that little girl?" They would have lunch in his, he had a, a kind of little side office from the main office. And, they would go in there and they'd put tablecloths on, and they'd have lunch. And, I always, I remember the smell of fried chicken and everything. And, she said, "I want that--," and he said, "That little girl's name is Carolyn Lee McClain [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]." She said, "Well, I want her to come and greet me." When she comes, I would always go down and greet her and we'd have some other--but she always specifically ask for me. So, I just felt really special. They built up my--I got a good self-concept and I felt good about myself from home. But, then they, they just further developed that, you know. And, I just felt like it wasn't anything I could do--couldn't do. I would introduce her sometimes she'd pop in at a program or a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting and I would introduce her. I pinned a corsage on her one time. The things that teachers do in a, in a learning environment, and I did that when I taught too, helps to build the character of children. Teachers, a lot of them don't do that anymore. They don't, they see teaching--I saw teaching as a calling. And, when I was young the teachers saw teaching as a calling. Not just a profession, but a calling. And, so, they built character. They built strong young women and strong men. And, I got that all the way through school. I don't know if my counterparts got that but I know I got it. Story_ID: 667407 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You say like some of the students resented you [at Thomas H. Slater Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] because of the way you looked (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they didn't, they used to call me teacher's pet. "You're the teach- ," because when the buzzer would ring, she said, "Now, when the buzzer ring you just go to the office and see what they want." And, I, I mean, and when she would go out the room, she'd say, "Take names and give me the names." So, after school one day I told her, I said, "You know," I say, "I wish you would ask somebody else to do these things." I said, "Because, I--it makes the other children not like me." And, she said, "But, I send you out and do things because they're mean to you." I said, "But, they're mean to me because you're showing favoritism." I said, "You know we have--," I say, "please let somebody else do it." And, I said, "I don't wanna take names," 'cause I didn't tell on anybody anyway. Speaker 1: To what degree, you know, I didn't think about this so much when I was growing up, but to what degree you think skin tone has to do with it? Speaker 2: It had a ton. My mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] is two shades lighter than I am. She has brown hair. They used to tease me that my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] was not my grandmother. "How could she be your grandmother, she's black?" I said, "But, she is." "She's not your mother's mother. And, they just told you that. She adopted her." They would say mean things like that. And, so, that's--was very early on. Story_ID: 667408 Speaker 1: So, that's when my grandmamma [Montine Wilmont] told me the story. "Your granddaddy is white. Your granddaddy discovered more about cancer than anybody--," his father [L.C. Allen] did. And, he--both of 'em were doctors. They owned the clinic in Gainesville [Georgia]. Right--in what you call Hoschton [Georgia]. It's right outside from Gainesville. And, my grandmother, the son was an intern at the time. His father owned the clinic [Hillcrest-Allen Clinic and Hospital, Hoschton, Georgia]. The clinic was next to the house. I went to see the house when I was about ten. And, it was still there. And, it's like a monument or something. And, so, she said, "I went home and I would tell my mother, Mr. Allen's son [Myron B. Allen] keeps bothering me." And, so, the mother said, "He don't want you. You black and you ugly." You know, we, we had person--my grandmother's mother looked like an Indian [Native American]. But, my grand- her father was dark. It's a funny thing in our race, and we're getting back to it now, they still doing it in school. I have a lot of little mentees so this is another story for another time though. I had to go and see about a little girl who they were calling black because her skin color was, was dark. And, so, my grandmother was a beautiful woman but people--we had been, I guess, persecuted so long, we saw black as not being beautiful. We, we couldn't conceptualize and therefore my grandmother went and ironed and my mother, her mother did not recognize she was--my grandmother was 5'2", weighed probably ninety pounds or 100 pounds. And, she kept seeing that my grandmother's stomach was getting a little full. You know, my grandmother was probably about six or seven months pregnant. And, she said, "What is wrong with you?" She said, "I told you Mr. Allen--," and explained to him, her what had happened. And, so, she, my grandmother--all the boys I think were away. Like I told you my grandmother was next to the baby boy. All my grandmother's brothers were in the [U.S.] Army. They were gone away. She went to this doctor's house and told him she was gonna kill him. She had a hatchet. But, they ran her away and she went back home. She said, so, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] came and got my great-grandmother, I said I'm a write a book, it's a very interesting story-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --came and got my grandmother and took her out to a tree and tied her to a tree. And, during those days, my mama said my grandmother wore white cotton stockings, you know, they would do that 'cause she work so hard and had had all those children. I guess she had varicose veins or something. And, she said that they beat her until the skin on her legs rolled down in the stockings. And, said, that--I get emotional when I think about it (crying). But, she told them, she was such a strong woman, she told them, say, "You might kill me but you can't eat me. You--Dr. Allen's son raped my daughter and I entrusted him to go there." She was trying to help the family by ironing clothes and the, the boy who was my mother's father drove up and said, "Let her go." And, she had them put her in his car and he took her back to where she lived and, and treated her. But, when they took the stockings off the skin came off. But, she was bloody everywhere but they said that, and he told this story, said that, to my grandmother, said, "Your mama is some woman." Even in the midst of about ten men beating her, they didn't wanna just kill her. That was too easy. They wanted her to suffer. And, when they told her, she just said, the last thing she said before she passed out, "You can kill me, but you cannot eat me." And, looked them right in the eyes, with the hoods over their faces. And, so, it's like my grandmother had a lot to deal with. Then, Mr.--the doctor wanted to take my mama 'cause she came out white. Story_ID: 667409 Speaker 1: So, the doctor wanted to adopt or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He wanted that daughter. He wanted that child. He wanted that child. And, my grandmamma [Young's maternal grandmother, Montine Wilmont] had to leave. But, the only thing Andy [Young's husband, HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was telling me that I never thought of, he just told--we were talking about this about three or four years ago. He said, "You all went on vacations." He said, I mean, when, I mean, my mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] when I was two years old, now you think about in 1946 I was wearing like a forty-five dollar dress. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, my mama had bought it at J.P. Allen [J.P. Allen Company, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: That's (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was queen of my high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], my lace came from Paris [France]. Dorothy Alexander [Dorothy Hudson Alexander] who was a very rich black woman in this city, T.M. Alexander's wife, made my dress, my debutante--I used it as my debutante and my queen dress, and she charged then five hundred dollars, in 1962. So, Andy was asking me, he said, "I know your grandmamma worked on the railroad [Southern Railway], and I know your mother had--was working for a company as a bookkeeper," he said, "but, still, I'm trying to realize, did you ever think where that money came from?" And, I said, "No." My grandmother never at one time blinked when the lady--mama said, well, she has some lace that has come from Paris, but she--in order to pay for the lace and to get her to design the dress it's gonna be five hundred dollars. So, my grandmother said, "Okay." I went to college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I finished in three and a half years. But, I went to college and my grandmamma would give me--she didn't believe in checks, she still didn't trust people. She would send a money order for the year. I never, ever, nor my brother [George McClain, Jr.], knew what it was to have a loan in college. And, I didn't know until I finished college about really loans because my girlfriends were saying they had to pay back loans. I said, "Well, where did you--why do you have a loan?" They said, "Our parents couldn't pay. You don't have a loan?" I said, "No." My grandma would take that money order up there in August and it would be enough tuition for the year. And, all she had to do was give me money for books. I never thought, I really thought everybody else was doing that. And, then when they, you know-- Speaker 1: Ambassador Young was right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Um-hm, he said, "Now, Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], you didn't think about that because you just don't have the kind of mind." He said, "But, the more you tell me about that, and the more y'all had vacations," and I mean, I had little coats with fur on it, and muffs, with fur. I love clothes now. And, I love 'em now because I always had very nice stuff. And, so, he said, "That money came from somewhere." Said, "Now, you might not know where it comes from. You know it, you know from what they say that it wasn't your dad [George McClain, Sr.]." So, he said, "That probably came from your granddad [Myron B. Allen]." Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Something he had left, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's quite a story. Story_ID: 667410 Speaker 1: So, you were determined to become a teacher (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--become--determined, I had said I wanted to be a veterinarian 'cause I'm an animal lover. I mean, when I was in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I'd bring home three--my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] said, "You cannot bring any more dogs home." So, my stepfather [Moses Harden] put up a cyclone fence and he said, "Now, Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young] you can't have more than two dogs." Said, "You keep bringing these dogs home," and see I'd stop and feed 'em. And, you know, I, 'cause I would save my lunch, stuff from lunch and feed 'em, if I saw a stray dog. Speaker 1: Yeah, these are the days, people don't live like that anymore. But, in those days, dogs roamed neighborhoods. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You could walk out a house and you'd meet a new dog-- Speaker 2: Dog. Speaker 1: Just like you meet a person. Speaker 2: And, that's the way it was. And, when I walking home from school with my friends, they be (screams). I said, "He's not gonna bother you, come here." And, then when they start grab- and my mama said, "You can't bring 'em all home. I know you love 'em but you can't bring 'em all home." And, so, I just, I just decided I wanted to be a veterinarian. And, then I realized I couldn't stand blood. I couldn't stand for things to suffer, you know. The lady right, my teacher lived right next, at that time, lived right where my mother married my stepfather. We bought another house and we lived right next door to my teacher. And, she had Doberman Pinscher, and that's the only dog I didn't like 'cause he always tried to jump on my dog. But, next to her was a lady who had leukemia. I never heard of leukemia--sickle cell [sickle cell disease]. I never had heard of it. But, she would have sometimes her window up and you would hear just (moans). And, I said, "Mama, what is that?" She said, "Well, Miss Smith [ph.] has sickle cell and it's something that's very particular to Afro Americans." Well, she said, colored people at that time. She said, "But, she's very ill." I said, "I can't stand it. I don't, I don't want her to suffer." So, I realized then that my destiny, blood, and to see things suffer, I couldn't be a veterinarian. But, I decided, I love people and I love children so I wanted to be a teacher. I could've been a principal, I, but I stayed in the classroom for thirty, thirty-one years. Story_ID: 667411 Speaker 1: So, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school to Price High [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Went to college to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Went to get my master's at Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Now was there--at Price High, were there any special teachers there? Speaker 2: Yes. It was my counselor, Miss Eula Cohen. And, I had a wonderful homeroom teacher, Ernest Pharr. He was my homeroom teacher for the five years that I was there. And, he always encouraged me. That's the reason I went to Clark. I was destined to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. But, he had finished Clark and he said, "You know, Clark is a wonderful school." Said, "And, it's coed." And, he said, "You seem to shy away from boys and stuff and I think it would be good for you to go to Clark." He said, "Because Spelman is just girls and you need to learn to interact and to not--," I was scared of boys-- Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause what my grandma [Young's maternal grandmother, Montine Wilmont] said, you know. And, like when we did Halloween would come, my grandmamma--I would dress up as a gypsy or witch--a queen. But, I had to sit on the porch and my brother [George McClain, Jr.] would go out and trick or treat and bring me trick or treats. She wouldn't let me mix with the other kids. So, and, she would always--I never went to a pajama party. If there was a pajama party it had to be at our house. She wouldn't let me go to the pajama parties. She said, "Nah, I don't trust daddies or brothers in other folk's houses." So, a lot of parts of that I missed. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, when you were in high school, what was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: My favorite subject in high school was English. I loved English 'cause my homeroom teacher was a English teacher. Speaker 1: All right. So, now, were you, did you have, graduate with honors or anything in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I did. I graduated an honor student. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And did you have any special roll at graduation? Speaker 2: No, no. They just let the val- at that time, the val [valedictorian] and the sal [salutatorian] spoke. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, you graduated from--? Speaker 2: But, I was voted Miss Sweetheart also, Sweetheart of the twelfth grade senior class. Story_ID: 667412 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of activities did you participate in in high school? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't athletic at all. I played the violin and the cello. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were in the orchestra? Speaker 2: Right, in the orchestra. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have any musical aspirations? Speaker 2: Well, no because when I was in elementary school, my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden], I said, "I want a saxophone." 'Cause I had seen Louis Armstrong, they talked about him. I said, "I want a saxophone." She said, "I don't think that's for you." But, she bought it, and I didn't do anything with it. I didn't do anything with--nah, I didn't have any, nah. I used to--could sing believe it or not. When I was--I did, that was a musical aspiration. I would, what we had little talent shows in the sixth and seventh grade and entertain the other kids in school. And, I was always the lead singer. But, when I was fourteen, I had a tonsillectomy and my voice changed. I didn't, wasn't able to sing like that. But, I had a gorgeous voice and I remember the last song I sang as a leader. It was song that was--I love the--I get the 'Hit Parade' ['Your Hit Parade'] books and it came out: "Seventeen, seventeen, cool and solid seventeen" ['Seventeen']. And, the girls would be behind me and I'd have my little tam on and I'd just be going. And, then, I got--stayed sick a lot with my tonsils. So, the doctor said, "Well, you know what," he said, "we just gonna have to take the tonsils out." But, my grandmother [Montine Wilmont] was even afraid for me to, she spent the night with me in the hospital to have surgery. But, it didn't go, it didn't go really well 'cause it really affected me. Speaker 1: I know, now, that was a common procedure in those days. You know, they don't do it anymore. Speaker 2: They don't do it anymore. Speaker 1: But, tonsillectomies in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], I know so many friends of mine-- Speaker 2: So--I had it, I had it, and, and, at four years of age and it was, you know, something that--I just stayed sick the whole summer. So, the doctor said, "Well, we usually like," for some reason he said, "we usually like to take tonsils out in the winter." He said, "But, hers are so bad." Because I was constantly with colds and everything. So, that summer right after school was out, he took my tonsils out. But, my voice changed and everything. And, I really was a good--my mama is an excellent singer. But, I, I really wanted to but I couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Now, where were you living at the time you were in high school? You-- Speaker 2: I was living in a place called Joyland [Atlanta, Georgia], still in the southeast side of town 'cause Price High [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was right--not far from, from Slater Elementary [Thomas H. Slater Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I moved right, my--after my senior year to the northwest side of town-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where my mother's home is now on Kings Grant Drive. Story_ID: 667413 Speaker 1: And, you say you read a lot. What was your favorite literature in those days? Speaker 2: I, I used to read mystery stuff, you know. I, and like 'Lassie' ['Lassie Come-Home,' Eric Knight], 'Black Beauty' [Anna Sewell]. If it had something to do with an animal, I read it. And, I liked just mystery stories, Nancy Drew, all of that kind of stuff. And today I like that. I like to look at it on TV, Jessica [Jessica Fletcher]--and I can solve problems. I don't how to explain it. If I go to a movie and there's kind of murder mystery in it, nine times out of ten, I mean it's not obvious and you don't know 'til the end, I can tell you who committed it. And, my girlfriend, I know one night we were at my girlfriend's house and it was a movie I wanted to see and they rented it. This is when everybody was renting movies then. And, I said, "I want to see that movie." She said, "Well, come over, Norm's [ph.] gonna pop popcorn and we're gonna have your favorite hot dogs," you know I love hot dogs. So, we were looking at the movie and everything, this was before married Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. And, so, she said, "Oh, I bet," Norman said, "I bet you can't tell me who is gonna be the murderer in this story." The story had just started. It had been on six minutes. I said, "That orderly right there." He said, "You seen the movie." I said, "No I'm not." I said, "Why," he said, "I just can't believe that." And, Peggy [ph.] said, "Well, she hasn't seen it as far as I know." Because, I--you know what, 'til today I don't drive because I'm scared to go anywhere by myself. That's my--I got license (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that a legacy of your grandmother's upbringing? Speaker 2: Fear is learned. And, and it doesn't leave. And, I lived with my grand- my [maternal] grandmother [Montine Wilmont] lived up until she was sixty-two and then she had a massive stroke. But, Peggy told me, said, "You can drive." And, Andy said too. I've had two or three cars and I tried to drive and I got nervous. But, the problem is Peggy, my best girlfriend, Peggy said, "You don't wanna go anywhere by yourself." And, I don't. I don't like going places by myself. I mean, I'll go like, if I have to go to meeting or something I'm going by myself but there other people in there. But, driving, the thought of being by myself in a car, unh-uh. I just, I can't do it. But, I went and told him, I said, "The simple deduction is," I said, "it was no reason for that man to be in that picture." I said, "It opened up and he comes in and what part does he play? It's very insignificant, they could've left him out. So, he has to be the murderer." He told me, he said, "I don't even wanna look at it anymore." He said, "I've seen it." And, so I said, "I wanna see the movie." Speaker 1: But right. Especially if I, you know, if I see one and I see a minor star. Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not a big star, but a minor star-- Speaker 2: Why, why are they in there? Speaker 1: --walking around-- Speaker 2: You have to use simple deduction and it's also my suspiciousness. I mean, I'm suspicious of so much stuff. I mean, you know, I tell my girlfriend I (laughter), she said, "You're just crazy." I'd be in a restaurant and I said, "That man keeps looking over here." She said, "What man?" I said, "Over there." And, so, she said, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], we old and grown. Nobody--." I said, "I'm telling you." I said, "I don't like the way he's looking." And, she'll tell me, she'll look over, she said, "Well, he is." And, and she jumped 'cause she thought she could sneak over and he was looking right over there. I mean, I'm just suspicious of people. Now, I love people, but I'm just suspicious. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 667414 Speaker 1: After high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you started Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University] right here in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started Clark, and I got real sick. Let me tell you. I preached on--I'm a little minor preacher too, I like to preach too. But, my freshmen year, I finished it very well. At the end of my freshman year, that summer, at the beginning of that summer, I got very, very sick. And, I had a nervous condition and my head would just go back like that, just go back. Mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] took me to doctor after doctor after doctor and they said, "Well, we can't explain it." Said, "It's within her. It's--she's nervous, and I don't know what she's nervous about." Said, "But, I think maybe," this was June, last of May, "that she probably won't be able to start her sophomore year." And, I went, my mama took me to this doctor. My mama fasted for seven days drinking only water and juice. And, then she was shopping one day and one of her friends came up and she didn't even notice her. And, she said, "What's wrong with you?" She said, "You just seem like you're in another place." And, she told her about my illness and nobody--she had taken me from doctor to doctor, and nobody could explain it. And, so, she said, "Well, I know this doctor, William Avery [William G. Avery, Sr.], in the Strickler building [Strickler Office Building, Atlanta, Georgia]." Said, "He's a white doctor. He doesn't have any black patients but they say he's beginning to take some soon." She said, "But, he's so good until it's a waiting list." My mama said, "Give me the name and the number." Speaker 1: So, this is about 1964? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'bout 19--1963. Speaker 1: Three [1963], okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause it's right after my freshman year, you know, I was going in my sophomore year. So, she said, "I want you to go on and call him and get on the waiting list." So, she called. She talked to the nurse. She told the nurse my case. Said, "I want her to go back to school in September." Said, "But, the doctors say that there's nothing they can do, and that she won't be able to go back to school if she doesn't get better." He--the nurse told him about it. He was so interested in the case, he moved me up on the case and told mama to bring me that Saturday. My mama called that Monday. And, so, that's just clearly confirmed to me that if you have faith as big as a mustard seed, you can move mountains. So, when my mother told me that the doctor was gonna see me and she told the lady, "Oh, he'll see her. She'll be going, she'll be next to go." I mean, you have to--she had fasted, she had prayed. I mean, I was thin, very thin, and I became thinner. I could not eat. I had no taste for nothing. They would get ice cream. I love shrimp. I love hot dogs. Unh-uh, I wouldn't eat it. I might take one bite. So, she said, "She can't survive like this." So, I went to see him. He saw me. He gave me, he said, "I'm giving you this medicine. It was created for something else, but I think it's gonna help your condition." He said, "What your condition is, it's really not so much medical, as psychological." He said that "You are very resent- ," I was very resentful of my monthly cycle 'cause I was in so much pain. So, this was a copout. It was a very strange thing. I mean, he said, "But, I'm a get you well." So, I went back. I went that June. I went back that July. He said, "How, you doing?" I said, "I'm doing better." He said, "You got one month. School starts in September." That August I was doing good. I went back to school. Speaker 1: Well, what did he--how did he help you? Speaker 2: He gave me this med- he talked to me first of all and explained everything to me what he felt was happening to me. But, this medicine that he gave me, I had to take it every day for about, well, a whole month. And, then, I would take it again the whole month, every month, and he said, "This, this was not invented for this." And, I didn't know 'til I graduated from college. It was a birth control pill. It was something that would regulate your cycle that would stop the muscles from contracting. They didn't, they didn't invent the birth control pill for birth control. They invented the birth control pill thinking for, for the cycle. No other doctor had had that insight. He said he, he had to pull, but he said, "I admit I had to pull back and see why this pill was invited--invented and what the, what the things that it would do." Boom, I went on and then finished in three and a half years. Did my student teaching in January to March and sat and waited 'til graduation. Story_ID: 667415 Speaker 1: What was college life like at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful. I had wonderful teachers. There again, I had great teachers. I had friends. I was gonna join a sorority. But, then, they said, "We gonna get you when you get in." And, my fear went back to when I was child when they would run me and push me down and hit me and cut my hair. It had nothing to do with that. They were just kidding me. But, you know, what is, is real. What has happened to you is real and you always have flashbacks. So, I didn't join the sorority but I was liked, and I was Miss City, and it was really, it was good, it was good. Speaker 1: Now, when you were in, at Clark, were the student participating in any of the sit-ins in Atlanta [Georgia] or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, no. They had done that earlier. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. That was gone. Speaker 1: 'Cause you started, what, in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, that--? Speaker 2: The latter part of '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you just kind of missed that. Speaker 2: I just missed it. Speaker 1: And so integration (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--but, I heard about it. I couldn't've dare had sat in. I mean, when I was in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], they wanted me to, you know they had just started integrating some of the schools. And, my [maternal] grandmother [Montine Wilmont] said, "Oh, no. You won't be one of 'em. They don't need to ask you. You're not going." Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, "You're gonna stay here where you can be comfortable where people know you and everything." Story_ID: 667416 Speaker 1: So, did you, you kind of, did you follow the Civil Rights Movement in your household? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. We--my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden], we looked, what we could see on TV. I had, and it's probably at my mama's house today in the trunk, 'cause all our little valuables are in the trunk. And, I'm getting ready--I'm cleaning it out now 'cause she's been staying with me for three years. She can't walk. But, I did a scrapbook on Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], did one on [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young. And, it's a pro- it's amazing. I told Andy, "Those the only two out of movement that we did scrapbooks on," you know. And, he, at that time was, people didn't realize how valuable he was to Martin Luther King. But, we had the scrapbooks. So, I know they know they're in there. And, we did John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. We loved John, John F. Kennedy was killed my sophomore year. And, they said, "The president has been shot." And, we thought they were talking about President Brawley. And, so everybody said, "Oh, we so," that's the president of our college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. "We're so sad." Speaker 1: Benjamin Brawley [sic. James P. Brawley], right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. They said, then they said, "Nah, President Kennedy." We all "Aww," started crying (laughter) then. Yeah, but Kennedy, Martin, and Andy. We kept scrapbooks on. But, my grandmamma [Montine Wilmont] would always say--see when my brother [George McClain, Jr.]--flashback, when my brother--they integrate where you could go to the baseball stadium and stuff to see baseball when it first came here. My brother went to the baseball game with some of his friends. My brother was beautiful, I mean for a man. He was absolutely gorgeous. And-- Speaker 1: Was he tall (unclear)? Speaker 2: 6'4". And, when he came out of the stadium, you know, some white girls said, "Oh that's--he sure is cute." He was with his friends. Three white boys beat him and broke his nose. Well, his friends ran away. They were scared. So, you didn't have cell phones. So, they got to a pay phone and told the police, and called my mom. And, when my mom got down to the hospital, she passed right by him; didn't know who he was. But, she recognized his shoes. They had broken his nose, beat his face, and they were--and, and he said, "I don't know who it was, it was three white boys. I have no idea. I didn't know him." Said, "These girls told me I was handsome." He said, "But, I knew not to talk to them." 'Cause this was still segregated, you know, and stuff. I mean, you could go places and things, but it's still-- Speaker 1: The social rule is still. Speaker 2: Rules--social rules were still there. And, they said, "We gonna mess up that pretty face, since it's pretty." But, luckily the scars healed and, and everything. But his nose were broke--was broken. And, I remember we were sitting home one day, and during that time for a broken nose they stuffed it with cotton. The cotton start slipping down his throat. "I'm choking, I'm choking." Honey, my mama went down in there and got that cotton outta there. But, I've heard a lot of things--and then he went over embankment, blacked out and went--we didn't know he had seizures. And, and was trapped two days before he turned thirty on this birthday, December the 10th, and luckily it was warm day. All of the windows were out. The car was ma- I never saw it, my mama saw it, mashed down to here. My mama was--he had borrowed my mama's car and was going to the movies to take this girl. Hadn't picked up the girl yet. And, he said he got dizzy, and he said, "Well, I'm a cross the street and just stop." Instead he hit the--on Burbank [Drive] which is off of Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] now. It used to be old Hunter Street. The car went over the embankment and the paper boy who was throwing the paper that morning at 4:30 discovered him. And, he never walked again but he didn't have but one little scratch. The motor was in the back of the car. And, so, it's been a lot of stuff that has happened in my life, but you know, I learned that you have to live above your circumstances and not beneath them, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've done very well. Story_ID: 667417 Speaker 1: So, graduation [from Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] you said you started your student teaching where in--? Speaker 2: I started my student teaching at Wesley elementary school [Wesley Avenue School], and it was over in southeast Atlanta [Georgia]. A very poor school. Black, all black school. I started in the fifth grade with Miss Taylor [ph.], and my principal was Dr. Ralph Long. And, he told me, he said, "You did such an excellent job student teaching, could you come back? I'm gonna call downtown and ask can you come back on my faculty as a teacher." And, I told him, I said, "Oh I would love that." And, then he called me back. I guess, it was about the last of July. He said, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]," he said, "I'm just so sorry." He said, "Miss Satterfield [ph.] called me and say you could not come to Wesley Avenue. That you were the type of person," see she would ask you every kind of question you, you ask. Like she said, "How would you feel," I'd never forget, "how would you feel," and I was the only one at my, out of my group who was chosen to do that. They were all, went to all black schools. She said, "How would you feel if you came to a classroom and there were all white students and maybe one black, maybe none? How would you feel?" I said, "Well, you know," I said, "children are children. I don't teach colors." I said, "I teach children." I said, "It doesn't matter what color they are or what race they're in, they're children, and my thing is to teach them." And, so she said, "Okay." She said, "Now, are you afraid of white folk?" I said, "No." I said, "Let me tell you," I said, "I have a fear of a lot of folk, but it has nothing to do with their color or what race they're in." And, so, she said, "Um-hm." I'd never forget, she was a stern lady. You had to go down there with gloves on and a little hat and a little suit. And, I'm sitting there, I said, "Oh, lord." Everybody had told me, you know, teachers before me, "Oh, you gonna catch it, honey. You gonna catch it, 'cause that lady is mean." And, so, she said, "If I were to put you--I understand that Dr. Long has asked for you to come to Wesley Avenue. Is that something you would like to do?" I said, "Yeah. I had a great experience there with the students." She said, "But, if you didn't get that, would you be disappointed?" I said, "Not," I said, "I might be. I anticipated going there." But, I said, "No." I said, "Because what I wanna do is teach." And, I told her about all of my favorite, my, my experiences as a child at school and how good my teachers were. And, I said, "I wanna make some children feel the same way they made me feel." She called Dr., called Ralph Long and said, "No, she's going to East Lake [East Lake Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]." Story_ID: 667418 Speaker 1: Yeah, we're just talking about the difference in when you started and the way things are now. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Having to wear gloves. I haven't heard that in so long. Speaker 2: Oh we wore gloves, and not only gloves, the little hat on your head, and you came in in your suit. And, you had your hair pulled--my hair was real long, so I had to wrap it up, you know. 'Cause one day I did my student teaching and somebody came in and said, "Honey," I used to wear, they called me Pocahontas. I used to wear my hair in two long plaits. "You can't wear it like that teaching. You got to put that hair on that head, wind it up," you know. And, so, but, we--I went in there and then when we went to school we had to have on a dress or a suit. You, you know, now people don't wear stockings. We wore stockings then, they didn't have the pantyhose, you know. And, so, the kids now, I was telling Governor Barnes [Roy Barnes], I said, "You know, sometimes that--," he said, "Why is it that the kids don't give the teachers the respect that they used to give 'em?" I said, "Well, you know, teachers are perceived differently now." I said, "And, a lot of time, teachers wanna be the students' friends. You wanna--them to know that you care for them. But, you have to let them know that you're in a leadership role and that you're there to help them to discover stuff. You teach 'em but you let them discover themselves so they can learn. They have to learn. You can't teach 'em to learn. You have to show them the way." I said, "And, you have to let 'em know that you care for them. But, you also have to develop their respect and it's the way you carry yourself." And, I always felt the way you dress. I would never have worn jeans to school. And, I stopped--Andy [Young's husband, HistoryMaker Andrew Young] made me stop teaching in 1997 because we married in '96 [1996] to, to marry him. But, I never would have--only time I wore jeans was on planning days when the children didn't come. And, I think it has a lot to do with the way we carry ourselves, and we become too familiar with the students. But, you have to let your students know you care. You have to plan for them. Now, I know the students now are, are--I never taught, the amazing thing about it is I never taught in an all black school. When that school turned black, they pulled my number and sent me to a poor white school with very few, it was only one grade. The first, second, third--I was used to being at a school where you had three first grades, two first grades. And, the kids were very poor. So, I went to the seventh grade to replace a white teacher and she went to where I was. Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: I did very well there. I learned that these kids came to school--you have to first, you can't teach 'em if they hungry. You can't teach 'em if they feel inferior, coming to school with slides on and raggedy clothes. You have to find a more excellent way to help them. You first do that and then you got their attention. And, then they will learn and they will do well. And, so, when that school closed, my principal said, "I'm going to E.P. Howell [E.P. Howell Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I'm taking with two teachers with me. I'm taking Ms.," at that time I married right out of college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], the first time. He said, "I'm taking Ms. Watson [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], and I'm taking Miss Porter [ph.]." So, we went to that school. Story_ID: 667419 Speaker 1: So, your name was Watson (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Watson. My first married name. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us, did you meet your first husband in college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Is that-- Speaker 2: I met my--there was a bowling alley and my mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] and father [Young's stepfather, Moses Harden] took me to bowl every Friday. So, when I was a senior in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I --this, I was bowling and this fellow came, a fellow came up and said, told me his name. And, I said, "Oh, hi, how you doing?" And, so, mama said, "This is her father. This is her mother." And, he said, "Well, she was so pretty. I just wanted to speak. My friend is the one that likes her." 'Cause my husband was real shy, real spoiled. And, so, we said, "Oh, hi." And, so, then, so, he said, "He wants your phone number." I said, "Well, I don't date." He said, "Well, how old are you?" I said, "I'm sixteen," and I said, "I'll be seventeen in September." He said, "And, you don't date?" I said, "No, no, no." I said, "My grandmamma [Young's maternal grandmother, Montine Wilmont] and my mama don't let me date." And, so, he said, "Well, he's really a nice boy." So, he came up and introduced himself. Well, as it turned out my mama knew his father very well. And, knew his father's best friend. So, still when it was time to go to the prom, my brother asked his friend's baby brother who was the same age as me to take me to the prom. So, after I finished high school, we talked on the phone and he would come over to see me. But, I couldn't go on a date. So, after I finished high school, he did take me out. He was a very nice young man. But, he was very spoiled. He was--his mama had three children. His mama was registered nurse. His daddy, at the time, taught at AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] math, you know; at AU. And, then they developed the first building supply company in the Southeast, black. And, so, we dated through college. I only dated, my mistake was, I only dated that one fella, and we got married right after college. I never stayed in an apartment like my girlfriends when they finished college, they got their own place. I married right out of my mother's house and I married him. And, the marriage worked for, pretty good for about ten years. But, he was spoiled. He was lazy. I mean, this fella--I remember when we were in college, he came down in the, what we call the rec [recreation center]. I didn't know how to play cards. So, I was watching my girlfriends play cards on our little break. And, he came down to see me and he had on this leather coat, trench coat, and it had raccoon on, on the collar of it. And, we said, they said, "He got on a girl's coat." And, (unclear) boys said, "It's a man's coat, 'cause it's buttoned that way." He traveled to New York [New York] to get his clothes. He went to London [England] and places. His daddy would send him. He was the only somebody in high school who had a car. He dressed very well. He was just absolutely spoiled. And, so, we got married and he just, his father was really running the business. And, he had worked with his father when he was fifteen and sixteen in the business. But, he had a degree from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in business. He had an accounting degree from AU. But, he was lazy, and he lost his daddy's business and became a liability. And, it just, I mean, I, everybody said, "Well, two spoiled people," I was spoiled but I wasn't selfish. He was spoiled and selfish. That's a different thing. So, we broke up after about twenty something years of marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so when did you all, you all break up? Speaker 2: We broke up in 1994. Story_ID: 667420 Speaker 1: Now the first school you went to was--? Speaker 2: Slater [Thomas H. Slater Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Slater. No, no, to work? Speaker 2: Oh, East Lake Elementary [East Lake Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, East Lake. Okay, so you, so you desegregated East Lake. Speaker 2: East Lake. Speaker 1: The faculty, okay. Speaker 2: Then, I went to Goldsmith [John Meador Goldsmith Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and I integrated that school. Speaker 1: What was that like as a teacher? I mean, with your colleagues? Did your white colleagues appreciate your presence or? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I mean, I never had problems, you know, and that's the reason they kept moving me around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I went to East Lake, several of the te- we had an Olympic medalist who came in with me. Seven black teachers integrated that school. She was the P.E. [physical education] teacher. She couldn't deal with the white kids. She couldn't deal with their parents. They didn't like her. She was, she was Edith McGuire. She had gone to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and won three gold medals. So, they thought she would be good in integrating the school. But, unh-uh. She, she, I thought she was wonderful person. But, my grandmamma [Young's maternal grandmother, Montine Wilmont] used to tell me, "You can tell a person to go to hell and they'll be glad they made the trip if you know how to say it." And, she was not that kind of person. She was just brash and everything. And, it's because she was an athlete and she had gotten those gold medals way back then. And, you know, she was a hero. And, but, I always, I mean, I didn't see any difference. When I'd go in cafeteria, I'd say, "Hi, how you all doing?" All of 'em are white people behind the thing. I said, "What do you have today?" I said, "The food looks so good." They said, "Well, you don't eat until we have chicken." I said, "I love chicken." And, I said, "When you gonna start having hot dogs? I like hot dogs, too." You know they started having hot dogs more often. And, all you got to do--it's no difference in people. Story_ID: 667421 Speaker 1: Do you think it was easier, now, once again, I'm thinking about this, 'cause I've seen and talked to a lot of people. Do you think like, your complexion had something to do with the ease (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's what they--that's what, that's what my friends said, the people at the school said. That they, they identified more with me than they did them. Because I'm a tell you what they did at that school. It was a lady there and she said, "You the teacher's pet." I mean, "The principal's pet, they all like you." I said, "No, no, no, no, no." "The parents like you." And, so, I said, "No, that's not true." Flashback to how when I was a children. So, they--yeah, "'Cause you, you remind them of them. They know you got some of them in--." I said, "All of us have some mixed blood in us." "But, you got more." So, I mean, they had a Christmas party, this lady did. So, the lady who had the Christmas party was gonna invite me. They put an invitation in everybody black's box but mine. So, the lady that I rode to school with was really sweet. And, she said, "Are you going to Lacky's [ph.] party?" It's just like it was yesterday. I'm sitting there looking, and I said, "Well, did she invite you?" She said, "She invited me. Look in your mailbox it's an invitation." So, I said, "No." She said, "It probably fell out." So, I left out the teachers' lounge. So, my friend was still in there. And, when Lacky came in she said, "You know Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young] didn't get an invitation to your Christmas party." She said, "She wasn't supposed to get one." She said, "What do you mean?" She said, "I didn't give it to the white ones and I didn't give to the half white one." And, so, I heard it. So, it hurt me so bad. So, my girlfriend that I rode with, I didn't say anything to her 'cause I didn't, I knew she felt bad about it. And, so she never mentioned the party again. Well, when I went in the lounge that Monday, we were gonna get out of school that Tuesday. They had all gone to Christmas party. So, I was sitting there, in there and some of the mean ones would said, "Oh that was a good Christmas party Lacky had." Well, since I had heard it, I didn't ask about it or anything. I just went on talking and everything. So, they said, "Yeah, it was really nice." I came out, so my girlfriend had come in and she heard them. And, she said, "I didn't mention that party about it anymore," she said, "because I knew she had not invited you, she told me." I said, "I heard it when she said it." I said, "You remember I had just step out of the teacher's lounge. And, I was about to go back in there to get something I had left in there. But, when I heard her say, 'Nah, I didn't invite Watson. Un-uh, I didn't invite her.'" And, so, it, it's been a--you know, but it's okay. Because hatred is learned. We are born loving everybody as a baby. But, conditions, environment, and sometimes I guess heredity, has to do with how we feel about people. But, I, I really don't hate anybody. I've never, even when they treated me mean, I would try to justify why they did it, you know. And, and consequently, I understood that because they did treat me better. I was treated better. I mean, you know, they would, "We cooked you some hot dogs, we did this, we did that." But, I never wanted special treatment, I was just a nice person. Story_ID: 667422 Speaker 1: You went on to East Lake Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], now that's in--? Speaker 2: That's over by Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew Charter School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. I'm sorry. East River [sic.] is what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: East River is-- Speaker 2: This is how it went. Let me tell you how it went. I went from East Lake to Goldsmith [John Meador Goldsmith Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. When it closed Mr. Hyde [ph.], my principal took me to E.P. Howell [E.P. Howell Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], which is right there on Howell Mill Road. When that school closed--see I had all white principals. When I left East Lake we had a black principal that year but I had gone. And, then, from E.P. Howell I went to E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and that was a very rich school. Speaker 1: About what time--what year was that? Speaker 2: That was, it had to be '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you had been in 1976, you were teacher of the year, right, in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, this is, this is a big deal. I mean, all the teachers-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were the teacher of the year. Speaker 2: I was--and then, I, I became, they selected twelve teachers to be on the Southern Bell [Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.] calendar teachers of excellence, and I was one of the twelve out of the metro Atlanta. Speaker 1: Atlanta area. Okay. Which includes all of the surrounding counties and towns (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I was one of the, I was--right. And, then, also I was chosen was the intermediate teacher, from all of the intermediate grades I was that representative, the teacher for the intermediate grades. Speaker 1: How did you--what were your thoughts about Atlanta in those days? This is right after the--'76 [1976] is three years after Maynard Jackson becomes the mayor. I mean, Atlanta is seen as a, like a new mecca, like Chicago [Illinois] used to be seen for black folks (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Everybody wanted to come to Atlanta-- Speaker 2: Everybody wanted--right, right. Speaker 1: --and they were coming from all over the United States. I know when I graduated from college, people wanted to come to Atlanta. That's where they wanted to go. Speaker 2: Well, see, I felt, I felt very comfortable because I went to Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] when there weren't but ten black students in 1972, 1971. Story_ID: 667423 Speaker 1: You're working on master's degree, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, every class we went in there weren't, there were four of us who went together. And, I mean, it was wonderful. My teachers reached out to me. Now, some of my girlfriends, one of my girlfriends she, she say she experienced prejudice in a class that both of us were in and that's just how two people could be in the same place and see things differently. I didn't see Dr. Perkins [ph.] as being prejudice. She had, see I'm tall so she sat by me one day and she had a roll book there, and her class was a very subjective kind of teaching because you had to write papers, you had get in front of the class and talk. So, she didn't give any objective tests. So, if she decided that she wanted to give you a B or C she could have. So, I noticed by all of our names she had B. And, the girl said, "She's gonna give us a B." I said, "No, that's just her way of identifying who are the four black student in here," 'cause that's what the terminology was then. And, so, she said, "Well, I don't like her. She's prejudice." I said, "She--you don't know her. She might not have taught black students before." I said, "Only thing we got to do, just let her know we just as smart as anybody else in this class." Well, my girlfriend, she just, I don't know why I ever told her I saw B by our names. Because that just totally changed her attitude. Well, it changed Dr. Perkins' attitude too. She came in there one day, she's a beautiful girl, big Afro wig on. And, was looking mean, big earrings, and then when she did, she look like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis. So, Dr. Perkins didn't like that. She gave her a B. She gave two of them Bs and two of us A's. And, I got, I never got a B at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean, I loved my teachers. It was just a wonderful--and Dr. Hoffman [ph.], he used to say, "Look, I'm going out of town, take up the projects to do. Take 'em up for me Watson [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]." I said, "Okay." I mean, I didn't--I guess, I don't know. Anyway, I went to an integrated school. And, then when I went to Georgia State I did not feel that the prejudice--my girlfriend always say, "They were very prejudiced." But, I don't dispute her because I think in her mind is how she saw it. Speaker 1: Now, there's a theory too that I've learned over the years-- Speaker 2: And, she's just as fair as I am, or fairer. Speaker 1: Yeah. There's a theory too, and I wonder what you think about this that there's a critical mass of black folks in certain situations. Now, there's not an exact number, I don't know if they, it probably could be scientifically worked out, where you have so many black folks, once you get--one might be all right. But, if you start getting, the number might be three and a certain larger number creates, starts creating an uncomfortable feeling amongst the majority. When you get so many that it becomes a, where they start feeling threatened, yeah. Speaker 2: I think that's true. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a very true situation. I mean, we went to classes where there were two hundred students. And, you had to get up and make a report and they would break you up into groups and then your group leader had to make the reports. Well, I've never been afraid to talk in front of groups, you know, so I would get up. My girlfriend, she got up and she had a paper and she had told me what she was gonna say. It wasn't anything on that paper that she said. It was good. And, I told her it was good. But, she was so nervous. And, we had, there were only two black professors down there, Dr. Stone [ph.], and the man that taught us media educations, I can't think of his name now. His wife is my sorority sister, but anyway. I mean, I just didn't feel uncomfortable. I did not. I was, I went there to learn. I didn't go there--I had friends when I went there. I mean, they were loving. I think sometimes, I know it's happened a lot of times with me, not all the times but when you show love and, "Perfect love cast out all fear" [1 John 4:18]. And, if you show love, people just come on around. Story_ID: 667424 Speaker 1: Now did you join any of the black teachers' organizations when they were formed? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the-- Speaker 1: NABSE and, yeah the National Association of Black School Educators [sic. National Alliance of Black School Educators] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Association of Black--right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, you did see a need that for black people teachers to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. Oh, yeah. You--see, what happened to me, I never say I didn't--I always say, "I didn't see," I'm not saying it's not happening. What I'm saying is I didn't, I can't lie and say I experienced it. But, I joined all those groups, AFT [American Federation of Teachers], you know, all those groups, PACE [Program of Alternative Certification for Educators]. You know, I was always a member and I always supported the teachers, you know, and everything. But, I just couldn't sit and say what, I couldn't lie and say I, I had a difficult, I had a wonderful time. But, there were those who didn't. Speaker 1: When you were teaching were you concerned about curriculum in terms of how it represented black people and--to the students (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Let me tell you, when I went to the school, I know they thought I was crazy. I went over to Goldsmith [John Meador Goldsmith Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now, you're talking about the poorest black and the poorest whites in the world. We, we, I had the blacks and the white. And, we did a play on Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and I had a white boy, Dwayne McKenzie [ph.] played Martin Luther King to let, it was point there. He was the smartest boy in the class and he was articulate but I wanted to let them know, it's not the color, it's the content of the character. It's how the person is. And, that came through. And, then, it was so good until they took me over to the high school, Archer High School [Samuel Howard Archer High School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was not far away and we did it for a big audience. Yeah, yeah, I did. And, I always, my girlfriend and I when I was at E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], she was a great writer of plays. And, we, we didn't cast black characters necessarily with a black student. You had to audition for the character. And, if you happened to be white and the character was Harriet Tubman, or Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], then you got it. I mean, you know, that's just the way it was. But, we taught, it wasn't in the curriculum, but we brought it to the forefront, you know. And, as I, when I left around 1990, it started in '93 [1993] or '94 [1994], they did start, we started getting information in books and things about Afro American. But, we always celebrated. And, what I would tell my students, I said, "We--they have designated," I said, "when I was young, it was a week." I said, "A day," I said, "but, now they've designated the month of February as Afro American History Month [Black History Month]." I said, "But, you cannot have American history without Afro, without black history." I said, "It's intertwined." And, we talked about the red light. We talked about the sole of the shoe. We talked about how--I told 'em, we read, I read them the story about Admiral Peary [Robert Peary] going to the, put the flag down. And, so, I said, "Now, Admiral Peary didn't wanna take a black man to put the flag down to go up there to the North Pole with him." I said, "But, why did he do it? Because he was the only one who could handle the dogs." I said, "What you have to learn to do," and I said, "and, I'm talking to blacks and whites," and I talk Asian. My school became an international school. We had thirty-four cultures with thirty-six different language. We had four ESOL [English for Speakers of Other Languages] teachers. And, told 'em, I said, "What you have to understand is, in this life you've got to make yourself indispensable. Do something or make something that nobody else wants to do." I said, "He couldn't get any other of his partners to be able to manage those dogs. So, Matthew Henson went up there and put the flag down because he was a black man and he could manage the dogs." Story_ID: 667425 Speaker 1: I said, "You find out what you can do that nobody else can do." I said, "You don't have to follow in--if your dad," I had doctors and lawyers and everything else children in there. Their pare- their maids would drive up there in Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz]. I said, "But, find something that somebody needs or this society is going to want and nobody else has done it." And, they, they started thinking. So, when they did their projects, they would always think outside of the box and stuff. So, we did a lot of that. And, and we talked about how people helped--I said, "Let me tell you something." I said, when I would get (unclear), 'Eyes on the Prize' and show them a piece of it, said, "What you have to realize, this movement was not just a black movement." I said, we were talking about the Civil Rights Movement then. It was very foremost on their mind. I said, "You hear about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. You hear about [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young. You hear about Ralph David Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery]." I said, "But, there were white people." I say, a lady by the--the first tombstone that Miss Lowery [HistoryMaker Evelyn Gibson Lowery] and I put up on Highway, I think 48 [sic. U.S. Route 80] off Selma [Alabama], was Viola Alousso [sic. Viola Liuzzo]. She had four children [sic.] and her husband was in the union [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] and I think they were in Michigan-- Speaker 2: Right, from Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Detroit. And, they--she was sitting looking at TV how they were beating these people and putting firehoses. She asked her husband, she left her children, came down to Selma. And, driving one evening in the highway, she had a black man in the car. That was against the law. You couldn't have a black man in the car with a white lady. And, I said, "They killed her. She gave her life." I said, "So, don't think that you hear them. You might not hear about those, those people. But, those people the three boys, Andrew [Andrew Goodman], Matthew [sic. Michael Schwerner], and, the three boys that were killed. Speaker 2: Schwerner. Speaker 1: Schwerner and Chaney [James Chaney]. Speaker 2: And Goodman. Speaker 1: And, Goodman. I said, "They gave their lives." I said, "When you saw that march, what made that march go across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], there was as many white, pastors, and people, and stars, as anybody else." So, I said, "We can't live divided." I said, "We have to come together." So, we never taught separatism, we always taught togetherness, and so the parents really liked that. They really liked that. See, we teach, a lot of times we'd teach in isolation and you can't do that. Not one culture, not one race do anything by themselves. It was a combination. So, I used to tell 'em, I said, "This is, Black History Month's designated to us. But, our black history and American history are all in one." Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, so, you, in 1982 Andrew Young is elected mayor, succeeds Maynard Jackson. And, you're teaching in Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia]. You start that same, that (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I'm teaching at E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I taught there until 1997. Story_ID: 667426 Speaker 1: All right. You've given us kind of an analysis off camera of Atlanta [Georgia]. What it was like and as your teaching is growing as you said we have, Maynard Jackson is mayor and here comes [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young who brings a lot of credentials with him-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as mayor. Speaker 2: When Andrew Young, in 1982, became mayor, his son rode to school with me. His son was in the first grade. And, there was friend of theirs by the name of Elizabeth Blackwell [Elizabeth Knox Blackwell] whose husband Randolph Blackwell had been in the movement. And, Andy had gotten him a job working with President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] in rural development. But, Andrew had died [sic.] and Libby, I rode to school with Elizabeth. She was also at E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], and Bo [Andrew Young III] rode with us because when they came back from the--being ambassador, Bo was in the UN [United Nations] nursery. He was used to international schools. But, we had-- Speaker 1: This's Andrew Young son? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: He's just a little guy? Speaker 2: He, he was six. Speaker 1: Six, okay. Speaker 2: And, so, he came and he asked Libby, he said, "You and that lady, Miss Watson [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]," said, "I want Bo to go to that school up until after the three grade and then I'll let him go to a neighborhood school." He said, "'Cause we're gonna still be traveling. And, I want him, he's only been in--with an international school." So, he started there, first grade, and he came to our school. Speaker 1: What grade were you teaching in those days? Speaker 2: Fifth (cough) excuse me. I taught the fifth grade. But, I taught all grades, K-7th [kindergarten to seventh grade]. But, the majority of my years were in the fifth grade because they took the sixth and seventh grade out of the elementary school and made it a middle school. So, Bo rode to school with us every day. And, and he too was a different little boy. He had blonde hair, green eyes, and he was very, very fair. But, he took from his mother's [Jean Childs Young] side. But, he looked like Andy, you know. So, he went and the children would look at him and said, "You're the mayor's son." And, but, when he first came there, it must've been 1980 when he came to, in the first grade. Story_ID: 667427 Speaker 1: How did you meet the Young family in the first place (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Through this lady, Miss Elizabeth Blackwell [Elizabeth Knox Blackwell]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because she was teaching with me and she--I rode to school with her. I told you I didn't drive because I didn't want to be by myself. So, I rode to school with her and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] asked Libby said, "Can she, Bo [Andrew Young III] ride with you all?" And, she said, "Yeah." So, he would bring--Andy lived ten minutes from me off of Cascade [Road] and five minutes from Libby off of Peyton [Road]. So, my husband would bring me to Libby's house every morning. And, then, Bo--Andy would bring Bo to Libby's house. And, so, we would take him to school and everything. Well, Bo was very knowledgeable. I mean, he suffered with dyslexia but he had been since--had a passport since he was two months old. And, he had been to at least about twenty-five countries (laughter) by the time he got to be six. 'Cause they took him, had to take him everywhere. You know, the girls were in college. See, he was born, Andy's oldest daughter [Andrea Young] was eighteen years older than Bo. And, the next daughter [Lisa Young Alston] was sixteen years old, and the youngest daughter [Paula Young Shelton] was twelve years older than Bo. They didn't expect another child. And, so, he came to the school [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and he was knowledgeable about things. He immediately tested for the gifted. Well, he caused problems because when they would say things, he said, "Oh, that's not true, I was there last year and that has changed. This book must be old." Teachers resented that. Instead of accepting that as a brilliant child and saying, "Oh, I'm glad you recognized that," they resented it. Still we had more white teachers than black. We had--we were beginning a truly international school and we still had the bus--the black kids that were there were bused in. They called it minority to majority school. And, we had kids from outside of town but we also had kids from East Lake Meadows [Atlanta, Georgia], which was the poorest project. They used to call it Little Vietnam but those kids achieved because they, it was a copycat kind of thing and they did well because we expect them to do well. But, anyway, so, Andy got involved, he and Jean [Jean Childs Young], in our PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and different things. So, we received a lot of different things. Bo went there until he was nine years old, and then they put him in the school on our side of town. Well, Bo for some reason, he's always liked older women. So, he thought I was his girlfriend because see his daddy and mama were thirteen years older than I was. I was younger. And, he, he said, Andy has a brother and a sister-in-law, you know Sonja [HistoryMaker Sonja W. Young] and Walt [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], and Bo said, "I don't wanna stay with them." They still did a lot of traveling, out of the country and around the country. And, so, they asked me, say, "Bo wants to stay with you. Would it be a possibility?" I never had children. So, I said, "Yeah, that's good." I said, "We go to the same school." So, it was really convenient. So, he started staying with me up until he was eleven years old. So, I got to know the sisters. I got to know Jean. Story_ID: 667428 Speaker 1: And then Libby died. She had multiple myeloma. When we were at E.P. Howell [E.P. Howell Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], she got the cancer, and then she moved up to E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] with me and she only went to E. Rivers with me for two years, and then she said, "I'm not gonna do well." She said--her husband [Randolph Blackwell] had died. He had died of prostate, first time I ever heard of prostate cancer, in 1979 [sic. 1981]. And, she died, she said, "I'm gonna live to see Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] be inaugurated. And, then Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], I'm a go." I said, "Where are you going?" I was in denial. And, so, we talked about it and everything. And, so, I had become friends with Andy and his family. And, I think the thing that really got Andy and really, I was very good to his children and then to--Bo [Andrew Young III] was crazy about me. And, I think that he saw a good person in me because I would go every day to see Libby after school at home. When she was in--hospitalized for about a month in and half, I would go every day after school. The lady dropped me off and I'd do all my schoolwork there and sit and talk with her and keep her company. I knew she was dying. And, a lot of her friends said, "Oh," who had been friends with her much longer than I had. I only met her through them. Well, no, I met her through to the school. I used to be in, well, at my E.P. Howell School because I had been at that school with that principal before. He told me, he said, "My wife is having surgery and I'm gonna be out with her for about six to eight weeks." He said, "I want you to be in charge." Well, there were older white teachers there and I was one of the youngest teachers. In fact, probably next to the youngest teacher. So, he said, I said, "Oh, I don't know if they gonna like that." He said, "You'll stay in your classroom. But, if it's a problem I want you to help solve it 'cause you have an open mind. And, I don't need anybody with a closed mind. And, I've already informed," see, they wouldn't dare do that now. But, then he said, "I've informed the superintendent," our area superintendent. We were in Area 1. No, Area 4. He said, "I've informed the superintendent, Dr. Hyde [ph.], that you're doing this. He said it was fine. Your record was very good." So, Libby came over to our school. She said, "I've, I've been reaching poor kids all my life, black kids. And, I'm, I just wanna move to another situation." So, we had a third grade opening. So, I said, "Well, what's your name?" That's how I started riding with her. She said, "Elizabeth Blackwell [Elizabeth Knox Blackwell]." She said, I said, "Where do you live?" She said, "On--off of Peyton Road on Harlan [Road]." I said, "Okay. That's not far, about ten minutes from me." I said, "I live on Melbenan Drive." She said, "Yes." She said, "I just wanna come over here. I'm tired of screaming and hollering and I'm tired of, you know, I just want some nice kids to teach. I want--," and, so, I said, "Well, this is a very nice school." I said, "Mr. Hyde is a very good principal." She said, "Are you the assistant principal?" I said, "No. I'm a teacher just like you are." I said, "But, I came over here during," I came early to get things settled. I said, "Mr. Hyde's wife had a serious surgery and he wants to stay home with her and he asked me would I work in his place." I didn't get any more money. But, you know, I wasn't looking for any more money. It was just a position of honor. And, so, I told her, I said, "Well, he has interviewed two teachers for that position." She said, "Well, how do you get to school every day?" I said, "Oh, my husband drops me off." She said, "I tell you what, if you put a good word in, I'll take you to school," (laughter), "and bring you to school every day." And, so, she seemed like to be such a nice person. So, Mr. Hyde came back for a couple of days and he was interviewing the people, and he interviewed her and he had interviewed the other two teachers. And, so, he said, "What did you think?" I said, "I like Miss Blackwell." And, it wasn't just because she was black and she was gonna give me a ride. She really was a good person. And, he said, "I, I lean- I'm leaning toward her too." So, he hired her and that's how I got to ride with her, and then I got to know Andy and those. That was prior to Peachtree Battle [Avenue]. Story_ID: 667429 Speaker 1: She got, she start being real sick and she got multiple myeloma that was, which is bone cancer, and they diagnosed her. And, she said, "Oh, I'm a--the doctor say I'm gonna be fine." 'Cause she ate very good. She played tennis, indoor tennis in the winter as well as outdoor tennis in the summer. She's the only person I knew at that time that was eating only chicken and fish, and baking it. She was thin, everything, but the doctor said because she had taken such good care of herself, she would make it. So, when E.P. Howell [E.P. Howell Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] closed because we didn't have any more kids to come because that neighborhood had grown old. Mr. Hyde asked me to go to this other school, and, and David York had always asked me to come to his school. I said, "Mr. Hyde [ph.], I think I'm a go with Mr. David York over at E. Rivers [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] because it's a, it was going to be an international school and I really wanna get exposed to that." I said, "It's nothing to do with you. I've loved my time at Goldsmith [John Meador Goldsmith Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and here with you." So, they sent Libby [Elizabeth Knox Blackwell] to another school. So, I went over to the area superintendent and asked her could Libby come. I said, "She's sick." I said, "But, she's a good teacher." And, I said, "I don't think she can work under," I've forgotten the lady's name now, but over at Brandon [Morris Brandon Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I said, "Because the lady is very mean." And, I said, "And, Libby won't survive." Well, they realized they she was friends to [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young. So, therefore, they let her come over there. And, it was during the time that we were over there that Andy was elected mayor. But, she had stopped 'bout six months or five months. And, she said, "I'm gonna live 'til Andy is sworn in, and then I'm going." So, that's how I met them. And, then I continued to keep Bo [Andrew Young III]. Speaker 2: This was '82 [1982], (unclear)? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. She died in '82 [1982]. Right after--he was sworn in in '82 [1982], in January. And, she died in January. Speaker 2: Okay. And, his son, at that time, was six. Speaker 1: At that time, he was eight or nine. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: But, he had been staying with me even while Libby was living. And, he continued to stay with me until he was eleven, then he wanted to stay with his little friends. Story_ID: 667430 Speaker 1: So, was it 1994 that Ambassador Young's wife (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His wife died. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jean Young [Jean Childs Young] died, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, in 1994. Speaker 1: She died of cancer, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. She had, she was diagnosed in 1991 with liver and colon cancer. And, they gave her six months to live. But, with him taking her to John Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] and taking her to an experimental program down in Florida, she was able to live three more years. But, the quality of life was not good. Speaker 1: Okay. I know that was quite a struggle for him in those days. Speaker 2: It was. I never seen him so sad. And, he used to--how we really got, got together was, he would say, after she died, he traveled, he and Bo [Andrew Young III], for a year, all over the world. And, then, he went back and Bo came back home. He wanted to come back home. And, he traveled. He would call me, he said, "Now, how did you deal with your brother [George McClain, Jr.] and Libby's [Elizabeth Knox Blackwell] death?" He said, "My mama [Daisy Fuller Young] death was devastating, my daddy's [Andrew Young, Sr.] was." He said, "But this is the most devastating death I've ever had." I said, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]," I said, "the thing," I was his friend. I said, "You know, memories are things that you can't ever lose." I said, "I love Barbra Streisand's song, memories are beautiful but yet so painful to remember. You might choose to forget ['The Way We Were']." I said, "But, I don't--." I said, "I remember my brother and my grandmother [Montine Wilmont], the two closest people to me who have ever died." I said, "And, I can tell you everything about them and every pleasant memories, there weren't any bad ones." And, I said, "And, I know that's true of Jean." I said, "You'll get through this." He said, "But, I'm just missing her so much." I said, "Well, you're over there in, you've been to China, Japan, South Africa." I said, "You've been to Australia." I said, "You've been to Sweden." I said, "Surely, all these women that you've seen and you found somebody." He said, "I'm not really looking for anybody." He said, "I enjoy talking to you." He said, "Do you mind talking to me?" I said, "No." But, sometimes I'd be so sleepy because he would forget he was in another country. It might be three o'clock in the morning. The phone would ring. I was staying with my mama [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] at that time. Speaker 1: 'Cause you had just recently been divorced yourself in '94 [1994] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, uh-huh, I got--uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So, you're at your mother's house and the phone ringing late at night (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I had a phone in my room, you know, so I had the door closed and everything; had my own room. But, he told me, he said that he was just so upset. Story_ID: 667431 Speaker 1: And, then he came back. When he came back after traveling, he would, you know, periodically come back. I think he had several, maybe people wanted to go out with him and stuff and so he said, he told me, I think this was 1995 toward the--when 'Waiting to Exhale' came out. It was about the, I guess about November. 'Cause I remember wearing a coat. He said, "Look, come go to the--I tried to get my children to go to the movies with me. They say they didn't have time. Lisa [Lisa Young Alston] has two small children. Bo [Andrew Young III] is dealing with girls." And, the other two girls [Andrea Young and Paula Young Shelton] were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So, I said, "Well," I said, "I'll," he said, "I have six passes and this is a premiere," and he told me where it was. I said, "Okay." So, I got six of my friends, we piled into my girlfriend's little car, and went and met him at the theater. He said, "I didn't know you were gonna bring everybody." I said, "You said you had six." He had six, so I had to let him have one and then we were five; three in the back two in the front. So, we came to the theater and saw the movie. And, so, my girlfriend said, "I think he likes you." I said, "Unh-uh." I said, "We are friends." I said, "He's taken several--." "Well, why did he ask you go come out to the movies? Why didn't he--?" I said he had told me had passes and he was letting me know I could bring other people. So, I think because I knew his children, 'cause I knew Jean [Jean Childs Young], and the fact that he knew the kind of person I was. Andy is not--Jean was a very beautiful woman. But, Andy is not a eye candy person. He looks at the soul of a person, and the heart of a person. And, that's what makes it attractive to him because that's who he is. He marches to the tune of a different drumbeat than most people I know. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you started dating I guess, what in ninety--? Speaker 1: We start dating, really we had two dates. We had that date and then I'd never forget, in 1996 he sent to my house twelve dozen of roses. Two men had to bring 'em in. It was a hundred forty-four roses of every color. He asked the man, "What--how many different color of roses do you have at your place?" He said, "Twelve." He said, "Give me twelve dozen." So, when I came home, I mean we didn't have a table to put it on. And, I said, "What is this?" They said, "[HistoryMaker] Andrew Young sent you this." And, then he started having this lady who--he was at the Olympics at that time. He had, started having-- Speaker 2: Yeah this is a big deal, the '96 Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. And, so, he had this lady to bring me shrimp in January. Every week she was bringing me something to eat 'cause he knew I liked shrimp and stuff. And, they said, "Where is food coming--who is that white lady keep," (laughter), "bring you food?" I said, "I don't know." I said, "She's from the Olympics." So, people start pulling--putting it together. So, he came to, Bo came to pick me up February 14th, and we had dinner at the house, you know. And, I ate some dinner and stuff and then they took me back home. Story_ID: 667432 Speaker 1: And, then he brought Franklin Sonn who was South, ambassador from South Africa to the U.S. And, Franklin Sonn, he was showing him the city. He had come here for a conference and he visited Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. And, Andy told him, said, "You know, this is an international city." He said, "It is?" He said, "Yes." He said, "I'm a--," and they passed, they were passing by my school [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. He said, "I'm a take you to a school where they have--," at that time they had thirty-two different nationalities, and about thirty-four different languages. So, he said, "I want you to come to this school right here." Well, the most diversified grade was the kindergarten. So, the kindergarten was outside on the monkey bars, and sliding, and I had my kids out there playing soccer. So, he came up, and I said, "Oh," I said, he introduced me. I said, "Oh, how you doing?" He said, "I went to see Miss Matthews [ph.] and told her I wanted to come down here and she told me the kindergarten was on the, on the ground and you probably were on there as well." So, Andy used to take a little camera and takes pictures. So, he took pictures of all of them on the monkey bars and doing stuff. And, the man said, "I can't believe this." 'Cause he saw all the little slanted eyes and the little blonde heads and, and Africans. He said, "Oh, my goodness." So, Andy--it was toward the end of school and I came back to my room. He said, "Do you have a ride home?" I said, "I do." I said, "But, Sandra [ph.] want us to stay late. I wanna go home early." So, he took me home to mama's [Dorothy Wilmont Harden]. And, then so, Franklin Sonn told him, said, "You need to marry that lady. She not married?" And, he said, "No." He said, "You've been talking about how long--lonely you are. You all sat there a talked and had so much in common." And, so, Andy said, "Oh, no, she's been recently divorced and she--." Andy said, "We're friends." And, he said, "No, it's more than friends." Andy said, "I did send her a hundred forty-four roses on Valentine's Day." And, so, so it just came and he went back and told Adelaide Tambo in South Africa who husband had been president of ANC [African National Congress]. Speaker 2: Oliver Tambo's wife (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oliver Tambo. And, he had told him that, he was dead but she, he said, "Andy needs to get married and you need to make a wedding dress." So, I had four choices of wedding dresses. Next thing I know he said--she called me. She said, "What's your name?" I said, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young]." They're very proper, you know. And, "Well, I'm Mrs. Adelaide." And, I said, "Yes." She said, "I'm in South Africa and I learned from--," what is the, I can't think of his first name. But, ambassador's son, "That you and Andy might be getting married. I will make your dress. You can't come to South Africa and wear an American dress. How do you look? He said, you're beautiful." I said, "Well, no, that's all in the eye of the beholder." I said, "I'm tall." I said, "I guess, I'm average size." I said--she said, "Could you wear a ten or a twelve?" I said, "Yes." And, so, she said, "Okay." So, I called Andy, I said, "This crazy lady called me from South Africa talking about the wedding." He said, "Well, you wanna get marr- I want you to go--," he had asked me to go to South Africa with him. But, it was to go to South Africa 'cause he was trying to get the 2004 Olympics [2004 Summer Olympics] at Cape Town [South Africa]. And, so, he said, "Well, I asked you to go and you said, your mama wouldn't let you go that far with me and we weren't married or anything." So, he said, "Well, do you wanna get married?" I said, "Well, I don't know." I said, "You haven't said anything to my mama. My mama not gonna let--." "You're a grown woman." (Laughter) I said, "I know." He said, "You've been married before." I said, "I know but my mama is real particular." He said, "Okay." So, he came over there and asked my mama. And, my mama was totally shocked. She said, "Well, if she wants to get married, she can get married." So, he talked to my principal. They gave me a special leave for three weeks. And, I went to South Africa and we got married. We landed on--we left on, on a Monday. We got there on a Tuesday. We got married that Thursday. Speaker 2: This is 1996, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: This is March of (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) March 28th. We left on (cough) the 25th, got married on the 28th. Story_ID: 667433 Speaker 1: Now, who was at the, I know that--? Speaker 2: Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] married us and Bishop McKinley Young. Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was supposed to have come but a parliament flared up that day so he couldn't come. But, there were a lot of officials, people from the northern province who were over the north, people who were over the southern province, and a lot of dignitaries. It was about one hundred people. Speaker 1: Are very many people from his family there? Speaker 2: Nobody from his family. Nobody from my family. In fact, nobody knew we were getting married except for my girlfriend, my principal, and the news broke that Friday. We left on that Monday. Harry Belafonte's daughter, and Sidney Poitier's daughter was in, were in South Africa. They were visiting Adelaide [Adelaide Tambo]. And, she told 'em, said, "Oh," said, "you know Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] is marrying a school teacher and they're coming over here to get married." They came back and told [HistoryMaker] Steen Miles who was Channel 11's [WXIA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] anchor person that we were getting married. And, she came to my school [E. Rivers Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] that Friday. I was leaving early. And, she said--my principal came down and she said, "I'm a let you leave school." She said, "Because Channel 11 is here with Steen Miles. I cannot keep 'em out of the school 'cause it's a public school." She said, "I'm, I'm going to let Miss Black [ph.] go. I'm a put two aides in your room. You just get in the car and lay down." And, I told my children I was going to South Africa, that Miss Wine [ph.] would be taking over the class for three weeks. But, I told 'em I was going for the Olympics [2004 Summer Olympics]. I said, "We're trying to get the Olympics," and everything. But, they was smart kids, you know. They said, "You didn't work with the Olympics, did you?" I said, "No, but I'm just going with a friend." So, I got in the car, I saw--they drove right on by them. They didn't see me. So, when--they waited 'til school was out and they stood out there with their cameras. And, they asked--but, they couldn't tape the kids because you can't do that without permission. But, they came up, they said, "Anybody out here in Miss Watson's room?" And, they said, "We are." They said, "Did she say anything about going to South Africa?" "Yes. She's been telling us for the last two weeks that's she going to the South Africa for the Olympics. She'll be gone three weeks." 'Cause spring break was in there too, so I really was gone two weeks. And, said that, "She will be back and she's gonna bring us something." So my goodness. So, they came into the office. They knew it was, they knew it was me 'cause they had told them it was me. And, so, they asked the secretary, they said, "Do you have a picture of Miss Watson?" So, they had the picture of me on the calendar, the Southern Bell [Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.] calendar. So, they clicked and took that picture. I was sitting in the salon getting my hair shampooed. It had been shampooed and they had rolled it, and I was coming out from under the dryer. And, the new, they had the TV on it says, "Andrew Young has gone to South Africa many times. This time, he is going to take a bride." Nobody knew who that bride was. Everybody was just startled. They couldn't believe it. I mean, they were, I mean, they did at first but to keep them watching the news they--at the end. And, I told, I knew they, they gonna put my picture up. So, I told the girl, I said, "Look, take the rollers out of my hair, I'm a put a hat on. I'm going on home." And, my other girlfriend was in another beauty shop. She said, she was sitting there and say they said, they showed my picture. "He will be taking the Carolyn McClain Watson [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young] as his bride to South Africa on Monday." I mean, my girlfriend said, everybody said, "You knew that. That's your best friend." She said, "Yeah, I knew it." "Well, you didn't--," she said, "why did I need to tell you? She, she told who she wanted to know. If she had wanted you to know, she would've told you." She said, "Well, Steen Miles has told it all." When I, I was at my mama's [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] house. My mama said, "Oh, Carolyn, the phone is ringing like crazy." All that for--everybody was calling, everybody was calling. "Is this true? Is this true?" My mama said, "You need to talk to Carolyn. Carolyn is a grown woman. I don't know, you know, you talk to her." That was the worst nightmare. Story_ID: 667434 Speaker 1: So, were you able to travel without a entourage? Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't have anybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just the two of us. And, luckily Shirley Franklin was over there doing business. And, a fella that had been Andy's aid, Julius Hollis, he was doing business also. And, he, he came to the wedding. But, everybody else was new to me. Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] knew Jim--we had it the U.S. embassy. Jim Joseph [HistoryMaker James Joseph] had just recently gotten married [to Mary Braxton-Joseph]. He was U.S. ambassador to South Africa. And, he was in the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration with Andy. So, they stood up with us. We didn't have any family there at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, that was a, quite a time. Speaker 2: It was. It was. And, then it was so much fun, so much fun. But, coming back, you had to face these people. They were very mean the first two years, even Sonja [HistoryMaker Sonja W. Young]. She was--I think she had somebody in mind she wanted him to marry, you know. And, he had to tell her, you know, "If you plan to come to this house and be family, then you, you're gonna have to accept my wife," you know. Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young] wasn't like that and I think that she began to--she's very nice now. You know, it took her a little while. But, you know, I--my motto, a motto that my [maternal] grandmother [Montine Wilmont] and I didn't think about that when you asked me what my favorite motto was. Another one is to: it matters not how you treat me, what matters is how I treat you. Because I have to pay for how I treat you. But, how you treat me, all I have to do is pray for you. So, I, I keep that in mind. I mean, I was treated very meanly for two years. I mean, people, a lady, we went to an event that was a very big event, The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and dance. And, she was president and she had been with Andy in the movement, she in fact had been Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] secretary. And, she always borrowed money from Andy and stuff, you know, she was an older lady. But, so, she didn't want him to marry me. And, she got up at her group and introduced, Bill Campbell was mayor at this time, and he and his wife were there and she said, "I wanna introduce our special guest, Bill Campbell and First Lady Sharon Campbell [Sharon Tapscott Campbell] and Ambassador Young," and didn't call my name. All, I mean, all hell broke loose because the lady who was the national president of The Links at that time was like a sister to Andy. She called her, told the lady, "She probably is gonna sleep late but I want you to call her in morning and apology. And, then when you all convene in January, I want you to step down as president. This is an organization of friendship and love. And, you don't mistreat people." So, it was, it was difficult. It was really I--and every time something like this happen, I would go back to my childhood. It's, it's funny how these scars and stuff, and I understood very well how my grandmother's scars from being raped and not trusting men were embedded in her. Well, I was always guarded and I was nice to everybody and loved everybody, but I was guarded. And, so, I start thinking about how I was treated as a child. I mean, I really--'cause there were a lot of people wanted to marry Andy. And, they were just hurt. Speaker 1: Has it been worth it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He's a wonderful man. He is, like I tell you, he has a drumbeat different from anybody. He's one in a million. We could have money. We have no money 'cause he gives money away. He feels that hunger--he said, when he goes to the judgement gate and they ask him, God ask him, "Andrew did you feed the hungry? Did you clothe the naked? Did you set at liberty those who were oppressed? Did you visit me in prison?" He said, "I wanna be able to say all of those things." He, he said, "The only good for money is to give away." Story_ID: 667435 Speaker 1: So the--when you were in South Africa in '96 [1996] when you got married, this was your first time in South Africa, right? Speaker 2: It was my first time in South Africa. Speaker 1: And, South Africa is very much in the news, Nelson Mandela was the new president. I think he'd been president about a year then, right? Speaker 2: He became president in 1994. Speaker 1: Okay. That's two years. So, did you get a chance to meet him? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Absolutely. He had--there was a reception for us at his place. And, we also--Mr. Oppenheimer [Harry Oppenheimer] who owned the diamond mines in South Africa, Andy [Young's husband, HistoryMaker Andrew Young] had gone there as a--under apartheid and spoke to the chamber of commerce in the '70s [1970s]. And, Mr. Oppenheimer had a dinner for us. And, we were riding on the property and I told Andy, I said, "When are we gonna get to the man's house?" We kept passing these big bronze statues and stuff. We drove in this driveway and I really thought it was a street. We literally drove for forty-five minutes and then so, he said, "We've been riding on the--Oppenheimer's property all this time." And, then we got to the house and I said, "Oh, they own the diamond mines." So, I, I assumed that the wife [Bridget McCall Oppenheimer] could be just glitzy in diamonds. She had one probably thirty carat emerald with diamonds around it on her neck. So, he had two dogs. And, I'm a dog lover and they know I am. So, they just came all up to me, Whippets with collars on and three rows of diamond on each of the collars. And, I said, "Andy, those are diamonds on--." He said, "Oh, yeah." But, she, she said very--and I looked at her finger. She had on a band but she said, I said, "Oh, that's beautiful." She said, "You know I wear this all the time." She said, "I guess it's like when you work in a place that makes donuts or something like that, you don't eat it because you're with it all the time." So, she, she said she had diamonds. And, I should've known because she own the diamond mines. Speaker 1: So, the dogs had sported more diamonds than she was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, uh-huh. And, they sat right under me and I fed them. 'Cause I don't know, that, that--it was just overwhelming for me. Story_ID: 667436 Speaker 1: Well, I just wondered how [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, I didn't get a chance to ask you this but how did you, I guess, feel about going to a country that is supposed to be free and yet most of the country is still controlled by the white colonial powers that is--? Speaker 2: You know, I had--in the United States with Miss Lowery. I had worked the, Evelyn Lowery [HistoryMaker Evelyn Gibson Lowery] with--I was part of the SCLC/WOMEN [SCLC/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.], and we had picketed South Africa at Winn Dixie [Winn Dixie Stores, Inc.] for getting products from South Africa in their stores. And, so, I was very knowledgeable of the fact that how they did and it was so similar to our situation here. But, Andy told me, he said, "You know, I went there, and the first time I'd never been frightened because," he said, "but I was frightened when I first went there and went to stay with the Oppenheimers [Bridget McCall Oppenheimer and Harry Oppenheimer]. Because--," he said when his plane landed there were fifty white South Africans, twenty-five on each side, with leather jackets and leather boots and caps on. And, said, when the plane landed the black, the Africans who were, you know, handling the baggage and stuff said, they cheered when he stepped off, he and Stony Cook. And, he went and shook their hands and then said he went down, they had on leather gloves, he went down the line from side to side and shook each of 'em hand. He said, that's the only time he thought he was gonna be killed. Because when he go to the house the fella that Stony Cook, who was traveling with him, they put him in, they had them in room's side by side. They stayed at the Oppenheimers' house 'cause they couldn't protect them at the hotel. So, Andy say, that night the guards was standing there by his room and then when he came back, they moved him to another room. And, say, he wrote his wife, Jean [Jean Childs Young], to tell her, you know, that he loved her and take care of the children because he didn't know what the outcome of that was gonna be. Speaker 1: This is the situation being he's a black ambassador from the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration sent to South Africa where they don't treat black people equally. Speaker 2: Right. But, he's staying the richest man in the country's house. Speaker 1: Who was, I guess, his job ostensibly was to protect Andrew Young from getting killed, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was. He could--it would have been a bloodbath had they killed him. And, he went and spoke to the chamber and Andy told them the, he asked Andy, and said, "Do you think it's gonna be a bloodbath?" And, Andy said, "No it's not. It's going, it's going to be okay. It's gonna be a lot of changes because the people--," but, you still have people really living in a lot of poverty, even now. You know, when we went over there on Soweto [South Africa] and different places. You see the little tin huts and stuff like that. The kids still have to walk in some of the rural areas, two and three hours, school have to go and carry water, get water and walk miles. But, it was a beautiful place. Story_ID: 667437 Speaker 1: But, I, I just really felt funny, and I guess that's the reason I got sick in Oppenheimer's [Harry Oppenheimer] house because I had seen, we had adopted an orphanage there of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] children. And, I had gone to see them and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] had adopted the orphanage before we got married. So, I went to see the kids. They were young, very young. And, all of them were living with AIDS and we had--with Andy's name and with what he had given them, people gave to this orphanage and it was just so touching. And, to see this man with so much; dogs with diamonds on their necks. You know, it was a funny feeling, I got sick. And, so, I could not eat. So, it was embarrassing. So, I guess those little dogs knew, say, "I'm a help her out 'cause I like her." They came over to my side and every time they talked and looked off, I gave them each something to eat. So, I would cut my meat, move it around on the plate and slip it off and give it to them. And, I excused myself and I went to the bathroom and I just regurgitated. I was so sick. And, when we left I sipped ginger ale and Andy said, "What's wrong? Something is wrong." I said, "Andy," I said, "I don't know what it was." I said, "I was overwhelmed when we drove all that time and these people had all these things. And, to see the people that had nothing." I said, "I, it's just--," he said, "Carolyn [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], it's the have and the have nots. And, we have not yet learned in the United States and in the world to integrate the money." Said, "We have done something on war. We've done something on integration in the United States. But, we have not done anything on poverty." And, he said, "That's the way it is here." And, said, "That's something that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] wanted to do, redeem the soul of America through racism, war, and poverty." He said, "But, the--he didn't get to do. He was gonna have the Poor People's Campaign but he was killed before he could do something on poverty." So, he said, "But, it will change." And, in the Bible it say, you will have poor, you will have with you always. But we have to look after them. And, I, I got okay but I was just sick for the next day or two 'cause we were there three weeks in different parts. Went to--got married in Cape Town [South Africa], went to Sun City [South Africa], flew back to Joburg [Johannesburg, South Africa]. Then we went to Zimbabwe. Then we went to Delaney [ph.] up in Kruger Park [Kruger National Park], and didn't pay for a thing. Everything was free. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it was very nice. I mean, and we had a, a great time. Story_ID: 667438 Speaker 1: When you came back, I mean, what was the--you were talking about it before the break, but were you able to resume teaching and everything without a problem (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I taught for one year. He asked me to stop teaching that year. And, I said, "Look Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], let me, I'll only would get 60 percent of my salary." I say, "So, let me teach a couple more years." He said, "Not. Absolutely not. Now you could--this is 1996, you can finish up '96 [1996] and go through '97 [1997] but then after then, I want you to leave." Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that, it was that summer that the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics]--? Speaker 2: Yeah. That summer was 1996, and the world came to Atlanta [Georgia]. And, it was really, really nice. We went to oh so many events and stuff. And, I was used to going 'cause I always volunteered with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. I had volunteered with the Mayor's Masked Ball [UNCF Atlanta Mayor's Masked Ball] which him and [HistoryMaker] Billye Aaron had started. But, to go like he went, I mean, and you had to make sure you look good and everything. And, you know, you couldn't repeat yourself in clothes and it was very taxing. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've often wondered when you--how some public figures do it, you know, the travel. Speaker 2: Oh, it's, it's very, even now, it's very, very difficult. I mean, when I go to the store I make sure I have everything in place because people are visual creatures. And, they won't, and they expect certain people to look certain ways at all times. And, so, I just do that. I mean, you know, because I know that, that people are that way. Now, he doesn't care, you know, about that. But I do. And, so, but it's very difficult. I mean, you have to go, like in South Africa, when I came back from South Africa, I was fine. Some people caught colds and got sick. We were there three weeks this last trip, last, this past March. When I came back after a week I was sick for two weeks, very sick. Because I didn't have a chance to rest. Everybody wanted his attention. Every place we went, there were three or four or five places that we had to go. And, the others could enjoy themselves and stuff. But, I tell people it was wonderful. I love being back there. But, it wasn't a vacation. It was like a little job, you know. Story_ID: 667439 Speaker 1: How have things changed in the, in the ten years, well twenty years since--twenty years right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's been twenty years and it's slowed down some. He doesn't, one year Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] traveled to Africa fourteen times. So, that means he traveled twice in a month, two times. But, and I would go with him. I've been on every continent but the Antarctica in twenty years. But, now it's slowed down. My mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] three--my daddy died, my stepfather [Moses Harden] died. It'll be four years this Christmas day. He died on Christmas day. My mother, three years ago this Christmas fell and broke her ankle and I moved her with me, and she's been with me, will be three years this December. Even though I have around the clock care, she's an only child. My grandmother [Montine Wilmont] never, you know, married. She never had a boyfriend. So, my mama's an only child. And, my brother [George McClain, Jr.] has been dead twenty-nine and a half years. So, I'm a, I've been like an only child. So, we have each other. And, all of her, most of her friends have gone. So, I hate just leaving her all of the time. But, I always, when Andy travels now, because he'll be eighty-five in March, I send somebody with him. Story_ID: 667440 Speaker 1: Now, you worked on various projects here with Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and now you, you were vice chair of the Andrew Young Foundation [Andrew J. Young Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia], right, or you were--? Speaker 2: Before I was vice chair of the Andrew Young Foundation, we had a consulting company called GoodWorks International [GoodWorks International LLC, Atlanta, Georgia], and it started in 1996. And, I was kind of the vice chair there but I also was the protocol person because we had a lot of international people coming in to meet us. And, I would take their wives shopping and take them sightseeing and everywhere. And, when I was at, at GoodWorks I worked one year after they started the company. And, then I started going up to the office just almost every day 'cause my mother [Dorothy Wilmont Harden] was in good health and everything. My daddy [Young's stepfather, Moses Harden] was living. So, I didn't stay at home. I would come to the office and do things. I would travel with him. I went to Africa, to Europe. I went to Asia. He did a project on, for Nike [Nike, Inc.]. A consulting showing that there was not child labor in Asia, Asia. And, I went there with him; Vietnam and Guangzhou, China, and Osaka, Japan. I mean, Jakarta, Indonesia, just everywhere. And, I loved it. It was wonderful. I think that some of the smartest people in the world are people who travel because it's just first hand you learn other cultures. You learn so much. And, I really, really enjoyed it. And, every place I went I tried, he tried to make sure that I would stop by and go to a school because he knew I missed that. And, then he's on Ted Turner's United Nations (unclear) board [United Nations Foundation, Washington, D.C.]. So, we went to Jordan, we went to everywhere with him. We went to, I got to go to Norway. I got to see where Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] received and President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] received their Nobel Peace Prizes. So, it was, it's been, it's been a wonderful life. It's, it's been great. I decided that--they were talking about, when I was at GoodWorks International, that they wanted to name the Andr- a school after, a policy school after Andrew Young at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Well, you know that carries with it a ticket, usually $20 million. So, Andy said, "Well, I don't need a school named after me. And, I can't, I don't have $20 million." So, they said, "Well, whatever you give, it's already a done deal. We wanna name this school 'cause you're the most outstanding Georgian besides Martin Luther King. And, he didn't live long enough for us to know him that well." So, I did a fundraiser with Chevron [Chevron Corporation] as a major sponsor and raised almost three million dollars. Gave the school $1.3 million for the Andrew Young School of Policy Study [Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, I then started raising money for different causes when Haiti was, had that devastating earthquake, we raised money for that. And, so, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] came, I mean, what's the--Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came down for the forum. He couldn't come for the birthday celebration but he came for the forum and gave. I put the Andrew Young medal on his neck. And, so, it's, it's been a great thing that I've continued even with the Andrew J., that office lasted about ten years, GoodWorks, ten to eleven years. He decided, he had set up a foundation anyway but it--he didn't have a space. It was a foundation where he gave to different things. But, it was a 501(c)(3). Story_ID: 667441 Speaker 1: So, we moved after GoodWorks [GoodWorks International LLC, Atlanta, Georgia] ended, we came here [Georgia Public Broadcasting, Atlanta, Georgia] and I continued to raise money for the things that he wanted to do to help students, to help the poor, to help farmers, and all of the different many ideas that he has. And, also, he does these documentaries ['Andrew Young Presents'] and he has about thirty now. And, so, all of this we do. Speaker 2: They are documentaries about the Civil Rights Movement and about African (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it's about the Civil Rights Movement, after Africa, about T.I. "Walking with Guns." He mentors a lot of these youn- all these young rappers crazy about him because he doesn't pass judgement on 'em, he helps them. And, T.I. was in jail that time and he asked Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] would he be his mentor. And, so, he did "Walking with Guns." He did one on 'Gone with the Wind' with Margaret Mitchell ["Change in the Wind"], how people didn't know a southern white woman established Hughes Spalding hospital [Hughes Spalding Pavilion; Hughes Spalding Children's Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] for black, blacks. Because her nurse, her--the lady who was her housekeeper had cancer and had nowhere to go to be treated. And, also, that she sent over twenty-five students from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] to medical school. And, she and, you know, Benjamin Mays corresponded with one another. Speaker 2: Right. So, there's lots of--so, there are over thirty now, okay. Speaker 1: Thirty, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. All right. Story_ID: 667442 Speaker 1: What else does [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young--now, there's a Carolyn Young Walk too right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a Carolyn McClain Young Mentor Walk [sic. Carolyn Young Mentor Walk] which we started six years ago. And, I was talking to some friends who are of East Indian descent and they were saying, "We want to put a mentor walk in your name." And, I said, "Oh, I don't know about having anything in my name." I said, "My husband is the famous one." They say, "No, but you've done a lot and you don't want anything for it." I said, "Well, I don't do anything to get anything for it. I do it because it's the right thing to do." But, I shared with them when I was at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I used go down to go M. Agnes Jones [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] my sophomore year and volunteer with the students on my free time. And, then at the end of the period I would take, and with some of the teacher, take one class and bring 'em to the college campus so they could see college. And, I said, "You know, a lot of these students would never see a college campus. They don't know college is a friendly place. They don't know the fun that the kids have." So, they said, "Well, that's the more reason we're gonna develop this mentor walk." And, so, we first invited schools to come and we paired up college students with them. The first two mentor walks was at M. Agnes--was Agnes Scott College [Decatur, Georgia], an all girl white college. Then, we went to, after we left Agnes Scott College, we went to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] for one term. We went to Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] for one time, and to do the mentor walk. The kids were bused in. It was on a Saturday and we do reading with the younger kids. We have a session where the, we have volunteers from the corporate community that come in and talk to the parents. We had a session for high school kids on self-concept and on talking about careers. And, it was really, really grown. And, the last two years we've had it at Atlanta Technical College [Atlanta, Georgia] because we want kids to see everybody. You don't have to go to a regular college. You can--technical college, I'm on that board as well. And, they do 98 percent graduation and 98 percent job placement. They have the Allied Health Building. They have the beauty part of it, where you do hair. Where you, where you do nails. They have the, now they have a place where you can do the aeronautics, work on airplanes and different things, and the mechanical part. They have so many components. And, then they have a program where the high school students if they're doing real well, they can come over there their senior year and take at least two to three courses which we count for college credit. And, a lot of them will leave early. So, it's just a wonderful thing that we've started. Like, we start on October the 28th visiting school, reading, giving children books, because now children are so technology savvy and they don't read anymore. They--but to hold a book in their hand and see all the beautiful illustrations. You have to start when they're very young and then it will go on. You can't start, you know, even though we include the middle school and high school. And, we have different tracks for them. The little kids we wanna put books in their hands, and tell stories, and get them interested, and do puppetry art, and do different things. But, it has gone very well. Story_ID: 667443 Speaker 1: Now, you've been on, you're on the board of the Clark Atlanta University Board of Trustees [Atlanta, Georgia], United Negro College Fund [UNCF], Andrew and Walter Young YMCA [Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], the Atlanta Area Technical College [sic. Atlanta Technical College, Atlanta, Georgia], WestCare [WestCare Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia], and the board--other board affiliations include Georgia Human Relations Commissions [Georgia Human Relations Commission], the board of Georgia-- Speaker 2: That's passed. Now, the others I'm presently on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the board of human commission was under Dr., I mean, Governor Roy Barnes. Speaker 1: Okay. APEX Museum [Atlanta, Georgia] you used to be on that board. Speaker 2: I used to be on that board. Speaker 1: And, I mean, but this is all, all of this, it's a lot of volunteer activity and a lot of work. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, to those who much is given, much is required. And, I feel like I've been very blessed. I don't have the time that I had before because of my mom [Dorothy Wilmont Harden]. 'Cause she's ninety and you wanna spend time with her. And, so, I just think that, you know, you all--you can't ever stop giving and stop doing though. You know, I really didn't have time to speak this week for the women at Friendship [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia]. But, I said, "You know, I cannot do it." If you can't say a word for the Lord than you're pretty bad off. So, I said, well, let me go on and do something and get ready for that. But, it was in the mist of this inauguration and stuff so it was really hard. Speaker 1: So, you have ministry too, that you--? Speaker 2: No, just my personal ministry. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And, I speak-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you alluded to it before but you didn't speak--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do. And, I minister to, you know, people ask me to be Women's Day speakers or to talk to groups and I minister to the kids. Because I let the kids know that I didn't know my daddy [George McClain, Sr.] either. We can't live beneath our circumstances, we have live above 'em. Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Now, is there a project that you, that's your favorite project, or? Speaker 2: Well, one of 'em, and you just mentioned, is the mentor walk [Carolyn Young Mentor Walk], and the other one is my personal little mentee program where I mentor young women and try to build up their self-esteem, and try to, you know, let them know that they have some value and some worth, and do what I can for them. Speaker 1: Okay. How does your mother feel about your activities now? Speaker 2: Sometimes, now that she's getting older, she feels jealous. 'Cause like this morning when I told her, I said, "Well, I have to go do an interview." "Well, what, who is it with?" And, "Why are you going?" And, so, I just said, "Okay." Sometimes it makes me a little upset, you know, but I think she's okay with it. But, I worry about it, I mean, you know. But, I also read the Bible and I know that, who is your brother? Who is your sister? Who is your mother or your father? Everybody is. You can't, you have no respect of persons. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I have to keep that in mind as well. Story_ID: 667444 Speaker 1: Of your, your husband's colleagues in the Civil Rights Movement, who do you, who do you, I guess, have the most respect for, or of the many of them? Speaker 2: The, I never got to know Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] 'cause I was in school and stuff. And, I figured that if I had known him, he would be. But, I think the unsung heroes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they would've never been what they were unless they sacrifice who they were. So, I know a lot of his unsung heroes and he was meeting with MGM president yesterday at the Rotary [Rotary Club of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. Andy went by there because my godson, is vice president of MGM Properties [MGM Growth Properties LLC] and he wanted him to meet his president. So, he told Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], he said, "What are you doing now? What do you want--what you want me to help you with?" He said, "I would like for you to get the unsung heroes to Washington [D.C.] whether it's on the bus or what, to see the museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.], and let them go in free." And, every time I have an event, there's not a time that I have an event for Andy that those people are not present. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is a formalized group of people? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean that's been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they, they, he knows all of them. And, they're here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Most of them are right here in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A lot of 'em are dead. But, they, they don't get the credit that they should get. Speaker 1: These are people that he knows that really were in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He knows, he know they were in the movement with him. They took the beatings. They got the fire hoses, you know. They were the ground crew. Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 667445 Speaker 1: We ask these questions at the end of the interview. Ma'am, how--what do you see today to be your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who, like I told you earlier my favorite scripture is 1st Corinthians 13th chapter. And, I think that everything comes under the umbrella of love. We wouldn't break the Ten Commandments if we love. I mean, love is more important than beauty, more, love is more important really than, than the bread we eat because God will provide for us. And, He loved us so--He told us two commandments to keep. To love your Lord God with all your heart, and love your neighbor as yourself. And, I feel like this is what I'm trying to do. So, I, I think my legacy will be one of love and caring and sharing. Speaker 1: All right. Well, thank you so much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Speaker 1: --for spending time with us. Speaker 2: All right. All right. I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Well, I did too really..